ا
ا a particle introducing direct and indirect
questions; أم ― ا a - am in alternative
questions; أم ―سواء ا sawā’un a ― am no
matter whether - or; أ و a-wa particle
indicating or implying doubt: or? perhaps?
(atau/apakah) اَوتشك في ذلك (tašukku) you
wouldn't doubt it, would you? do you
perhaps doubt it? or do you doubt it? اَلا
alā and اَما a-mā intensifying interjections
introducing sentences: verily, truly,
indeed, oh yes, etc., اَلا فانظروا (fa-nẓurū)
oh, do look! why, look! اَما انه (innahū)
why, he is ... !
آب 1 āb2 August = Agustus (month; Syr., Leb.,
Jord., Ir.)
اب 2 see ابو
اب 3 abba u to long, yearn, ( إلى وطنه ilā
waṯanihi for one's homeland)
ابيب 4 look up alphabetically
اباتي (It. abate) abātī abbot (Chr.)
ابالة ibāla, ibbāla bundle, bale
يا ابت see ابو
ابجد abjad alphabet
ابجدي abjadī alphabetic(al); ابجديات elementary
facts, simple truths │ الحروف الابجدية the
letters of the alphabet
ابد abada ( ابود ubūd) to stay, linger ( ب at a
place); ― i u to roam in a state of
wildness, run wild, be shy, shy away, run
away (animal, game) II to make lasting or
permanent, perpetuate, eternize ( ھ s.th.) V
to be perpetuated, become lasting or
permanentl; to return to a state of wildness
ابد abad pl. آباد ābād endless, eternal
duration, eternity; ابدا abadan always,
forever; ever, (with neg.) never (in the
future), not at all, on no account; (alone,
without negation) never! not at all! By no
means! │ على الأبد، إلى الأبد and أبد الدھر
abada d-dahri forever; ابد الآبدين abada labadīn
and إلى ابد الآبدين ilā abadi l-a.
forever and ever
ابدي abadi everlasting, eternal, endless
الابدي al-abadī eternity
ابدي abadīya infinite duration, endless
time, eternity
آبد ābid wild, untamed
آبدة ābida pl. اوابد awābid2 unusual
thing, prodigious event │ اوابد الدنيا a. addunyā
the Wonders of the World
مؤبد mu'abbad eternal, endless,
everlasting │ سجن مؤبد (sijn) life
imprisonment
ابر 1 abara i u (abr) to prick, sting II to
pollinate ( ھ a palm tree)
ابرة ibra pl. ابر ibar needle, pln;
indicator (of an instrument); shot,
injection (med.);sting, prick │ حقنه ابرة
ḥaqanahu ibratan to give s.o. an injection;
ابرة الراعى i. ar-rā‘ī geranium (bot.); ابرة
مغناطيسية (magnāṯīsīya) magnetic needle;
شغل الابرة šug1 al-i. needlework
مئبر mi'bar needlecase; pack needle
آبار 2 ābār see بئر
ابريشية abrašīya and ابروشية abrūšīya pl. -āt
diocese, bishoprie (Chr.); parish (Chr.)
ابرميس abramīs, ابراميس bream (zool.)
ابريز pure gold 1
ابريسم ibrīsam, ibrīsim silk
ابريق ibrīq pl. اباريق abārīq2 pitcher, jug
ابريل abril April
ابزن abzan pl. ابازن abāzin2 washbowl
ابزيم ibzīm pl. ابازم abāzim2 buckle, clasp
ابض ubḍ pl. آباض ābāḍ and مأبض ma’biḍ pl.
مآبض ma’ābiḍ2 hollow of the knee,
popliteal space
ابط V to take or carry under one's arm ( ھ s.th.);
to put one's arm ( ھ، ه around s.o., around
s.th.), hold in one's arm ( ھ، ه s.th.)
ابط ibṯ pl. آباط ābāṯ m. and f. armpit
ابق abaqa i ( اباق ibāq) to escape, run away (a
slave from his master)
ابق abaq a kind of hemp
آبق ābiq pl. اباق ubbāq runaway,
escaped; a fugitive
ابل 1 ibil (coll.) camel
ابالة 2 ibāla, ibbāla bundle, bale
ابليز iblīz alluvial deposits (of the Nile)
ابليس iblīs pl. ابالسة abālisa devil, Satan
ابن 1 II to celebrate, praise, eulogize ( ه a
deceased person), deliver a funeral oration
ه) in praise of s.o.)
ابنة ubna passive pederasty
ابان ibbān time: ابان ibbāna during, في
ابان at the time of, during
تأبين ta’bīn commemoration (of a
deceased person) │ حفلة تأبين ḥaflat at-t.
commemorative celebration (in honor of a
deceased person)
مأبون ma’būn catamite; weakling,
mollycoddle, sissy; scoundrel
ابن 2 see بن 1
ابنوس abnūs ebony
ابه abaha and abiha a (abh) to pay attention (
ل, also ب to), heed ( ل, also ب s.th.), take
notice ( ل, also ب of) │ امر لا يؤبه له
(yu'bahu) an insignificant, unimportant
matter V to display proud, haughty
manners; to turn away, keep one's
distance, remain aloof ( عن from), look
down ( عن upon), think o.s. far above ( عن
s.o. or s.th.)
ابھة ubbaha splendor, pomp,
ostentation, pageantry; pride
اب ab pl. آباء aba' father (also eccl.): ancestor,
forefather: يا ابت yā abati O my father!
الابوان al-abawān the parents, father and
mother; ابونا abūnā reverend father, form of
address and title of a priest (Chr). │ ابا عن جد
aban ‘an jaddin handed down from father
to son, as s.th. inherited from forefathers;
ا بو سعن abū su’n marabou; ا بو ال نوم abū nnaum
poppy; ابو الھول abū l-haul the
Sphinx; ابو اليقظان abū l-yaqẓān rooster,
cock
ابوة ubūwa fatherhood, paternity
ابوي abawī paternal, fatherly
ابونيت ebonite
ابونيه (Fr. abonné) abūneh pl. -āt subscription;
subscription card (e.g., for public
conveyances, a concert season, etc.)
ابى abā a ( اباء ibā’, اباءة ibā’a) to refuse,
decline; to turn down, reject, scorn,
disdain ( ھ s.th.): to deny ( على ھ s.o. s.th.)
│ ابى الا أن يفعله (illā an yaf’alahū) he
insisted on doing it; ابى لله إلا أن God willed
that ... V to refuse, decline
اباء ibā’, اباءة ibā’a rejection; dislike,
distaste, aversion, disdain; pride
ابي abīy disdainful, scornful: proud,
lofty, lofty-minded
آب ābin pl. اباة ubāh reserved,
standoffish; unwilling, reluctant, grudging
ابيب abīb the eleventh month of the Coptic
calendar 2
ابيقوري abīqūrī Epicurean
ابيقوري abīqūriya Epicureanism
اترج utrujj and اترنج utrunj citron (Citrus
medica; bot.)
آتشجي (Turk. ateşçi) ātešgī fireman, stoker
مأتم ma’tam pl. مآتم ma’ātim2 obsequies, funeral
ceremony
اتان 1 atān pl. آتن ātun, اتن utun, utn female
donkey, she-ass
اتون 2 atūn, attūn pl. اتن utun, اتاتن atātīn2 kiln,
furnace, oven
اتاوة itāwa pl. اتاوى atāwā duty, tax, tribute
اتوبيس (Fr.) otobīs autobus, bus
اتوماتيكي (Fr.) otomātīkī automatic
اتومبيل boyl lI الى d اتوموبيل (Fr.) otomobīl
automobile
اتى atā i ( اتيان ityān, اتى aty, مأتاة to come ( ه or
الى to; على over s.o.), arrive ( ھ or الى at); ب
اتى to bring, bring forward, produce,
advance, accomplish or achieve s.th.; اتى ه
ب to bring, give or offer s.o. s.th.; to do,
perform ( ھ a deed), carry out, execute ( ھ
e.g., movements); to commit, perpetrate (
ھ a sin, a. crime); to mention ( على s.th.); to
finish off ( على s.th., also s.o.); to finish,
complete, carry through, dispose, settle,
wind up, conclude, terminate, bring to a
close ( على s.th.); to destroy, annihilate,
eradicate, wipe out ( على s.th.); to
eliminate, carry away, sweep away ( على
s.th.), do away ( على with); to use up,
exhaust (also a subject), present
exhaustively, in great detail ( على s.th.),
elaborate ( على on s.th.) │ كما يأتي as
follows; اتى على آخره (ākhirihī) to
complete, finish s.th.; to spend or use up
the last of s.th.; اتى على الأخضر واليابس to
destroy everything, wreak havoc; اتى
البيوت من ابوابھا s.th. in the right way, knock
on the right door; يؤتى من قبل yu’ta min
qibali is undermined, weakened, ruined by
III to offer furnish, give, afford ( ب to s.o.
s.th.), provide, supply ( ب s.o. with); to be
propitious, be favorable ( ه for s.o.), favor (
ه s.o.); to turn out well (. for s.o.), be in
favor ( ه of); to suit, befit, become ( ه s.o.),
be appropriate ( ه for s.o.); to agree ( ه with
s.o.; food) │ اتاه كل شيء (kullu šai’in)
everything was in his favor, turned out
well for him, came his way IV to bring ( ھ
s.o. s.th.); to give ( ھ s.o. s.th.); to grant ( ھ
ه to s.o. s.th.), bestow ( ھ upon s.o. s.th.) │
آتى الزكاة (zakāta) to give alms V to
originate, stem, derive, spring, arise, result
عن) from); to end ( عن with), result ( عن
in); to get ( الى to), arrive ( الى at); to be easy
to do, be feasible without difficulty, be
attainable, go well, progress; to go about
s.th. ( فى ) gently, cautiously X to ask to
come, induce to come ( ه s.o.)
مأتى ma’tan pl. مآت ma’ātin place where
s.th. comes from; place at which one
arrives; access; pl. مآت place of origin;
origin, source, provenance; place where
one has been or to which one has come;
place where s.th. starts, where s.th. ends
آت ātin coming, next; following │
الأسبوع الآتي (usbū‘) the coming week, next
week; كالآتي as follows
موات mu’ātin, muwātin favorable,
propitious, opportune, convenient, suitable
اث aṯṯa u I a ( اثاثة aṯāṯa) to be luxuriant, grow
profusely (hair, plants) II to fix up,
prepare ( ھ s.th.); to furnish ( ھ an
apartment) V to be or become rich,
wealthy, to prosper; to be furnished
اثاث aṯāṯ furniture, furnishings (of an
apartment, of a room)
تأثيث ta’ṯīṯ furnishing
اث aṯṯ, اثاث aṯīṯ abundant, luxuriant,
profusely growing (hair, plants)
اثر aṯara u i (aṯr, اثارة aṯāra) to transmit, pass
along, report, relate ( ھ s.th., عن from, or
based on the authority of, s.o.) II to affect,
influence ( في or على s.o., s.th.), act ( في or
على upon), produce an effect, make an
impression, have influence ( في or على on);
to induce (phys.) IV to prefer ( ھ على s.th.
to), like ( ھ s.th.) more ( على than); to have a
predilection, a liking ( ھ for), like ( ھ s.th.),
be fond ( ھ of); to choose, deem wise or
advisable ( ان to do s.th.); to adore ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.) │ آثر نفسه بالخير (nafsahū bi-lkair)
to wish o.s. well, hope for the best
for o.s. V to be impressed, be influenced;
to let o.s. be impressed, be impressible; to
be moved, be touched ( ب or ل by, also ;(من
to be excited, be stimulated; to be affected
ب) by, said of materials, e.g., iron by acid);
to be induced (phys.); to follow in s.o.’s ( (ه
tracks, follow s.o.’s example, emulate ( ه
s.o.); to pursue, follow up ( ھ a question, a
problem); to perceive, feel ( ھ s.th.) X to
claim a monopoly; to possess alone, with
the exclusion of others, monopolize ( ب
s.th.); to appropriate ( ب s.th.), take
exclusive possession ( ب of); to preoccupy
ھ) s.th.), engross ( ھ the attention) │ استأثر
لله به the Lord has taken him unto Himself
اثر aṯar pl. آثار āṯār track, trace, vestige;
sign, mark; touch; impression, effect,
action, influence ( في on); tradition
(relating the deeds and utterances of
Mohammed and his Companions); work
(of art, esp. of literature); ancient
monument; آثار antiquities; remnants,
vestiges; (religious) relics │ علم الآثار ‘ilm
al-a. archeology; دار الآثار museum of
antiquities; لا اثر له (aṯara) ineffective,
ineffectnal; بأثر رجعي (raj‘ī) with
retroactive force (jur.); اصبح اثرا بعد عين
aṣbaḥa aṯaran ba‘da ‘ainin to be
destroyed, be wiped out, leave nothing but
memory behind; اعاده اثرا بعد عين (a‘adahū)
to destroy s.th. completely ; على اثره، في اثره
(also fī iṯrihī) on his (its) track, at his
heels, after him; immediately afterwards,
presently, thereupon; ;'11 j. immediately
afterwards, presently
اثر iṯra (prep.) immediately after, right
after
اثري aṯarī archeologic(a1); archeologist
(also آثاري āṯārī); old, ancient, antique │
عالم اثري archeologist; لغة اثرية (luga) dead
language
اثر aṯir egoistic, selfish
اثرة aṯara selfishness, egoism
اثير aṯīr favored, preferred ( عند by s.o.),
in favor ( عند with s.o.); select, exquisite,
noble; see also alphabetically
اثارة aṯāra remainder, remnant; faint
trace, vestige
مأثرة ma’ṯara, ma’ṯura pl. مآثر ma’āṯir2
exploit, feat, glorious deed
تأثير ta’ṯīr action, effect, influence,
impression ( في، على on); effectiveness,
efficacy; induction (phys.)
تأثيري ta’ṯīrī produced by induction,
inductive, inductional, induced (phys.)
إيثار īṯār preference; altruism;
predilection; love, affection
تأثر ta’aṯṯur being influenced; agitation,
emotion, feeling; excitability, sensitivity;
(pl. -āt) feeling, sensation, perception │
سريع التأثر easily impressed, impressible,
sensitive
تأثري ta’aṯṯurī: المذھب التأثري
(madhab)the impressionistic movement
تأثرية ta’atturīya impressionism
استئثار isti’tār arrogation of a monopoly;
monopolization; presumption,
presumptuousness; exclusive power
مأثور ma’tūr transmitted, handed down
│ قول مأثور (qaul) and كلمة مأثورة (kalima)
proverb
مؤثر mu’attir affecting, acting upon;
effective; impressive; moving, touching,
pathetic; (pl. -āt) influencing factor,
influence
أثير 2 look up alphabetically
أثفية utfīya pl. أثاف atāfin trivet, tripod (in
&ncient times: &ny one of the three
stones supporting a cooking pot near the
fire) │ ثالثة الأثافي that which rounds out a
number, caps s.th., puts the lid on s.th., the
crowning touch
اثل atala i to consolidate, strengthen II to
become rich V to be consolidated, be
strengthened; to become rich
اثل atl pl. اثول utūl (coll.; n. un. pl.
atalat) tamarisk (bot.)
اثيل atīl and مؤثل mu’attal deep-rooted;
of noble origin, highborn
اثم atima a (itm, atam, مأثم ma’tam) to sin, err,
slip V to eschew sin, shun evil; to restrain
o.s. hold back
اثم itm pl. آثام ātām sin, offense,
misdeed, crime
مأثم ma’tam pl. مآثم sin, offense,
misdeed, crime
تأثيم sin, offense, misdeed, crime
آثم ātim pl. اثمة atama and اثيم atīm pl.
اثماء atmā’ sinful, criminal, wicked, evil;
sinner
اثمد itmid antimony
اثير atīr ether
اثينا atīnā Athens
اثيوبيا atyūbiyā Ethiopia
اثيوبي atyūbī Ethiopian; (pl.-ūn) an
Ethiopian │ البلاد الاثيوبية Ethiopia
اج ajja u i ( اجيج ajīj) to burn, blaze, flame (fire)
II to light, kindle, start ( ھ a fire) V = I
ماء اجاج mā’ ujāj bitter, salty water
اجاج ajjāj burning, blazing, hot
متأجج muta’ajjij burning, blazing,
flaming
اجبية ajabīya horologium (Copt.-Chr.)
أجر 2 ajara u (ajr) to reward, recompense,
remunerate ( ھ s.o.) II to let for rent, let
out, hire out, rent, lease ( ھ s.th.); (with
nafsahū) to hire s.o. out IV to let for rent,
let out, hire out, rent, lease ( ھ s.th.); to
rent, hire, lease, hold under a lease ( ھ
s.th.), take a lease, ( ھ on); to hire, engage,
take on ( ه s.o.), engage the services ( ه of
s.o.) X to rent, hire, lease, hold under a
lease ( ھ .th.), take a lease ( ھ on); to charter
ھ) a vessel); to hire, engage, take on ( ه
s.o.), engage the service ( ه of s.o.)
اجر ajr pl. اجور ujūr wages, pay,
honorarium, recompense, emolument,
remuneration; price, rate, fee │ اجور السفر
u. as-safar fares
اجرة ujra hire, rent, rental; price, rate,
fee; fixed rate, (official) charge; postage │
اجرة البريد postage; اجرة النقل u. an-naql
transport charges, freight(age), carriage,
cartage
اجير ajīr pl. اجراء ujarā’ hireling;
workman, laborer, day laborer; employee
اجيرة ajīra working woman, factory
girl, female laborer; woman employee
تأجير ta’jīr letting, leasing, hiring out,
letting on lease; lease│ مشروع التأجير
والإعارة (i‘āra) Lend-Lease Act
ايجار ījār pl. -āt rent; letting, leasing,
hiring out, letting on lease│ للإيجار for
rent, to let
اجارة ijāra pl. -āt rent; letting, leasing,
hiring out, letting on lease
استئجار isti’jār rent, lease, tenure
مأجور ma’jūr paid, salaried, on the
payroll, gainfully employed; employee;
mercenary, venal, hired, bribed
مؤجر mu’ajjir pl. -ūn landlord, lessor
مستأجر musta’jir leaseholder, lessee,
tenant; employer 5
آجر 2 ājurr (n. un. ة) baked brick
اجزاجي see جزء
اجزاخانة see جزء
اجاص ijjāṣ pear
اجل ajala a (ajal) to hesitate, tarry, linger II to
delay, postpone, put off, defer, adjourn ( ھ
الى s.th. till) V to be postponed, be
deferred, be adjourned ( مؤجر till, to) X to
request postponement ( ھ of s.th.); to seek
to delay ( ھ s.th.)
اجل ajal yes, indeed! certainly! by all means!
لأجل li-ajli or من اجل min ajli because of,
on account of, for the sake of; for │ لأجل
أن in order that, that, so that; من أجل ھذا
therefore, for that reason, on this account
اجل ajal pl. آجال ājāl appointed time,
date, deadline; instant of death; respite,
delay│ بالأجل on credit (com.); قصير الأجل
short-term, short-time; short-lived: إلى أجل
غير مسمى (gairi musammā) for an
indefinite period, sine die, until further
notice
تأجيل ta’jīl delay, postponement,
adjournment, deferment, respite;
appointment of a time or date
آجل ājil delayed, protracted; deferred;
later, future (as opposed to عاجلا او │( عاجل
آجلا ’ājilan au ājilan, في عاجله او آجله sooner
or later, now or later on; في العاجل والآجل
now and in the future
الآجلة al-ājila the life to come, the
hereafter
مؤجل mu’ajjal delayed, late, postponed,
deferred; fixed in time, deadlined
اجمة ajama, coll. اجم ajam pl. -āt, اجم ujum, آجام
ājām thicket, jungle, forest: reeds,
canebrake
اجمية ajamiya malaria│ بعوضة الأجمية ba‘ūḍat
al-a. anopheles
آجن ājin brackish (water)
اجندة ajanda notebook
اح aḥḥa u (aḥḥ) to cough
احد II to make into one, unite, unify ( ھ s.th.)
VIII اتحد see وحد
احد aḥad, f. احدى one: somebody, someone,
anybody, anyone (esp. in negative
sentences and questions); الأحد the One
(God); Sunday│ احدھم aḥaduhum every one
of them; يوم الأحد yaum al-a. Sunday; أحد
السعف a. as-sa‘af Palm Sunday; أحد العنصرة
a. al-‘anṣara Whitsunday; آحد الألوف āḥād
al-ulūf a few thousand (2-9000; as
distinguished from عشرات الألوف and مئات
(الألوف
احدي aḥadī dominical, Sunday (adj.)
احدية aḥadīya unity, oneness
الآحد al-āḥād the units (math.)
احن 1 aḥina a (aḥan) to bate ( على s.o.)
احنة iḥna pl. احن iḥan old feud, deep-rooted
hatred
احين 2 see اوح
اخ see اخو
اخت see اخو
اخذ aḳaḍa u (aḳḍ) to take ( من ھ s.th. from or
out of): to take ( ھ s.th.) along: to get,
receive, obtain ( من ھ s.th. from); to take
up, seize ( ھ s.th.); to grab ( ب s.o., s.th.),
take hold of ( ب): to perceive, notice ( ه s.o.,
said of the eye); to gather, understand,
infer, deduce ( من ھ s.th. from), read ( ھ
s.th.) between the lines ( من of); to grip,
captivate, thrill, spellbind ( ب s.o.); to take
up, acquire, make one's own ( ب s.th., e.g.,
a method); to keep, adhere ( ب to),
observe, take over, adopt, embrace,
follow, copy, imitate ( ب s.th.); to accept (
ب s.th.); to take, lead ( الى ب s.o. to); to
admonish, urge, drive ( ب ه s.o. to do s.th.);
to enjoin, impose ( ب ه on s.o. s.th.); to take
away ( ه على from s.o. s.th.), strip, deprive (
ه على s.o. of), cut off, bar ( ه على s.o. from);
to reproach, hlame ( ه على s.o. for); to hold
against s.o. ( على ) that ... ( ان ), fix the blame
على) on s.o., ان for the fact that); to
obligate ( ب على s.o. to); to learn ( على or عن
from s.o., ھ s.th.), acquire knowledge ( على
or عن from s.o.), أخذ العلم عنه ('ilm) to study
under s.o.; to begin, start ( في or ب with
s.th. or s.th., with foll. imperf.: to do s.th.),
prepare, set out, be about ( في or ب to do
s.th.) │ أخذ أبھته (uhbatahū) to make
preparations, prepare o.s., get ready; أخذ
مأخذ فلان (ma’ḳad) to adopt the same
course as s.o. else, follow s.o.’s example;
أخذ منه مأخذا to seize s.o., take possession of
s.o. (a sensation, or the like); أخذ مجراه
(majrāhu) to take its course; أخذ مجلسه
(majlisahū) to take one's seat, sit down;
أخذ خذره (ḥidrahū) to be on one's guard;
أخذه بالحسنى (ḥusnā) to be friendly, be nice
to s.o.; أخذ بخاطره (bi-ḳāṯirihī) to show o.s.
complaisant toward s.o., try to please s.o.;
أخذ بذنبه (bi-danbihi) to punish s.o. for his
offense; أخذ رأيه (ra'yahū) to ask s.o.’s
opinion, consult s.o.; أخذ الرأي عليه (uḳida
r-ra'yu) the matter was put to a vote; أخذ
بأسباب (bi-asbābi) to embrace, adopt s.th.,
e.g., أخذ بأسباب الحضارة الأروبية (ḥaḍāra) to
adopt European culture; أخذ بالشدة (šidda) to
deal with s.o. severely, give s.o. a rough
time; أخذ عليه طريقه to obstruct s.o.’s way,
hinder s.o. from moving on; أخذ على عاتقه to
shoulder s.th., take s.th. upon o.s.; أخذ العدة
ل (‘udda) to prepare, set out, get ready to
do s.th.; أخذ عليه عھدا (‘ahdan) to put s.o.
under an obligation, impose a
commitment on s.o.; أخذ على (حين) غرة
uḳida ‘alā (ḥīni) girratin to be taken by
surprise, be caught unawares; أخذ بالمقابلة
(muqābala) to repay like for like; شيء يأخذ
القلوب s.th. which captivates the heart, a
fascinating, thrilling thing; أخذنا المطر
(maṯarū) we got caught in the rain; أخذ
بناصره (bi-nāṣirihi) to help s.o., stand by
s.o., take care of s.o., look after s.o.; أخذ
نفسه (nafasahū) to draw breath; أخذ عليه
أنفاسه to take s.o.’s breath away; أخذ النوم
(naum) sleep overwhelmed him; أخذ بيده
(bi-yadihī) to help s.o., stand by s.o. II to
lay under a spell, enchant, bewitch ( ه s.o.)
III to censure, blame ( ب، على ه s.o. for
s.th.); to punish ( ب، على ه s.o. for); to hold
s.th. ( على ) against s.o. ( ه), resent ( على s.th.
ه, in s.o.)│ لا تؤاخذني lā tu’āḳidnī pardon
me! forgive me! no offense, I hope! VIII
اتخذ ittaḳada to take ( ه s.th.); to take on,
assume ( ھ s.th.); to take up, occupy ( ھ
s.th.); to pass, adopt ( ھ e.g., a resolution);
to take, single out, have in mind ( ھ ھ، ه ه
s.o. or s.th. as); to make use ( ھ of s.th.),
use ( ھ s.th.); to imitate, affect ( ھ e.g.,
s.o.’s manner of speaking); to make ( من ھ
s.th. out of s.o. or s.th.)│ اتخذ شكلا (šaklan)
to take on a form or shape; اتخذ موقفا
(mauqifan) to take an attitude, assume a
position; اتخذ التدابير الازمة to take the
necessary measures; اتخذ قرارا (qarāran) to
pass or adopt a resolution; اتخذ المواقع الجديدة
to take up new positions (troops)
أخذ aḳd acceptance, reception; seizure;
taking out, taking away, removal, etc.│ أخذ
الرأي a. ar-ra'y voting, vote; أخذ ورد (waradd)
discussion, debate, dispute,
argument; شيء لا يقبل أخذا ولا ردا (yaqbalu)
an indisputable matter; أخذ وعطاء
(wa-‘aṯā’) give-and-take; traffic, trade;
dealings, relations (esp. business,
commercial); discussion, debate; fight,
battle
أخذة uḳda spell, charm
أخيذ aḳīd prisoner of war
أخيذة aḳīda booty, spoils
أخاذ aḳḳād captivating, fascinating,
thrilling
مأخذ ma’ḳad pl. مآخذ ma’āḳid2 place
from which one takes s.th., source; O wall
socket, outlet (el.); adoption, borrowing,
loan; manner of acting, mode of
procedure, approach; pl. مآخذ source
references, bibliography (in booke);
reprehensible points, faults, flaws, defects,
shortcomings│ المأخذ الأقرب the simplest,
easiest approach; قريب المأخذ easy to handle
or to use; see wao aḳada (middle of
paragraph)
مؤاخذة mu’āḳada objection, exception;
censure, blame│ لا مؤاخذة ! (mu’āḳadata)
pardon me! no offense, I hope!
أخذ ma’ḳūd taken, seized; taken by
surprise, caught, trapped; surprised; taken
ب) with), fascinated ( ب by); مأخوذ به in
force, valid
مأخوذات ma’ḳūdāt receipts, takings,
returns (com.)
اخر II to delay, put off, defer, postpone,
adjourn ( ھ s.th.); to hinder, impede,
obstruct, hold up ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.), slow
down, retard ( ھ s.th.); to draw out, delay (
عن s.th. beyond its appointed time); to put
back ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.), shelve ( ھ s.th.); to
set back ( ھ a watch, a clock); to suspend,
discharge, dismiss, remove ( ه s.o. from an
office) V to be late; to be delayed, fall or
lag behind ( عن ), tarry, linger, hesitate; to
default ( عن on), be behindhand, be in
arrears ( عن with), be behind ( عن in); to
hesitate ( عن with); to be suspended (from
service), be discharged, be dismissed│ لم
يتأخر بعد ذلك من ان after that, he did not
hesitate long before he …, presently, he ...
آخر āḳir pl. -ūn, -āt, اواخر awaḳir2 last,
ultimate, utmost, extreme; end, close,
conclusion; foot, bottom (of a paper);
الآخر and الآخرة the hereafter│ الدار الآخرة
the abode in the hereafter, the everlasting
abode; الى آخره ilā ākīirihī and so forth, et
cetera; آخر الأمر āḳir l-amri eventually,
finally, in the end, after all; آخر الدھر āḳir
d-dahri forever; آخر الزمان a. az-zamān
time at which the Day of Judgment is to
be expected, the end of the world; عن آخره
to the last, down to the grass roots,
entirely, completely, e.g., دمر عن آخره
(dummira) to be completely destroyed, be
wiped off the map; من آخره from behind,
from the rear; ما له آخر endless, infinite; في
آخر الآخر after all, last of all; اواخر الشھر a.
aš-šahr the end of the month, the last ten
days of the month; اخيرا وليس آخرا last but
not least
الآخرة al-āḳira the hereafter
آخر āḳar 2, f. اخرى uḳrā, pl. comm. اخر
uḳar 2 (and آخرون āḳarūn or اخريات
respectively) another, one more, الآخر the
other│ مرة اخرى (marratan) once more; ھي
الأخرى، ھو الآخر he also, she also, he in
turn, she in turn, انا الآخر I also; ان كانت
الأخرى (in kānat) otherwise; من آن الى آخر
from time to time; من سنة الى اخرى (sana)
from year to year; بين فترة واخرى (fatra)
once in a while, from time to time;
اخرى―آونة (awinatan) sometimes --
sometimes, at times -- at times
الأخرى al-uḳrā the hereafter
اخروي uḳrawī of or relating to the life to
come or the hereafter
اخير aḳīr last; latest; rearmost; the
second of two; اخيرا eventually, finally, in
the end, after all, at last; recently, the
other day; الأول―الاخير the former—the
latter│ اخيرا وليس آخرا last but not least
مئخار mi’ḳār palm which retains its fruit
into the winter
تأخير ta’ḳīr delay, deferment,
postponement; obstruction, retardation;
putting back, temporary shelving
تأخر .f ta’aḳḳar delay, lag, retardation;
hesitation, tarrying, lingering; slowness,
tardiness; backwardness,
underdevelopment (of a country)
مؤخر mu’aḳḳar rear part, tail, end; atern
(of a ship); remainder, balance (of a sum,
to be paid later); مؤخرا mu’aḳḳaran
recently, lately, the other day; at last,
finally, eventually
مؤخرة mu’aḳḳara rear, rear guard (of an
army); rear positions or lines (mil.); stern
(of a ship)
متأخر muta’aḳḳir delayed, belated, late;
occurring later ( عن than); behind,
behindhand in arrears; backward,
underdeveloped; lagging, staying behind;
defaulter; المتأخرون the later, or modern,
authors, writers, or the like (as opposed to
المتقدمون)؛ المتأخرات arrears, balance of a
سum remaining due after previous
payment│ البلدان المتأخرة (buldān) the
underdeveloped countries
اخطبوط uḳṯubūṯ octopus
اخو III to fraternize, associate as brothers ( ه
with s.o.) V to act or show o.s. as a
brother or friend VI to fraternize,
associate as brothers
اخ aḳ pl. اخو iḳwa, اخوان iḳwān brother;
fellow man, neighbor; friend; pl. اخوان
specif., brethren or members of an order;
الإخوان religious brotherhood of the
Wahabi sect, militant in character,
established by Ibn Sa‘ūd in 1910│ يا أخي
my dear friend! اخو ثقة aḳū tiqa
trustworthy, reliable; اخ شقيق brother
through both father and mother, brothergerman
اخت uḳt pl. اخوات aḳawāt sister; (gram.)
cognate; counterpart│ اختھا the other (of
two), its mate, its counterpart (after a fem.
noun)
خوي ḳuwaiy little brother
اخوي aḳawi brotherly, fraternal
اخوية aḳawīya brotherhood (as a
religious association)
اخاء iḳā’, اخوة uḳūwa brotherhood,
brotherliness, fraternity
اخاوة iḳāwa fraternization, fraternity,
brotherliness
تآخ ta’āḳin fraternization
اخور aḳūr barn, stable
اد adda u i to befall, afflict ( ه a.o.)
امر اد amr idd a terrible, evil, horrible
thing
ادب aduba u (adab) to be well-bred, wellmannered,
cultured, urbane, have refined
tastes; ― adaba i (adb) to invite (to a
party or banquet, ه s.o.), entertain ( ه s.o.)│
ادب مأدبة (ma'duba) to arrange a banquet,
give a formal dinner II to refine, educate ( ه
s.o.); to discipline, punish, ehastise ( ه s.o.)
IV to invite as a guest ( ه s.o.) V to receive
a fine education; to be well-bred, welleducated,
cultured, have refined tastes; to
show o.s. polite, courteous, civil, urbane;
to educate o.s., refine one’s tastes ( ب by,
through); to let o.s. be guided ( ب by)│
تأدب بأدبه (bi-adabihi) to follow s.o.’s moral
example
ادب adab pl. آداب ādab culture,
refinement; good breeding, good manners,
social graces, decorum, decency,
propriety, seemliness; humanity,
humaneness; the humanities; belleslettres
│ بيت الأدب toilet, water closet; قليل
الأدب and عديم الأدب ill-mannered, ill-bred,
impolite, uncivil; الأدب العامي (‘āmmī)
popular literature; رجال الأدب literati, men
of letters; كلية الآداب kullīyat al-ā. (= faculté
des lettres) college of arts; آداب rules, rules
of conduct, e.g., آداب السلوك rules of
decorum, etiquette; الآداب decency, morals
ادبي adabī moral, ethic(al); literary│
واجب ادبي moral obligation; ادبيا وماديا
adabiyan wa-māddīyan morally and
physically; الفلسفة الأدبية (falsafa) ethics,
moral science
ادبيات adabīyāt lliterature, belles-lettres
ادبخانة adabḳāna pl. -āt toilet, water
closet
اديب adīb pl. ادباء udabā’ cultured,
refined, educated; well.bred, wellmannered,
civil, urbane; a. man of culture
and refined tastes; man of letters, writer,
author
اديبة adība authoress, writer
مأدبة ma’duba pl. مآدب ma’ādib banquet,
formal dinner
تأديب ta’dīb education; discipline;
punishment, chastisement; disciplinary
punishment│ مجلس التأديب majlis at-t.
disciplinary board
تأديبي ta'dībī disciplinary; punitive,
retaliatory│ قضية تأديبية (qaḍīya)
disciplinary action
تأدب ta’addub good breeding, good
manners, civility, politeness,
courteousness, tact
آدب ādib host
مؤدب mu’addib pl. -ūn educator; teacher
in a Koranic school (Tun.); ― mu'addab
well-bred, well-mannered, civil, urbane
ادرة udra scrotal hernia
ادرنة adirna2 Edirne, Adrianople (city in NW
Turkey)
الادياتيك (Fr. adriatique) al-adriyātīk and بحر
الادياتيك baḥr al-a. the Adriatic Sea
ادم 1 adama i (adm) to take some additional
food ( ھ with the bread), enrich ( ھ the
bread) with some extra food or condiment
ادام idām anything eaten with bread;
shortening, fatty ingredient
ادم 2 adam, adama skin
اديم adīm skin; surface; tanned skin,
leather│ اديم الأرض a. al-arḍ the surface of
the earth
ادام addām tanner
آدم 3 ādam2 Adam│ ابن آدم human being
آدمي ādamī human; humane; poor,
inferior, meager; (pl. -ūn, ( اوادم awadim2)
human being
آدمية ādamīya humaneness, humanity;
humanism
اداة adāh pl. ادوات adawāt tool; instrument;
utensil, implement, device, appliance;
apparatus; (gram.) particle│ اداة الحكم a. al-
ḥukm machinery of government; اداة
التعريف definite article (gram.); اداة التنفيذية
(tanfīdīya) executive agency; pl. materials,
equipment, gear, ادوات حربية (ḥarbīya) war
material; ادواوت احطياطية (iḥtiyāṯīya) standby
equipment (techn.); ادوات منزلية
(manzilīya) household utensils, household
effects
الأدون al-adōn (Hebr.) the Lord; Mr. ... (Isr.)
ادى II to convey, take, bring, lead, steer,
channel ( ھ، ه ب s.o., s.th., الى to), see that
s.o. or s.th. ( ھ، ه or ب) gets to ( الى ); to
bring about, cause, effect, produce ( الى
s.th.); to lead, contribute, be conducive (
الى to a result); to amount, come
practically ( الى to); to tend ( الى to), aim ( الى
at); to carry out, execute, discharge ( ھ
s.th.); to perform ( ھ a ritual, etc.); to do (
واجبه wājibahū one’s duty); to fulfill ( وظيفة
a function, رسالة a mission); to accomplish
مأمورية) a task); to take ( يمينا an oath; امتحانا
an examination); to render ( خدمة ḳidmatan
a service, ل or الى to s.o.; ھ e.g., a
meaning, a musical composition, etc.)│ ادى
(salām) to greet, salute V to lead, be
conducive, contribute ( الى to results); to be
carried out, be performed, be
accomplished; to 10 arrive ( إلى at), be lead
إلى) to) X to demand, claim ( ھ ه from s.o.
s.th.)
اداء adā’ pl. -āt (as verbal noun of II)
rendering (of a service); pursuit,
performance, execution, discharge (of a
duty), realization, effectuation,
accomplishment (of a task); rendition,
reading (e.g., of a musical composition);
fulfillment; payment│ حسن الأداء ḥusn al-a.
good rendition (of a work of art, of a
musical composition)
تأدية ta’diya rendering (of a service);
pursuit, performance, execution, discharge
(of a duty), realization effectuation;
accomplishment (of a task); fulfillment;
payment
مؤدى mu’addan assignment, task,
function; sense, meaning, signification,
import, underlying idea
اذ id 1. (introducing a verbal clause) (and)
then; إذ ذاك id dāka (also written إذاك ) then,
at that time, at the same time, in doing so;
2. (conj.; temp. and caus.) as, when; since,
as, the more so as, because; اذ ان id anna
since, as, in view of the fact that; for,
because
1 اذا ١ . (introducing a nominal clause the
subject of which may he expressed by ب
with foll. genit.) and then, and all of a
sudden; (with noun in nominative case or
with ب) there was … and all of a sudden
there was …; 2. (conj.) when; if,
whenever; whether, if (introducing
indirect questions); اذا ما when, whenever; ا
لا اذا (illā) unless if not; except when
اذا (اذن 2 ) idan then, therefore, in that case,
hence, consequently
آذار ādār2 March (month; Syr., Leb., Jord., Ir.)
اذن 1 adina a to listen ( إلى to s.o..); to allow,
permit ( في ل s.o. s.th.); to hear, learn ( ب of
s.th.), be informed ( ب about) II to call ( ب
to), esp. to call to prayer ( بالصلاة ); to crow
(rooster) IV to announce, make known ( ب
s.th., ب ه to s.o. s.th.), inform, notify ( ه
s.o.); to call to prayer; to call upon s.o. ( ,(ه
urge, admonish, exhort ( ه s.o..) to do s.th. (
ب); to herald ( ب or ھ s.th.); to foreshadow
ب) s.th.); to be on the verge ( ان of doing
s.th..)│ آذن بالسقوط (بالزوال ) (zawāl) to show
signs of the imminent downfall (end); آذن
الليل بانتصاف (lailu bi-ntiṣāf) it was close to
midnight V to herald, announce ( ب s.th.)
X to ask permission ( في to do s.th., rarely
ب); to ask permission to enter ( على s.o.'s
house), have o.s. announced ( على to s.o.);
to take leave ( من of s.o.), say good-by ( من
to)
اذن idn permission, authorization; باذن لله
if God choose, God willing; (pl. اذون
udūn, اذونات udūnāt) (postal) order│ اذن
البريد pl. اذونات البريد postal money order; اذن
البوسته do.
اذن udun, udn pl. آذان ādan ear; handle
(of a cup)│ التھاب الاذن الوسطى (wusṯā)
middle-ear infection, otitis media (med.)
اذان adān call to prayer
اذنية udaina little ear; ear lobe
مأذنة ma’dana, مئذنة midana pl. مآذن
ma’ādin2 minaret
ايذان idān declaration, proclamation,
announcement ( ب of s.th..)│ ايذنا بانتھاء
الحديث indicating that the conversation is
(was) ended
مأذون ma’dūun authorized; slave with
limited legal rights (Isl. Law); = مأذون
شرعي (šar‘ī) official authorized by the
cadi to perform civil marriages (Isl. Law)
مأذونية ma’dūnīya leave, furlough (mil.
Syr.); license, franchise (Syr.)
مؤذن mu’addin muezzin, announcer of
the hour of prayer
اذن idan see اذا 2
اذى adiya a to suffer damage, be harmed IV to
hs.rm, hurt, wrong ( ه s.o.); to molest,
annoy, irritate, trouble ( ه s.o.)│ لا يؤذي lā
yu’dī innocuous, harmless, inoffensive V
to suffer damage, be wronged; to feel
offended, be hurt
اذى adan, اذاة adāh, اذية adīya damage,
harm; injury; trouble, annoyance,
grievance, wrong, offense, insult
اذاية idāya damage, harm, harmfulness,
noxiousness
ايذاء īdā’ harm, damage, prejudice;
offense,. hurt; grievance, nuisance
مؤذ mu’din hurtful, harmful, injurious,
detrimental, prejudicial; annoying,
irksome, troublesome; painful, hurting,
offensive, insulting
اراتيقي arātīqī and اراتيكي pl. اراتقة arātiqa a
heretic (Chr.)
آرامى ārāmī Aramaean; Aramaic
ارب ariba a (arab) to be skillful, proficient ( ب
in s.th.); -- araba i to tighten ( ھ a knot) III
to try to outwit ( ه s.o.)
ارب arab pl. آراب ārāb wish ( في for),
desire, need ( في of s.th.); purpose. aim,
goal, end
ارب irb pl. آراب ārāb limb│ مزقه اربا اربا
(mazzaqahū) to tear s.th. to pieces or to
shreds
اربة irba skill, resourcefulness,
cleverness, smartness
اربة urba pl. ارب urab knot, bow
اريب arīb skillful, resourceful, clever,
intelligent
مأرب ma’rab pl. مآرب ma’ārib2 wish,
desire; object of desire, purpose, aim,
goal, end
اربيل arbīl Erbil (the ancient Arbela, city in N
Iraq)
ارتوازي artuwaāzī artesian (well)
ارث 1 II to sow dissension ( بين between, among)
ارث 2 irt inheritance, heritage; estate (of
inheritance)
ارثوذكسي urtūduksī orthodox; الارثوذكسية the
Orthodox Church
الروم الارثوذكسي ar=rūm al-urtūduksī the
Greek Orthodox Church
ارج arija a (araj, اريج arīj) to be fragrant V do.
ارج araj fragrance, sweet smell
ارج arij fragrant, sweet-smelling
اريج arīj fragrance, sweet smell
ارجح II ta’arjaḥa to rock, swing
متأرجح muta'arjiḥ fluctuating
الارجنتين al-arjantīn Argentina
ارجوان urjuwān purple
ارجوان urjuwānī purple(-colored)
ارجوز popular spelling (eg.) of قره جوز ’aragōz
(q.v.); Punch (in a Punch and Judy show)
ارخ II to date ( ھ a letter, and the like, ب with a
date); to write the history of s.th. ( (ھتاريخ
ta'rīḳ dating (of a letter, etc.); ta'rīḳ
pl. تواريخ tawārīḳ2 date; time; history;
chronicle, annals│ تاريخ الحياة t. al-ḥayāh
biography; curriculum vitae; تاريخ عام
(‘āmm) world history; علماء التاريخ the
historians
تاريخي tārīḳī historic(al)
مؤرخ mu'arriḳ pl. -ūn historiographer,
historian, chronicler, annalist; -- mu’arraḳ
dated
ارخبيل arḳabīl archipelago
ارخن (άρχων) pl. اراخنة arāḳina archon, pl.
notables (Chr.-Copt.)
اردب irdabb (now usually pronounced
ardabb)pl. ارادب arādib2 ardeb, a dry
measure (Eg.; = 1981)
اردبة irdabba cesspool
الاردن al-urdunn Jordan (river and country)
اردني urdunni Jordanian│ المملكة الاردنية
الھاشمية al-mamlaka al-u. al-hāšimīya the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (official
designation)
اردواز (Fr. ardoise) arduwāz slate
ارز 1 arz (n. un. ة) cedar
ارز 2 aruzz rice
ارس arasa i (ars) to till the land
اريس irrīs and arīs peasant, farmer
ارستقراطي aristuqrāṯī aristocratic; ristocrat
ارستقراطية aristuqrāṯīya aristocracy
ارسطو arisṯū Aristotle
ارش arš indemnity, amercement, fine, penalty;
blood money (for the shedding of blood;
Isl. Law)
ارشي ابسقوبس (Gr. ὰρχιεπίσϰοπος) archbishop
ارشيدوق (Fr. archiduc) archduke, ارشيدوقة
archduchess
ارض arḍ f., pl. اراض arāḍīn, اراضون arāḍūn
earth; land, country, region, area; terrain,
ground, soil│ الارض السفلى (suflā) the
nether world; الارض المقدسة (muqaddasa)
the Holy Land, Palestine
ارضي arḍī terrestrial, of the earth; soil-,
land- (in compounds); situated on or near
the ground, ground (adj.); earthly;
underground, subterranean
ارضي شوكي arḍī šaukī artichoke
ارض araḍ (coll.; n. un. ة) termite;
woodworm
ارضية arḍīya pl. -āt floor; ground (also, e.g., of
a printed fabric, of a painting); ground
floor, first floor (tun.); storage, warehouse
charges
ارضروم arḍurum2 Erzurum (city in NE Turkey)
ارطة (also اورطة ) urṯa pl. ارط uraṯ ( (اورط
battalion (formerly, Eg.; mil.)
ارطقة arṯaqa pl. -āt heresy (Chr.)
تاريع see ريع
ارغن urgun pl. اراغن aragin2 organ (mus. instr.)
ارول urgūl, argūl a wind instrument (related to
the clarinet, consisting of two pipes of
unequal length)
ارق ariqa a to find no sleep II to make
sleepless ( ه s.o.), prevent s.o. ( ه) from
sleeping
ارق araq sleeplessness, insomnia
اريكة arika pl. ارائك arā’ik2 couch, sofa; throne
اركيلة argīla pl. اراكيل arāgīl2 (syr.) water pipe,
narghile
ارلندي irlandī Irish
ارم 1 arama i to bite
ارم urram molar teeth│ حرق الارم
(ḥarraqa) to gnash one's teeth (in anger)
ارومة arūma, urūma root, origin; stump
of a tree
مئرم mi'ram root (of a tooth)
آرام 2 ārām (= ارام ) pl. of رئم ri'm) white
antelopes
الارمن al-arman the Armenians
ارمني armanī Armenian (adj. and n.)
ارمينيا armēniyā Armenia
الارناوط al-arnāwuṯ the Albanians
ارناوطي arnāwuṯī Albanian
ارنب arnab f., pl. ارانب arānib2 hare; rabbit│
ارنب ھندي (hindī) guinea pig
ارنبة arnaba female hare, doe│ ارنبة الانف
a. al-anf tip of the nose; nose, muzzle (of
an animal)
ارنيك (Turk. örnek) urnīk pl. ارانيك arānīk2
pattern, model; form, blank
اروبا urubbā Europe
اروبي urubbī European (adj. and n.)
ارى 1 ary honey
آرى 2 ārī Aryan
آرية ārīya Aryanism
اريحا arīḥā Jericho
از azza u i ( ازيز aziz) to simmer; to hum, buzz;
to whiz, hiss; to fizzle; to wheeze
ازيز azīz hum(ming), buzz(ing);
whizzing, whizz, whistle (e.g., of bullets)
ازب 1 azaba i (azb) to flow, run (water)
مئزاب mi'zāb pl. مآزيب ma'āzīb2 and ميزاب
mīzāb pl. ميازيب mayāzīb2 drain; gutter,
eaves trough
ازب 2 izb dumpy, pudgy, stocky; small man
الازبك al-uzbak the Uzbeks
ازر azara i (azr) to surround ( ھ s.th.) II to
clothe ( ه s.o. with an ازار izār q.v.); to
cover, wrap up ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to
strengthen, brace ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.) III to help
ه) s.o.); to support, back up, strengthen ( ه
s.o.) V and VIII to put on an izār (see
below), wrap s.o. in an izār VI to help
each other; to rally, unite, join forces
ازر azr strength│ شد ازره šadda azrahū or شد من
ازره (min azrihi) to help, support,
encourage s.o., back s.o. up; šadda azruhū
to be energetic, vigorous, lusty,
courageous
ازار izār m. and f., pl. ازر uzur
loincloth; wrap, shawl; wrapper, covering,
cover
مئزر mi’zar pl. مآزر ma’āzīr2 apron;
wrapper, covering, cover
مؤازرة mu’āzara support, aid,
assistance, backing
تآزر ta’āzur mutual assistance
ازف azila a (awaf, ازوف uzūf) to come,
approach, draw near (a time)
ازق azaqa i (azq) to be narrow V do.
مأزق ma'ziq pl. مآزق ma’āziq2 narrow
passageway, narrow pass, strait, bottleneck;
predicament, fix, dilemma, critical
situation, also مأزق حرج (ḥarij)
ازل azl pl. آزال āzāl eternity (without
beginning), sempiternity
ازلي azali eternal, sempiternal
ازلية azalīya sempiternity, eternity
ازم V to be or become critical, come to a head
(situation, relations)
ازمة azma pl. azamāt emergency; crisis│
ازمة وزارية (wizāriya) cabinet crisis
تأزم ta'azzum: تأزم الحالة t. al-hāla critical
development, aggravation of the situation
مأزوم ma'zūm victim of a crisis
ازمير izmīr2 Izmir (formerly Smyrna, sea-port
in W Turkey)
ازميل izmīl pl. ازاميل azāmīl 2 chisel
ازوت (Engl.) azōt azote, nitrogen
ازوتي azōtī nitrogenous
ازى III to be opposite s.th. ( ه), face ( ه s.o., ھ
s.th.)
ازاء izā’a (prep.) opposite, face to face
with, facing; in front of; in the face of
(e.g., of a situation); as compared with;
بازاء bi-izā’i opposite, face to face with,
facing; in front of; على ازاء ‘alā izā’i in the
face of (e.g., of a situation)
آس 1 ās myrtle
آس 2 pl. -āt ace (playing card)
آس 3 II to found, establish, set up ( ھ s.th.), lay
the foundation ( ھ for) V to be founded, be
established, he set up
اس foundation, basis; exponent of a
power (math.)
اس asās pl. اسس usus foundation (also,
of a building), fundament, groundwork,
ground, basis; keynote. Tonic (mus.)│ على
اساس (with foll. genit.) on the basis of, on
the strength of, on account of, according
to; لا اساس له من الصحة (asāsa, ṣiḥḥa)
completely unfounded (news, rumor)
اساسي asāsī fundamental, basic;
elementary; essential; principal, chief,
main│ حجر اسود (ḥajar) cornerstone,
foundation stone
اساسيات asāsīyāt fundamentals,
principles
تأسيس ta'sīs founding, foundation,
establishment, setting up, institution;
grounding, laying of the substructure
(arch.); pl. -āt facilities, utilities;
institutions
تأسيس ta'sīsī founding; foundational,
fundamental│ مجلس تأسيسي (majlis)
constituent assembly
مؤسس mu'assis founder
مؤسسة mu’assasa pl. -āt foundation,
establishment; firm (com.); institution;
organization
الاسبان al-asbān, al-isbān the Spaniards
اسباني isbānī Spanish; (pl. -ūn) Spaniard
اسبانخ isbānaḳ spinach
اسبانيا isbāniyā Spain
اسبداج isbidāj and اسبيداج isbīdāj white lead,
ceruse
اسبرتو (It. spirito) isbirto alcohol
اسبليطة isbalīṯa epaulet
است see ست 1
استاتيكي istātīkī static (el.)
استاد (Fr. stade) istād stadium
استاذ ustād pl. اساتذة asātida master; teacher;
professor (academic title); form of address
to intellectuals (lawyers, journalists,
officials, writers and poets); ledger
(com.)│ الاستاذ الأعظم (a‘ẓam) Grand
Master (of a lodge); الاستاذ الأكبر title of the
Rector of Al Azhar University; استاذ كرسي
(kursī; Eg.) and استاذ بكرسي (Syr.) full
professor; استاذ بلا كرسي (Syr.) associate
professor; استاذ متفرغ (mutafarrig;Eg.) parttime
professor (holding an office outside
the university); استاذ مساعد (musā‘id)
assistant professor (Eg.; Syr.); استاذ زائر
(Eg.; Syr.) visiting professor; اساتذة في الجدل
(jadal) they are masters of disputation
استاذية ustādīya mastership;
professorship, professorate
استانبول istanbūl2 Istanbul, Constantinople
استانبولي istanbūlī of Istanbul
الآستانة al-āsitāna, الاستانة al-astāna, al-istāna
Constantinople, Istanbul
استبرق istabraq brocade
استراتيجي istrātījī strategic
استرالي usturālī Australian
استراليا usturālīyā Australia
استرليني istarlīnī sterling│ جنيه استرليني pound
sterling; منطقة الاسترليني minṯaqat al-i.
sterling area
استمارة see امر
استوبة (It. stoppa) tow, oakum; cotton waste
استوديو (It.-Engl. studio) istūdiyō pl. استوديوھات
istūdiyōhāt studio; atelier
استوكھولم istokholm Stockholm
استونيا (Engl.) istōniyā Estonia
استياتيت I istiyātīt steatite, soapstone (min.)
اسوج look up alphabetically
اسد X to display the courage of a lion ( على
against)
اسد asad pl. اسد usud, usd, اسود usūd, آساد āsād
lion; Leo (astron.)│ داء الاسد leontiasis
(med.)
اسر 1 asara i (asr) to bind, fetter, shackle,
chain ( ه s.o.); to capture, take prisoner ( ه
s.o.); to captivate, fascinate, hold
spellbound ( ه s.o.), absorb, arrest ( ھ the
attention) X to surrender, give s.o. up as
prisoner
اسر asr (leather) strap, thong; capture;
captivity│ شدة الاسر šiddat al-a. vigor,
energy
اسرة usra pl. اسر usar, -āt family;
dynasty; clan, kinsfolk, relatives; -- asirra
see سرير
باسره bi-asrihī entirely, completely,
altogether, جاءوا باسرھم all of them came,
they came one and all
اسار isār (leather) strap, thong; captivity;
captivation, enthrallment│ وقع في اساره to
be subjected to s.th., fall into the clutches
of s.th.
اسير asīr pl. اسراء usarā اسرى , 2 asrā,
اسارى asārā prisoner, captive, prisoner of
war
اسيرة asīra pl. -āt female prisoner, slave
girl
آسر āsir winning, captivating,
fascinating; captor
مأسور ma’sūr captivated, fascinated,
enthralled ( ب by)
اسرة 2 asirra see سرير
مأسورة 3 look up alphabetically
اسرائيل isrā’īl2 Israel│ بنو اسرائيل banū i. the
Israelites; دولة اسرائيلية daulat i. the State of
Israel
اسرائيلي isrā’īlī Israelitish; Israelite;
Israeli (adj, and n.); اسرائيليات Judaica
اسرافيل isrāfīl 2 Israfil, the angel who will sound
the trumpet on the day of Resurrection
اسرب usrub lead (metal)
اسطانبول isṯanbūl2 Istanbul, Constantinople
اسطبل isṯabl pl. -āt stable, barn
اسطبة (It. stoppa) usṯubba tow, oakum
اسطرلاب asṯurlāb astrolabe
اسطقس isṯaqīs pl. -āt element
اسطوانات usṯuwāna pl. -āt column (arch.);
cylinder (math.; of an engine);
phonograph record; -- pl. اساطين asāṯīn2
high-ranking, prominent personalities;
stars, celebrities, authorities, masters (e.g.,
of art: اساطين الفن a. al-fann)
اسطوانى usṯuwānī cylindric(al)
اسطورة usṯūra pl. اساطير asāṯīr legend, fable,
tale, myth, saga
اسطوري usṯūrī fabulous, mythical, legendary
اسطول usṯūl pl. اساطيل asāṯīl2 fleet; squadron
□ اسطى usṯā (colloq. for استاذ ) pl. اسطوات
usṯawāt master; foreman, overseer; also
form of address to those in lower callings,
e.g., to a cab driver, coachman, etc.
اسف asifa a (asaf) to regret ( على or ل s.th.), feel
sorry ( على for), be sad ( على about) V do
اسف asaf grief, sorrow, chagrin, regret│ وا
اسفاه ! wā asafāh! Oh, what a pity! it's too
bad! ويا للاسف wa-yā lal-asafi (or only
للاسف ) unfortunately; مع الاسف and بكل اسف
bi-kulli asafin do.
اسف asifa and اسيف asīf regretful, sorry,
sad, grieved, distressed
تأسف ta'assuf regret
آسف āsif regretful, sorry, sad│ تركته غير
آسف (gaira āsifin) I left him without regret,
I was only too glad to leave him
مأسوف عليه ma’sūf ‘alaihi mourned (esp.
of a dead person, = the late lamented)
مؤسف mu’sif distressing, sad, regrettable
متأسف muta’assif sad, sorry, regretful;
متأسف ! sorry!
اسفاناخ isfānāk and اسفانخ isfānaḳ spinach│
اسفاناخ رومي (rūmī) garden orach (Atriplex
hortensis, bot.)
اسفلت asfalt asphalt
اسفنج isfanj,isfunj sponge
اسفنجي isfanjī spongy; porous
اسفندان isfindān maple (bot.)
اسفيداج isfīdāj; white lead, ceruse
اسفين isfīn pl. اسافين asāfīn2 wedge
اسقربوطي isqarbūṯī: مرض اسقربوطي (maraḍ)
scurvy (med.)
اسقف usquf pl. اساقفة asāqifa, اساقف asāqif2
bishop│ رئيس الاساقفة archbishop
اسقفي usqufī Episcopal
اسقفية usqufīya episcopate, bishopric
اسقمري usqumrī, isqumrī mackerel (zool.)
اسقيل isqīl an Oriental variety of sea onion
(Scilla)
اسكتش (Engl.) isketš sketch
اسكتلندا iskotlandā Scotland
اسكتلندي iskotlandī Scottish, Scotch
اسكلة iskila pl. اساكل asākil2 seaport,
commercial center (in the East)
اسكملة iskamla stool, footstool
اسكندرونة iskandarūna2 Iskenderon (formerly
Alexandretta, seaport in S Turkey)
الاسكندرية al-iskandarīya Alexandria (city in N
Egypt)
اسكندينافيا iskandināfīya Scandinavia
اسل II to sharpen, point, taper ( ھ s.th.)
اسل asal (coll.) rush (bot.)
اسلة asaIa pl. -āt thorn, spike, prong;
point (also, e.g., of a pen = nib); tip of the
tongue
الحروف الاسلية al-ḥurūf al-asalīya the
letters ز، س and ص
اسيل asīl smooth│ خد اسيل (ḳadd) smooth
cheek
اسالة asāla eliptic, oval form
مؤسل mu’assal pointed, tapered
اسلامبولي (variant of استانبولي ) islāmbūlī of
Istanbul
اسلانده islandā Iceland
اسم see سم 1
اسمانجوني asmanjūnī sky-blue, azure, cerulean
اسمره asmara Asmara (capital of Eritrea)
اسمنت asmant, ismant cement
اسمنتي asmantī cement (adj.)
اسن asana i u and asina a to become brackish
(water)
آسن āsin brackish
اسو) and اسى) اسا asā u (asw, اسا asan) to nurse,
treat ( ھ a wound); to make peace ( بين
between, among); -- اسى asiya ( اسى، اسا
asan) to be sad, grieved, distressed II to
console, comfort ( ه s.o.); to nurse ( ه a
patient) III to share (one’s worldly
possessions, ه with s.o.), be charitable ( ه to
s.o.); to assist, support ( ه s.o.); to console,
comfort ( ه s.o.); to treat, cure ( ھ s.th.,
medically) V to be consoled, find solace
VI to share the worldly possessions; to
assist one another, give mutual assistance
اسى asan grief, sorrow, distress
اسوة uswa, iswa example, model,
pattern│ اسوة ب uswatan bi following the
model or pattern of; along the lines of; in
the same manner as, just as, like
مأساة ma’sāh pl. مآس ma’āsin trogedy,
drama
تأسية ta’siya consolation, comfort
مواساة muwāsāh (for mu’āsāh)
consolation; charity; beneficence
أسوار iswār, uswār pl. أساور asāwir أساورة , 2
asāwira bracelet, bangle
أسوان aswān Aswan (city in S Egypt)
اسوج asūj Sweden
اسوجي asūjī Swedish
اسى see اسو
آسيا āsiyā Asia│ آسيا الصغرى (ṣugrā) Asia
Minor
آسيوي āsiyawī Asiatic, Asian (adj. and
n.)
اسيوط asyūt2 Asyūt (city in central Egypt)
اشب V to be mixed, heterogeneous, motley (a
crowd)
اشابة ušāba pl. اشائب ašā’ib2 mixed,
motley crowd
اشببيلية išbīliya2 Seville (city in SW Spain)
اشبين išbīn pl. اشابين see شبن
اشر ašara u (ašr) to sow ( ھ s.th.); -- i to file,
sharpen with a file ( ھ s.th.) II to mark,
indicate, state, enter, record ( ھ s.th.); to
grant a visa; to provide with a visa ( على
s.th.)
اشر ašar liveliness, high spirits,
exuberance; wildness; insolence,
impertinence
اشر ašir lively, sprightly, in high spirits,
exuberant; wild; insolent, impertinent,
arrogant
مئشار minšār pl. مواشير mawāšīr2 saw
تأشير ta’šīr issuance of an official
endorsement; official endorsement; visa
تأشيرة ta’šīra pl. -āt visa│ تأشيرة مرور t.
murūr or تأشيرة اجتياز transit visa
مؤشر mu’aššir indicator, needle (of a
measuring instrument)
مؤشر mu’aššar jagged, serrated; marked,
designated ( ب by, with)
اشفى išfā pl. اشاف ašāfin awl, punch
اشنان ušnān potash; saltwort (Salsola kali; bot.)
اشنة ušna moss
اشور ašūr Assyria
اشوري ašūrī Assyrian (adj. and n.)
اصيص aṣīṣ pl. اصص uṣūṣ flowerpot
اصد II to close, shut (a door, etc.)
اصر iṣr pl. آصار āṣār covenant, compact,
contract; load, encumbrance, burden; sin;
pl. آصار bonds, ties
آصرة āṣira pl. اواصر awāṣir2 bond, tie (fig. e.g.,
اواصر الولاء a. al-walā’i bonds of
friendship); obligation, commitment
اصطبل iṣṯabl pl. -āt stable, barn
اصفھان iṣfahān2 Isfahan (city in W central Iran)
اصل aṣula u ( اصالة aṣala) to be or become
firmly rooted; to be firmly established; to
be of noble origin II to found ( ھ s.th.),
give s.th. ( ھ ) a firm foundation, establish
the foundation or origin of ( ھ ) V to be or
become firmly rooted, deep-rooted,
ingrained; to take root, be or become
firmly established; to derive one's origin (
من from) X to uproot, root out, extirpate,
exterminate, annihilate ( ھ s.th.); to
remove ( ھ an organ by a surgical
operation)│ استأصل شأفته (ša’fatahū) to
eradicate s.th., eliminate s.th. radically
اصل pl. اصول root; trunk (of a tree); origin,
source; cause, reason; descent, lineage,
stock (esp., one of a noble character);
foundation, fundament, basis; the origins!
(e.g., of s book); pl. اصول principles,
fundamentals, rudiments, elements (e.g.,
of a science); rules; basic rules, principles,
axioms; real estate, landed property; assets
(fin.); -- اصلا aṣlan originally, primarily;
(with neg.) by no means, not at all, not in
the least│ في الأصل originally, at first; اصول
الفقه u. al-fiqh the 4 foundations of Islamic
jurisprudence, i.e., Koran, Sunna, qiyās
(analogy) and ijmā‘ (consensus); اصول
وخصوم assets and liabilities; اصول مضاعفة
(muḍā‘afa) double-entry bookkeeping;
حسب الأصول (ḥasaba) properly, in
conformity with regulations
اصلي original, primary, primal, initial;
genuine, authentic, pure; basic,
fundamental, principel, chief, main│ الثمن
الأصلي (taman) cost price; الجھات الأصلية
(jihāt) the cardinal points (of the
compass); عدد اصلي (‘adad) cardinal
number; عضو اصلي (‘uḍw) regular member
اصولي uṣūlī in accordance with the
rules, conforming to prevailing principles;
traditional, usual; legist
اصيل pl. اصلاء uṣalā’2 of pure, noble
origin; original, authentic, genuine; pure;
proper, actual; firm, solid; sound,
reasonable, sensible; of strong,
unswerving character; steadfast; deeprooted;
native, indigenous│ الأصل الأصيل
the actual reason; اصيل الرأي of sound,
unerring judgment
اصيل pl. آصال āṣāl, اصائل aṣā’il2 time before
sunset, late afternoon
اصالة aṣāla firmness, steadfastness,
strength of character; nobility of descent,
purity of origin; aṣālatan immediately,
directly, personally│ اصالة الرأي a. ar-ra’y
clarity and firmness of judgment;
judiciousness; بالاصالة عن نفسه
spontaneously, of one's own accord, in
one's own name, personally, privately (as
opposed to بالنيابة عن غيره)؛ اصال ونيابة
aṣālatan wa-niyābatan directly and
indirectly
تأصيلة ta’ṣīla pedigree, genealeogy
تأصل ta’aṣṣu1 deep-rootedness
استئصال isti’ṣāl extirpation,
extermination, (radical) elimination;
removal by surgery
متأصل muta’aṣṣil deep-rooted, deepseated;
chronic (illness)
اطيط aṯīṯ the mooning bray of a camel
اطر 1 aṯara i u (aṯr) and II to bend, curve ( ھ
s.th.)
اطار iṯār pl. -āt, اطر uṯur frame (also, of
eyeglasses); tire (of a wheel); hoop (of a
barrel, etc.)
اطارة iṯāra rim, felly (of a wheel)
اطاري iṯārī framelike, hoop-shaped
اطرية 2 see طرى
اطرغلة uṯrugulla a variety of pigeon
اطرون aṯrūn = نطرون
الاطلانتيك، الاطلانطيك al-aṯlantīk, al-aṯlanṯīq the
Atlantic
اطلانطيكي aṯlanṯīqī and اطلانطي aṯlanṯī Atlantic
اطلس aṯlas2 satin; (pl. اطالس aṯālis2 atlas,
volume of geographical maps
اطلسي aṯlasī Atlantic
اطلنطي aṯlanṯī Atlantic│ الحلف الاطلنطي the
Atlantic Pact
اطوم aṯūm sea turtle
اغا agā, آغا āgā pl. اغوات agawāt aga, lord,
master, sir; eunuch, harem chamberlain
الاغريق al-igrīq, الاغارقة al-agāriqa the Greeks
اغريقي igrīqī Greek, Grecian (adj. and n.)
اغسطس agustus August (month)
افّ V to grumble, mutter in complaint ( من
about)
افّ uff dirt (in the ears or under the
nails), earwax, cerumen
افّ uff interj. expressing anger or
displeasure
افف afaf displeasure; grumbling,
grumble
الافرنج al-ifranj the Franks, the Europeans│ بلاد
الافرنج Europe
افرنجي ifranjī European
افرنسي ifransī French; الافرنسية the French
language; الافرنسيون the French
افريز ifrīz pl. افاريز afārīz2 frieze; edge; curb;
sidewalk│ افريز المحطة i. al-maḥaṯṯa
platform (of a railroad station); افريز الحائط
molding (arch.)
افريقا afrīqā f. and افريقيا ifrīqiyā, now usually
pronounced afrīqiyā f. Africa│ افريقيا
الشمالية (šamālīya) North Africa
افريقي ifrīqī, now usually pronounced
afrīqī African; (pl. -ūn, افارقة afāriqa) an
African
آفرين āfirīn bravo! well done!
افسنتين ifsantīn, ifsintīn wormwood, absinthe
(Artemisia absinthium; bot.)
افشين ifšīn pl. افاشين afāšīn2 litany (Chr.)
الافغان al-afgān the Afghans; Afghanistan
افغانستان afgānistān Afghanistan
افغاني afgānī Afghan (adj. and n.)
افق ufq, ufuq pl. آفاق āfāq horizon; range of
vision, field of vision; pl. distant lands,
faraway countries, remote regions;
provinces, interior of the country (as
distinguished from the capital)│ آفاق الأرض
a. al-arḍ the remotest parts of the earth;
آفاق البلاد a. al-bilād the outlying portions of
the country; شذاذ الآفاق šuddad al-a.
foreigners, travelers
افقي ufqī horizontal
آفاقي āfāqī coming from a distant country
or region
افاق affāq wandering, roving, roaming;
tramp, vagabond
افك afaka i (afk) and afika a (ifk, afk, afak, افوك
ufūk) to lie, tell a lie
افك ifk and افيكة afīka pl. افائك afā’ik2 lie,
untruth, falsehood
افاك affak liar, lying
افل afala u i ( افول ufūl) to go down, set (stars)
افول ufūl setting (of stars)
آفل āfil transitory, passing
افلاطون aflāṯūn2 Plato
افن afan stupidity
افين afīn and مأفون ma’fūn stupid, foolish,
fatuous; fool
افندي afandī pl. -īya gentleman (when referring
to non-Europeans wearing Western clothes
and the tarboosh); (after the name) a title
of respect (eg.); افندم ! afandim! Sir! (eg.)
afandim? (I beg your) pardon? What did
you say? 20
افوكاتو (It. avvocato) avokātō advocate, lawyer,
attorney│ الافوكاتو العمومي representative of
the attorney general (= Fr. avocat général)
افيون afyūn opium│ روح الافيون al-a. laudanum
اقة uqqa pl. -āt oka, a weight, in Eg. = 1.24s
kg, in Syr. = 1.2s2 kg
مؤقت see وقت
اقحوان uqhūwān pl. اقاحى aqāḥī daisy
اقرباذين aqrabādīn composite medicament│ علم
الاقرباذين ‘ilm al-a. pharmaceutics,
pharmacology
اقرباذيني aqrabādīnī pharmaceutic(al)
اقيط aqīṯ cottage cheese
اقليد iqlīd look up alphabetically
اقلم aqlama to acclimate, acclimatize, adapt,
adjust II ta'aqlama to acclimatize (o.s.)
اقليم iqlīm pl. اقاليم aqiilim2 climate; area,
region; province, district; administrative
district (Eg.; = مديرية); الاقاليم country,
provinces (as distinguished from the city)
اقليمي iqlīmī climatic; regional, local;
territorial│ المياه الاقليمية (miyāh) territorial
waters
اقليد iqlīd pl. اقاليد aqālīd2 key
اقليدس iqlīdis Euclid
اقنوم uqnūm pl. اقانيم aqānīm2 hypostasis, divine
person within the Trinity (Chr.);
constitutive element
اقونة (Gr. είκών) iqūna icon (Chr.)
اقيانوسية uqyanūsiya Oceania
اكادى akkādī Akkadian
اكاديمية akādīmīya academy
اكتوبر okctober October
اكد II to assure ( ھ ل s.o. of, ان that); to give
assurance ( ھ ل s.o. of); to confirm ( ھ s.th.
a view) V to be or become convinced,
convince o.s. ( من s.th.); to reassure o.s.,
make sure ( من of s.th.); to be sure ( من of);
to be urgent, imperative, requisite
تأكيد ta'kīd pl. -āt assurance;
confirmation; emphasis; بالتأكيد most
certainly! of course!
تأكد ta’akkud assurance, reassurance
أكيد akīd certain, sure; firm (resolve);
definite (desire); urgent, imperative
(need); أكيدا akīdan certainly! surely!
مؤكد mu’akkad certain, definite, sure;
confirmed
متأكد muta'akkid convinced ( من of)
اكر 1 akara i (akr) to plow, till, cultivate ( ھ the
land)
اكار akkār pl. -ūn, اكرة akara plowman
اكرة 2 ukra pl. اكر ukar ball (for playing)
اكزيما ekzēmā eczema (med.)
اشعة اكس aši‘‘at iks X-rays
اكسترا extra
اكسجين oksižēn oxygen
اكسير iksīr elixir
اكف akuff see كف
اكل akala u (akl, مأكل ma’kal) to eat ( ھ s.th.); to
eat up, consume, swallow, devour, destroy
ھ) s.th.); to eat, gnaw ( ھ at), 21 eat away,
corrode, erode ( ھ s.th.); to spend
unlawfully ( ھ s.th.). enrich o.s. feather
one's nest ( ھ with)│ اكل عليه الدھر وشرب
(dahru, šariba) to be old and worn out, be
timeworn; اكل الربا (ribā) to take usurious
interest; يعلم من اين تؤكل الكتف ya‘lamu min
aina tu’kalu l-katif he knows how to
tackle the matter properly; اكله جلده (j
ه lduhū) his skin itched; اكل في الصحن
(ṣaḥn) to eat off a plate; اكل حقه (ḥaqqahū)
to encroach upon s.o.’s right II and IV to
give s.o. ( ه) s.th. ( ھ ) to eat, feed ( ھ ه s.o.
s.th.) III to eat, dine ( ه with s.o.) V to be
devoured, be consumed; to be eaten away,
corrode, undergo corrosion; to become
old, worn, timeworn, full of cracks; to be
destroyed by corrosion VI = V
اكل akl food; meal, repast; fodder, feed│
غرفة الاكل gurfat al-a. dining room; (eg.) اكل
البحر a. al-baḥr land washed away by the
sea or the Nile (as opposed to (طرح البحر
اكل ukul, ukl food; fruit│ آتى اكله to bear
fruit
اكلة akla pl. akalāt meal, repast; -- ukla
bite, morsel
○ اكال ukāl prurigo, itch eruption
(med.)
اكال akkāl, اكيل akīl, اكول akūl voracious,
gluttonous; hearty eater, gourmand,
glutton
مأكل ma’kal pl. مآكل ma’ākil2 food, eats
تأكل ta’akkul wear; corrosion; erosion
(geol.)
تآكل ta’ākul wear; corrosion; erosion
(geol.)
ائتكل i’tikāl erosion (geol.)
آكل ākil eater
آكلة ākila gangrenous sore
مأكول ma’kūl eatable, edible; pl. مأكولات food,
foodstuffs, eatables, edibles
مؤاكل mu’ākil table companion
متأكل muta’akkil and متآكل muta’ākil
corroded; eroded; worn, timeworn; full of
cracks; rusty, rust-eaten
اكليروس iklīrūs clergy (Chr.)
اكليروسية iklīrūsīya clericalism
اكليركي iklīrikī cleric(al)
اكلينيكي iklīnīkī clinical
اكمة akama pl. -āt, اكام ikām, اكم ukum, آكام
ākām (coll. اكم akam) hill; reef; heap, pile│
وراء الاكمة ما وراءھا (warā’a) something's
fishy! there is more to it than meets the
eye
ال ill pact, covenant; blood relationship,
consanguinity
الا 1 a-lā and اما a-mā see│a
الا 2 alā see الو 1
الا 3 allā (= ان لا an lā) lest, that ... not, in order
that ... not, so as not to
الا 4 illā (= ان ل in lā) unless if not; except, save;
(after negation:) only, but, not until│ الا ان
illā anna except that ..., yet, however,
nevertheless (also introducing main
clauses); الا اذا illā idā unless, if not; except
when; والا wa-illā (and if not =) otherwise,
orelae; الا وھو illā wa-huwa (with a
preceding negation) unless he ..., except
that he ... ; وما ھي الا ان wa-mā hiya illā an
(with following verb in perf.) it was not
long until ... ; presently, forthwith; وما ھي
الا ان ... حتى wa-ma hiya illā an ... ḥattā no
sooner had he ... than .... e.g..... فما ھي الا أن
ھم حتى فعل (hamma) he had no sooner made
his plan than he carried it out
الاسكا alaska Alaska
الاى alay and آلاى ālay pl. -āt regiment 22
الب 1 alaba u i (alb) to gather, join forces, rally
II to incite ( على ه s.o. against) V to rally,
band together, plot, conspire ( على against)
جبال الالب 2 jibal al-alb the Alps
الالبان al-albān the Albanians
البانيا albāniyā Albania
الخ abbreviation of الى آخره ilā āḳirihī and so
on, etc.
الذى alladī f. التى allatī, pl. m. الذين alladīna f.
اللاتى allātī, اللواتى allawātī, اللائى allā’ī
(relative pronoun) he who, that which;
who, which, that│ بعد اللتيا والتى ba‘da llutayyā
wa-llatī after lengthy discussions,
after much ado
الزاس (Fr. Alsace) alzās2 Alsace (region of NE
France)
الس II to belittle, disparage ( على s.o.)
الف 2 alf pl. الوف ulūf, آلاف ālāf thousand;
millennium│ الوف مؤلف (mu’allafa) or آلاف
مؤلفة thousands and thousands; عشرات
الالوف ašarāt al-u. tens of thousands; مآت
الالوف mi’āt al-u. hundreds of thousands
الفى alfī: عيد الفى (‘īd) millennial
celebration, millenary
الف 2 alif name of the letter│ من الفه الى يائه from
beginning to end, from A to Z; يعرف الفه
وياءه (wa-yā’ahū) he knows it from A to Z;
الف باء ABC
الف 3 alifa a (alf) to be acquainted, familiar,
conversant ( ھ with s.th.); to be on
intimate terms ( ه with s.o.); to be or get
accustomed, used, habituated ( ھ to); to
like ( ھ s.th.), be fond of ( ھ ); to become
tame II to accustom, habituate ( ھ ه s.o. to
s.th.); to tame, domesticate ( ھ an animal);
to form ( ھ e,g., a committee, a
government); to unite, join, combine, put
together ( بين different things); to compile,
compose, write ( ھ a book) V to be
composed, be made up, consist ( من of); to
be united, be combined VI to be attuned to
each other, be in tune, be in harmony; to
harmonize ( مع with) VIII to be united, be
linked, be connected; to be on familiar,
intimate terms ( ب with); to form a.
coalition (pol.); to fit, سuit ( مع s.th.), go
well, agree, harmonize ( مع with); to be
well-ordered, neat, tidy X to seek the
intimacy, court the friendship ( ه of s.o.)
الف ilf pl. الاف ullāf intimate; close
friend, intimate, confidant; lover
الف ulfa familiarity, intimacy;
friendship, love, affection; union, concord,
harmony, congeniality
اليف alīf familiar, intimate; tame,
domesticated (animal); friendly, amicable,
genial; (pl. الائف alā’if2) intimate, close
friend, associate, companion
الوف alūf familiar, intimate; tame,
domesticated (animal); attached, devoted,
faithful
مألف ma'laf object of familiarity
تأليف ta’līf formation (e.g., of a
government); union, junction,
combination ( بين of separate things);
literary work; composition, compilation,
writing (of a book, of an article); (pl. تآليف
ta’ālīf تواليف , 2 ) work, book, publication
تآلف ta’āluf harmony; familiarity,
intimacy, mutual affection; comradeship,
camaraderie
ائتلاف I’tilāf concord, harmony;
agreement ( مع with); union; coalition,
entente (pol.)
ائتلافي I’tilāfī coalition- (in
compounds)│ وزارة ائتلافية coalition cabinet
الف ma’lūf familiar, accustomed; usual,
customary; custom, usage 23
مؤلف mu’allif pl. -ūn author, writer; --
mu’allaf composed, consisting, made up (
من of); written, compiled; (pl. -āt) book,
publication; see also الف 1 alf
متآلف muta’ālif harmonious
الق alaqa i, (alq) to shine, radiate, flash, glitter,
glisten V and VIII do.
الق alaq brightness, brilliance
الاق allāq bright, shining, brilliant,
radiant; glittering, flashing, sparkling
تألق ta’alluq glow, radiance, effulgence
متألق mula’alliq bright, shining, brilliant,
radiant
الكتروني elektrōnī electronic│ عقل الكتروني (‘aql)
electronic computer
الم 2 alima a (alam) to be in pain, feel pain; to
suffer (y from s.th.) II and IV to cause
pain or suffering ( ه to s.o.), pain, ache,
hurt ( ه s.o.) V = I; to complain
الم alam pl. آلام ālām pain, ache,
suffering, agony│ آلام نفسانية (nafsānīya)
mental agony; اسبوع الآلام usbū‘ al-a.
Passion Week (Chr.)
اليم alīm aching, sore; sad, grievous,
painful, excruciating; hurting
تألم ta’allum sensation of pain, pain, ache
مؤلم mu’allim aching, painful; sad,
grievous, distressing
متألم muta’allim aching, painful; in pain,
suffering, deeply afflicted; tormented
الام 2 ilā-mā see الى
الماس almās (al sometimes interpreted as
definite article) diamond
الالمان al-almān the Germans
الماني almānī German; (pl. -ūn, المان
almān) a German
المانيا almāniyā Germany
المانية almānīya German character or
characteristics, Germanity
اله II to deify ( ه s.o.), make a god of s.o. ( ه) V
to become a deity, a godhead; to deify o.s.
اله, الاه ilāh pl. آلھة āliha god, deity,
godhead
الاھة ilaha pl. -āt goddess
الھي، الاھي ilāhī divine, of God;
theological; الالاھيات al-ilāhīyāt
theological, spiritual concerns علم الالاھيات
‘i1m al-i. theology
لله allāh Allah, God (as the One and Only)│􀍿
درك li-llāh darruka exclamation of
admiration and praise, see در
اللھم allāhumma O God!│ اللھم الا (illā)
unless, were it not that, except that, or at
best (after a negative statement); اللھم اذا
(idā) at least if or when; if only; اللھم نعم
(na‘am) by God, yes! Most certainly!
الوھية ulūhīya divine power, divinity
تأليه ta’līh deification, apotheosis
آله ālih (pagan) god
آلھة āliha pl. -āt goddess
آلھي ālihī divine
متأله muta’allih divine, heavenly
اللاھوت etc., see لاھوت
آلو)ا لالا ) 1 alā u to neglect or fail to do, not to
do ( في s.th.), desist, refrain ( في from
s.th.)│ لالا يألو جھدا في (jahdan) he will go to
any length, he spares no effort, goes out of
his way for IV to swear│ آلى على نفسه ان he
promised himself that he ...
ايلاء īlā’ oath
آلو 1 (Fr. hallo) hello!
الومنيا alūminyā and الومنيوم aluminyom
aluminum 24
l الى ilā (prep.) to, toward; up to, as far as; till,
until; الى ان (conj.) until│ الى آخره (āḳirihī)
and so forth, et cetera; الى ذلك besides,
moreover, furthermore, in addition to that;
الى غد till tomorrow! اللقاء الى (liqā’) goodby!
الام ilāma (= الى ما ) up to where! how
far! الى متى till when! how long! اليك عني
(‘annī) get away from me! away with you!
الى جانب ذلك (jānibi d.) besides, moreover,
in addition to that; ھذا الى ان moreover,
furthermore; الى غير ذلك (gair d.) and the
like; وما اليه and the like, et cetera; ومن اليه
اليھم ) ) (wa-man) and other people like that;
اليك (addressing the reader) now here you
have ... ; here is (are) ... ; following is
(are) ..., e.g., والى القارئ ما in the following,
the reader will find what ... ; اسلوب عبراني
الى العربية (uslūb ‘ibrānī) a style of Hebrew
approximating Arabic; لا الى ھذا ولا الى ذاك
neither this way nor that way, belonging
to neither group; الامر اليك it’s up to you,
the decision is yours
آ لالاء 2 (pl. of الى ilan) benefits, blessings
الية 3 alya, ilya pl. alayāt fat tail (of a sheep);
buttock
الياذة iliyāda Iliad
ام 1 am or? (introducing the second member of
an alternative question)
امة 2 ama pl. اماء imā’, اموات amawāt bondmaid,
slave girl
ام 3 amma u (amm) to go, betake o.s., repair ( ھ
to a place), go to see ( ه s.o.); -- ( امامة
imāma) to lead the way, lead by one’s
example ( ه s.i.); to lead ( ه s.o.) in prayer; --
امومة) umūma) to be or become a mother II
to nationalize ( ھ s.th.) V to go, betake o.s.
repair ( ھ to a place), go to see ( ه s.o.) VIII
to follow the example ( ب of s.o.)
ام umm pl. امھات ummahāt mother; source,
origin; basis, foundation; original, original
version (of a book); the gist, essence of
s.th.; pl. امھات matrix (typ.)│ ام الحبر u. al-
ḥibr cuttlefish squid; ام الحسن u. al-ḥasan
(magr.) nightingale; ام الخلول u. al-ḳulūl
river mussel (zool.); ام درمان u. durmān
Omdurman (city in central Sudan,
opposite Khartoum); ام الراس u. ar-ra's
skull, brain; cerebral membrane,
meninges; ام اربع واربعين u. arba‘ waarba‘
īn centipede; ام شملة u. šamla(ta) this
world, the worldly pleasures; بام العين bi-u.
l-‘ain or بام عينه with one’s own eyes; ام
القرآن and ام القرآن the first sura of the
Koran; ام القرى u. al-qura Mecca; ام الكتاب
also: the original text of the Book from
which Koranic revelation derives; the
uncontested portions of the Koran; ام الوطن
u. al-waṯan capital, metropolis; امھات
الحوادث the most important events; امھات
الحروف matrix (typ.); امھات المسائل the main
problems; امھات المسائل the principal virtues
امة umma pl. امم umam nation, people;
generation│ امة محمد Mohammed's
community, the Mohammedans; الامم
المتحدة (muttaḥida) the United Nations
امي ummī maternal, motherly; illiterate
uneducated; (pl. -ūn) an illiterate
امية ummīya ignorance; illiteracy; see
also under اموى 2
اممي umamī international
امومة umūma motherhood; motherliness,
maternity
امام amāma (prep.) in front of; in the
presence of│ الى الامام (amāmi) to the front,
forward, onward, ahead; لم يكن الا ان (illā
an) he had no other alternative but to ... ;
وقف امامه (waqafa) to oppose, resist, stop,
check s.th.
امامى amāmī front, fore-, anterior,
forward, foremost│ نقطة امامية (nuqṯa)
outpost 25
امام imām pl. ائمة a’imma imam, prayer
leader; leader; master; plumb line
امامة imāma imamah, function or office
of the prayer leader; imamate; leading
position; precedence
تأميم ta’mīm pl. -āt nationalization
اما 1 a-mā see│a
اما 2 ammā (with foll . ف fa) as to, as for, as far
as... is concerned; but; yet, however, on
the other hand│ اما بعد (ba‘du) (a formular
phrase linking introduction and actual
subject of a book or letter, approx.:) now
then …, now to our topic: ...
اما 3 immā if; اما -- واما be it -- or, either – or
(also (اما -- او
امبراطور imbrāṯūr emperor
امبراطوري imbrāṯūrī imperialist(ic)
امبراطورية imbrātūrīya empire,
imperium; imperialism
امبير ambīr pl. امابير amābīr2 ampere (el.)
امبيق imbiq = انبيق
امت amt crookedness, curvedness, curvation,
curvature; weakness
امد amad pl. آماد āmād end, terminus,
extremity; period, stretch or span of time,
time; distance│ منذ امد بعيد for a long time
(past); قصير الامد short-dated; of short
duration, short-lived; short-term
امر amara u (amr) to order, command, bid,
instruct ( ه s.i. ب to do s.th.), commission,
charge, entrust ( ه s.o. ب with s.th. or to do
s.th.); -- amara, amura u ( امارة imāra) to
become an emir II to invest with authority,
make an emir ( ه s.o., على over) III to ask
s.o. 's ( ه) advice, consult ( ه s.o.) V to come
to power; to set o.s. up as lord and master;
to behave like an emir; to assume an
imperious attitude; to be imperious,
domineering VI to take counsel, deliberate
together, confer, consult with each other;
to plot, conspire ( على against) VIII to
deliberate, take counsel) ( ب about); to
conspire, plot, hatch a plot ( ب against
s.o.)│ ائتمر بامره to carry out s.o.’s orders
امر amr 1. pl. اوامر awāmir2 order,
command, instruction ( ب to do s.th.);
ordinance, decree; power, authority;
(gram.) imperative│ امر عال (‘ālin) royal
decree (formerly, Eg.); امر علي (‘alīy)
decree, edict of the Bey (formerly, Tun.);
امر قانوني ordinance having the force of law
(Tun.); الامر والنھي (wa-nnahy) pl. الاوامر
والنواھي (lit.: command and interdiction,
i.e.) sovereign power; full power(s),
supreme authority; امر توريد (delivery)
order (com.); تحت امرك at your disposal, at
your service. -- 2. pl. امور umūr matter,
affair, concern, business│ امر واقع
(accomplished) fact; امر معروف common
knowledge; في اول الامر at first, in the
beginning; لالامر ما (amrin) for some
reason or other; اليس الامر كذلك isn't it so? اما
والامر كذلك (ammā wa-l-amru) things being
as they are, there will, no doubt, ...; مھما
يكن من امر (min amrin) whatever may
happen; however things may be; ھو بين
امرين he has two possibilities (or
alternatives); الامر الذى which (introducing
a relative clause the antecedent of which
is another clause); قضى امره qudiya
amruhu it's all over with him; in the latter
and similar phrases, امره is a frequent
paraphrase of "he"
امر immar simple-minded, stupid
امرة imra power, influence, authority,
command│ امرته under his command
امارة amāra pl. -āt, امائر amā’ir2 sign,
token, indication, symptom, mark,
characteristic 26
امارة imāra position or rank of an emir;
princely bearing or manners; principality,
emirate; authority, power│ امارة البحر i. albaḥr
office or jurisdiction of an admiral,
admiralty; امارات ساحل عمان (i. s. ‘ummān)
Trucial Oman
امير amīr pl. امراء umarā’ commander;
prince, emir; title of princes of a ruling
house; tribal chief│ امير الاى (alay)
commander of a regiment (formerly, Eg.;
approx.: colonel; as a naval rank, approx.:
captain); امير الامراء approx.: major general
(Tun.); امير البحار (Eg. 1939) approx.:
admiral, كبير امراء البحار (Eg. 1939)
approx.: fleet admiral; امير البحر a. al-baḥr
admiral (when referring to a non-Arab
officer of this rank; Eg. 1939 approx.:
vice-admiral); امير البحر الاكبر or امير البحار
الاعظم fleet admiral (when referring to a
non-Arab officer of this rank); امير اللواء a.
al-liwā’ (Ir., since 1933) brigadier; امير لواء
العسة a. l. al-‘assa commandant of the
Bey's palace guard (formerly, Tun.); امير
المؤمنين a. al-mu’minīn Commander of the
Faithful, Caliph
اميرة amīr pl. -āt princess
اميري amīrī (and □ ميري mīrī)
goverment(a1), state-owned, state,
public│ ارض اميري (arḍ) government land
(Syr.); المطبعة الاميرية government press
امار ammār constantly urging, always
demanding ( ب to do s.th.); inciting,
instigating│ النفس الامارة بالسوء (nafs, sū’)
the baser self (of man) that incites to evil
تأمور ta’mūr soul, mind, spirit;
pericardium (anat.)│ التھاب التأمور
pericarditis (med.)
مؤامرة mu’āmara pl. -āt deliberation,
counsel, conference; plot, conspiracy
تأمر ta’ammur imperiousness,
domineeringness; imperious deportment,
overbearing manners
تآمر ta’āmur joint consultation, counsel,
deliberation, conference; plot, conspiracy
ائتمار i’timār deliberation, counsel,
conference; plot, conspiracy
استئمارة isti’māra (frequently written
استمارة ) form, blank
آمر āmir commander; lord, master;
orderer, purchaser, customer, client│ الآمر
الناھى absolute master, vested with
unlimited authority
مأمور ma’mūr commissioned, charged;
commissioner; civil officer, official, esp.,
one in executive capacity; the head of a
markaz and qism (Eg.)│ مأمور البوليس
commissioner of police; مأمور التفلسة
(taflīsa) receiver (in bankruptcy; jur.);
مأمور m. al-ḥaraka traffic manager
(railroad); مأمور التصفية m. al-taṣfīya
receiver (in equity, in bankruptcy; jur.)
مأمورية ma’mūrīya pl. -āt order,
instruction; errand; task, assignment,
mission; commission; commissioner's
office, administrative branch of a
government agency, e.g., مأمورية قضائية
(qaḍā’īya) judicial commission charged
with jurisdiction in outlying communities
(Eg.)
متآمرون muta’āmirūn, conspirators,
plotters
مؤتمون mu’tamirūn conspirators,
plotters; members of a congress,
convention, or conference, conferees
مؤتمر mu’tamar pl. -āt conference;
convention, congress│ مؤتمر الصلح m. aṣ-
ṣulḥ peace conference
امرك II ta’amraka to become Americanized,
adopt the American way of life, imitate
the Americans
تأمرك ta’amruk Americanization
امرلس amarillis amaryllis (bot.)
امريكا amrīkā (formerly, also امريقا ) America│
امريكا الجنوبية (janūbīya) South America 27
امريكي amrīkī American; (pl. -ūn) an
American
الامريكان al-amrīkān the Americans
امريكاني amrīkānī American; (pl. -ūn) an
American
امس amsu (but acc. امسا amsan) the day past,
yesterday; the immediate past, recent
time; -- amsi (adv.) yesterday; recently,
lately, not long ago│ بالامس bi-l-amsi
yesterday; not long ago; امس الاول a. lawwal
two days ago, the day before
yesterday
امسية umsīya pl. -āt, اماسى amāsīy
evening
امستردام amstirdām Amsterdam
امشير amšīr the sixth month of the Coptic
calendar
امع imma‘ and امعة imma‘a characterless
person; opportunist, timeserver
امل amala u (amal) to hope ( ھ or ب for),
entertain hopes ( ھ or ب of) II to hope; to
expect ( من ھ s.th. of s.o.); to raise hope. ( ه
in s.o.), hold out hope. ( ه for s.o.), give ( ه
s.o.) reason to hope or expect│ امله خيرا
(ḳairan) to let s.o. hope for the best V to
look attentively ( ھ، في at), regard,
contemplate ( ھ، في s.th.); to meditate; to
consider, think over, ponder ( ھ، في s.th.),
reflect ( ھ، في on)
امل amal pl. آمال āmāl hope, expectation
في) of s.th., also امل كاذب │( ب fallacious
hope
مأمل ma’mal pl. مآمل ma’amil2 hope
تأمل ta’ammul pl. -āt consideration;
contemplation; pl. تأملات meditations
آمل āmil hopeful
مؤمل mu’ammil hopeful
مأمول ma’mūl hoped for, expected
متأمل muta’ammil contemplative,
meditative, reflective; pensive, wistful,
musing
امن amuna u ( امانة amāna) to be faithful,
reliable, trustworthy; -- amina a (amn, امان
amān) to be safe, feel safe ( من or ھ from)
II to reassure ( ه s.o.), set s.o.’s ( ه) mind at
rest; to assure, ensure, safeguard,
guarantee, warrant, bear out, confirm,
corroborate ( على، ھ s.th.); to insure ( ضد
الحريق against fire); to entrust ( ه to s.o., على
s.th.); to say "amen" ( على to s.th.) IV to
believe ( ب in) VIII to trust ( ه s.o.), have
confidence, have faith ( ه in); to entrust (
على ه s.o. with, to s.o s.th.) X = VIII; to ask
for protection, for a promise of security,
for indemnity ( ه s.o.)
امن amn safety; peace, security,
protection│ الامن العام (‘āmm) public safety;
رجال الامن the police
امان amān security, safety; peace;
shelter, protection; clemency, quarter
(mil.); safeguarding, assurance of
protection; indemnity, immunity from
punishment│ في امان لله (a valedictory
phrase) in God's protection!
امين amīn pl. امناء umanā’2 reliable,
trustworthy, loyal, faithful, upright,
honest; safe, secure; authorized
representative or agent; trustee; guarantor
على) of); chief, head; superintendent,
curator, custodian, guardian, keeper;
chamberlain; master of a guild (Tun.);
(mil.) approx.: quartermaster-sergeant
(Eg. 1939)│ الامين الاول (awwal) Lord
Chamberlain (formerly, at the Eg. Court);
كبير الامناء approx.: Chief Master of
Ceremonies (ibid.); امين المخزن a. almaḳzan
warehouse superintendent; stock
clerk; امين سر الدولة a. sirr ad-daula and
امين السر a. as-sirr permanent secretary of
state (Sy,.); امين الصندوق a. aṣ-ṣundūq and
امين المال treasurer; cashier; امين العاصمة
mayor (esp. Ir.); امين عام (‘āmm) secretary
general; امين المكتب a. al-maktab (formerly)
a subaltern rank in the Eg. navy (1939) 28
آمين āmīn amen!
امانة amāna reliability, trustworthiness;
loyalty, faithfulness, fidelity, fealty;
integrity, honesty; confidence, trust, good
faith; deposition in trust; trusteeship; (pl.
-āt) s.th. deposited in trust, a deposit, trust,
charge; secretariat│ امانة الصندوق a. aṣ-
ṣundūq treasury department; امانة عامة
(‘āmma) secretariat general; محزن الامانات
maḳzan al-a. baggage checkroom
مأمن ma’man place of safety, safe place
تأمين ta’mīn securing, protection;
assurance; safeguarding; reassurance;
ensuring; guaranty, warranty; security,
surety; insurance│ تأمين اجتماعي (ijtimā’ī)
social security; تأمين ضد الحريق (ḍidda) fire
insurance; تأمين على الحياة (ḥayāh) life
insurance
ايمان iman faith, belief ( ب in)
ائتمان I’timān trust, confidence; credit
استئمان isti’mān trust, confidence
آمن āmin peaceful
مأمون ma’mūn reliable, trustworthy
مؤمن عليه mu’amman ‘alaihi insured
مؤمن mu’min believing, faithful; believer
مؤتمن mu’taman entrusted ( على with);
confidant; sequestrator (jur.)
امنيبوس omnibus omnibus, bus
اموى 1 amawī of or like a bondmaid or
handmaid
اموي 2 umawī Ommiad (adj.)
بنو امية banū umayya the Ommiads
اميبا amībā amoebae
اميرال amīrāl admiral
اميركا، اميركه amērikā, amērika America
اميرالية amīrālīya admiralty
ان 1 an (conj.) that; -- in 1. (conj.) if; وان wa-in
although, even though, even if; وان – ان be
it -- or (be it); الا illā (= ان لا ) look up
alphabetically 2. (particle) not, esp. in the
phrase ان ھو الا in huwa illā (f. ان ھي الا ) it
is nothing but, it is no more than
ان 2 anna (conj.) that; بما انه bi-mā annahū since
he (it), because he (it); على انه ‘alā annahū
while he (it), whereas he (it); introducing
a main clause: however, yet; وذلك انه that is
to say, namely, to wit; -- innā
(intensifying particle introducing a
nominal clause) verily, truly (in most
cases not translated in English)
انما innamā but, but then; yet, however; rather,
on the contrary
ان 3 anna i ( انين anīn, تأنان ta’nān) to groan,
moan ( من at)
انة anna pl. -āt moan, groan│ انات وآھات
wails and laments
انين anīn plaintive sound, wail; groan,
moan(ing)
انا ana I
اناني anānī egotistic; egoistic(al), selfish
انانية anānīya egoism, selfishness
الاناضل al-anāḍul Anatolia
اناناس anānas pineapple
انب II to blame, censure, reprehend, upbraid ( ه
s.o.)
تأنيب ta’nīb blame, censure, rebuke
انبا (pronounced ambā) Abba, a high
ecclesiastic title of the Coptic Church,
preceding the names of metropolitans,
bishops, patriarchs, and saints (< Άββα)
انبار anbār pl. انابر anābir انابير , 2 anābīr2
warehouse, storehouse, storeroom 29
انباشي (Turk. onbaşı) onbašī a mil. rank:
corporal (formerly, Eg.); وكيل انباشي
approx.: private first class (Eg.)
انبوب، انبوبة see نب
انبيق inbīq alembic
انت an-ta, f. anti thou, you (2nd pers. sing.); pl.
m. انتم antum, f. انتن antunna you (2nd
pers. pl. and polite form of address); dual
انتما antumā both of you
انتذا anta-dā it’s you!
انتيكخانة antīkḳāna museum
انتيكة antīka pl. -āt (eg.) old, old-fashioned,
outmoded
انتمون antimūn antimony
انث anuta u ( انوثة unūta) to be or become
feminine, womanly, womanish,
effeminate II to make feminine; to
effeminate, make effeminate; to put into
the feminine form (gram.) V to become
feminine (also gram.)
انثى untā pl. اناث ināt, اناثى anātā
feminine; female; a female (of animals);
الانثيان al-untayān the testicles
انثوى untawī womanly, female, women's
(in compounds); effeminate, womanish
انوثة unūta femininity, womanliness
تأنيث ta’nīt the feminine, feminine form
(gram.)
مؤنث mu’annat (gram.) feminine (adj.)
انثروبولوجيا antrōbōlōjiyā anthropology
انجاص injās (syr.) pear
انجلترا (It. Inghilterra) ingilterā England
الانجليز al-ingəlīz the English
انجليزى ingəlīzī English; Englishman
انجيل injil pl. اناجيل anajīl2 gospel
انجيلى injīlī evangelical; evangelist
انجيلية injīlīya evangelical creed
الاندلس al-andalus Spain
اندونيسيا indūnīsiyā Indonesia
انس anisa a and anusa u (uns) to be
companionable, sociable, nice, friendly,
genial; انس به to like s.o.’s company, like
to be together with s.o.; to be or get on
intimate terms ( ب or الى with s.o.); to be
used, accustomed, habituated ( الى to); to
perceive, notice, find ( ھ a quality, في، من
in s.o.); to sense, feel, make out, recognize
ھ) s.th., في in, at)│ انس لحديثه (li-ḥadītihī) to
like to listen to s.o. II to put at ease; to
tame III to be friendly, nice ( ه to s.o.); to
entertain, amuse ( ه s.o.) IV to keep s.o. ( (ه
company; to entertain, delight, amuse ( ه
s.o.); to perceive, discern, make out (with
the eyes; ھ s.th.); to sense ( ھ s.th.); to
find, see, notice, observe, e.g., آنس فيه الكفاية
he saw that be was duly qualified, that he
was a capable man V to become incarnate
(Son of God) X to be sociable,
companionable; to get on familiar terms,
become intimate; to become tame; to be
friendly, nice, kind ( ه to s.o.); to
accommodate o.s., accustom o.s., settle
down; to be familiar, familiarize o.s.,
acquaint o.s. ( ب or الى with); to inform
o.s., gather information ( ب ahout); to take
into consideration, take into account,
bring into play ( ب s.th.), draw upon s.th. (
ب); to listen ( ل to s.th.), heed ( ب an
opinion)
انس uns sociability; intimacy,
familiarity, friendly atmosphere
انسى unsī: كعب انسى (ka‘b) talus, inner
anklebone (anat.)
انس ins (coll.) man, mankind, human
race
انسي insī human; human being
ناس nās (coll.) and اناس unās people
ناسوت nāsūt mankind, humanity 30
اناسى anāsīy (pl.) people, human beings,
humans
انيس anīs close, intimate; close friend;
friendly, kind, affable, civil, polite,
courteous
انسان insan man, human being│ انسان
العين i. al-‘ain pupil (of the eye)
انسانة insāna woman
انسانى insānī human; humane;
humanitarian, philanthropist
انسانية insānīya humanity, humaneness;
politeness, civility; mankind, the human
race
مؤانسة mu’ānasa intimacy, familiarity,
friendliness, geniality, cordiality;
sociability; conviviality
ايناس īnās exhilaration; friendliness,
geniality; familiarity, intimacy, cordiality;
sociability
تأنس ta’annus incarnation (Chr.)
ائتناس I’tinās social life, sociability
آنسة ānisa pl. -āt, اوانس awānis2 young
lady, miss
مأنوس ma’nūs familiar, accustomed
مستأنس musta’nis tame
انش (Engl.) inš inch
انشوجة (It. acciuga) anšūga (eg.) anchovy
انطاكية anṯākiya2 Antioch (ancient city in Syria;
now Antakya, in S Turkey)
انطولوجى onṯōlōjī ontologic(al) (philos.)
انف anifa a (anaf) to disdain, scorn ( من s.th., ان
to do s.th.); to reject haughtily ( ھ s.th.) X
to resume, renew, recommence ( ھ s.th.);
(jur.) to appeal ( ھ a sentence)
انف anf pl. آناف ānāf, انوف unūf nose; spur (of a
mountain); pride│ رغم انفه ragma anfihi in
defiance of him, to spite him; كسر انفه
(anfahū) to humiliate s.o., to put s.o.'s
nose out of joint; شامح الانف stuck-up,
haughty, proud
انفى anfī nasal
انفة anafa pride; rejection; disdain ( من of
s.th.)
انوف anūf proud, haughty, stuck-up,
supercilious, disdainful
استئناف isti’nāf fresh start,
recommencement, renewal, resumption,
reopening (also, of a legal case); appeal
(jur.)│ قدم استئنافا (qaddama) to appeal,
make an appeal (jur.)
استئنافى isti’nāfī of appeal, appellate;
استئنافيا isti’nāfīyan by appeal
آنف ānif preceding, above│ آنف الذكر
(dikr) preceding, above, above-mentioned;
آنفا ānifan previously, above, in the
foregoing
مؤتنف mu’tanaf primordial, virginal
state; beginning
انفرس (Fr. Anvers) anvers Antwerp (city in N
Belgium)
انفلونزا influwanzā influenza, grippe
انق aniqa a to be neat, trim, smart, spruce,
comely, pretty; to be happy ( ب about), be
delighted ( ب by) IV to please ( ه s.o.)│ يؤنقه
الشيء (šai’u) he likes the thing V to apply
o.s. eagerly and meticulously ( فى to); to be
meticulous, fastidious, finical; to be chic,
elegant
اناقة anāqa elegance
انيق anīq neat, trim, spruce, comely,
pretty; elegant, chic
انوق anūq Egyptian vulture (Neophron
perenopterus)│ اعز من بيض الانوق a‘azz2
min baiḍi l-a. (lit.: rarer than the eggs of a
vulture, i.e.) approx.: scarcer than hens’
teeth (proverbially for s.th. rare)
تأنق ta’annuq elegance 31
مؤنق mu’anniq, مونق mūniq pretty,
comely, winsome, nice, pleasing
متأنق muta’anniq chic, elegant
انقره anqara Ankara
انقليس anqalīs eel
آنك ānuk lead (metal)
انكشارى inkišārī pl. -īya Janizary
انكلترا، انكلترة (It. Inghilterra) ingilterā,
ingiltera England
انكلوسكسون al-anglosaksūn the Anglo-Saxons
انكلوسكسونية al-anglosaksūnīya Anglo-
Saxondom
الانكليز al-inglīz the Engliah
انكليزى inglīzī English; Englishman
انكليس ankalīs eel
الانام al-anām and الآنام (coll.) mankind, the
human race
انموذج unmūdaj model, pattern; type, example;
sample, specimen
انمون anamūn anemone (bot.)
انى 1 anā i to mature, become ripe; to draw
near, approach, come (esp. time)│ انى له ان
it is (high) time that he; esp. in negative
statements: الم يأن a-lam ya'ni? isn't it
about time ...? V to act slowly, proceed
unhurriedly, bide one's time, be patient X
to take one's time, hesitate ( فى in, with); to
wait
انى anan pl. آناء ānā’ (span of) time,
period│ فى آناء الليل (laili) all night long; آناء
الليل واطراف النھار ānā’a l-laili wa-aṯrāfa nnahār
by day and by night
اناة anāh deliberateness; perseverance,
patience│ طول الاناة ṯūl al-a. longsuffering,
great patience; طويل الاناة longsuffering
(adj.)
اناء inā’ pl. آنية āniya, اوان awānin2 vessel,
container, receptacle│ آنية الطعام a.. aṯ-
ṯa‘ām table utensils, dishes; mess kit
تأن ta’annin slowness, deliberateness
متأن muta’annin slow, unhurried,
deliberate
انى 2 annā (interrog. part.) where ... from? why
is it that ... ? why? Where? (place and
direction); how? wherever; however│ وانى
له الا ... (allā) and why shouldn't he ... ?
انيسون anīsūn, آنيسون aniseed
انيميا anīmiyā anemia│○ انيميا خبيثة pernicious
anemia (med.)
آه āhi! آھا āhan! (interj.) oh!
اھب II to prepare, make ready, equip ( ل ھ، ه
s.o., s.th. for) V to be ready, be prepared;
to prepare o.s., get ready; to equip s.o., be
equipped ( ل for)
اھبة uhba pl. اھب uhab preparation,
preparedness, readiness, alertness;
equipment, outfit, gear│ اھبة الحرب u. al-
ḥarb military equipment; على اھبة الرحيل
ready to set out; على اھبة الاستعداد fully
prepared; on the alert (mil.); أخذ اھبته to
make one's preparations, get ready
اھاب ihāb skin, hide
تأھب ta’ahhub preparedness, readiness;
(pl. -āt) preparation
متأھب muta’ahhib ready, prepared
اھل ahala u ( اھول uhūl) to take a wife, get
married; -- ahila a to be on familiar terms
ب) with); -- pas. uhila to be inhabited, be
populated (region, place) II to make fit or
suited, to fit, qualify ( ل ھ، ه s.o., s.th. for);
to make possible ( ھ ل for s.o. s.th.),
enable ( ھ ل s.o. to do s.th.), make
accessible ( ھ ل to s.o. s.th.); to welcome (
ب s.o.) V to be or become fit, suited,
qualified ( ل for s.th.); to 32 take a wife; to
marry, get married X to deserve merit ( ھ
s.th.), be worthy ( ھ of)
اھل ahl pl. –ūn, اھال ahālin relatives,
folks, family; kin, kinfolk; wife; (with
foll. genit.) people, members, followers,
adherents, possessors, etc.; inhabitants;
deserving, worthy ( ل of s.th.); fit, suited,
qualified ( ل for); pl. الأھلون، الأھالى the
natives, the native population│ اھل البيت a.
al-bait members (of the house, i.e.) of the
family; the Prophet's family; اھل الدار the
people living in the house; اھل الحرفة a. al-
ḥirfa people of the trade; اھل الحلف a. al-
ḥilf people pledged by oath, members of a
sworn confederacy; اھل الخبرة a. al-ḳibra
people of experience, experts; اھل السفسطة
a. al-safsata Sophists; اھل السنة a. as-sunna
the adherents of the Sunna, the Sunnis; اھل
المدر والوبر a. al-madar wa-l-wabar the
resident population and the nomads; اھل
الوجاھة a. al-wajāha people of rank and
high social standing; اھلا وسھلا ahlan wasahlan
welcome! اھلا بك ahlan bika
welcome to youl له في دارنا اھل he is a
welcome guest in our house
اھلي ahlī domestic, family (adj.);
native, resident; indigenous; home,
national│ بنك اھلي national bank (Eg.);
حرب اھلية (ḥarb) civil war; محكمة اھلية
(maḥkama) indigenous court (Eg.); القضاء
الأھلي (qaḍā’) jurisdiction of indigenous
courts; الإنتاج الأھلي (intāj) domestic
production; وقف اھلي (waqf) family wakf
اھلية ahlīya aptitude, fitness,
suitableness, competence; qualification │ ا
لأھلية القانونية the civil rights; كامل الأھلية
legally competent; عديم الأھلية legally
incompetent, under tutelage
آھل ahil and مأھول ma’hūl inhabited,
populated (region, place)
مؤھلات mu’ahhilāt qualifications,
abilities, aptitudes
متأھل muta’ahhil married
مستأھل musta’hil worthy, deserving,
meriting; entitled
اھليلج ihlīlaj myrobalan, emblic (fruit of
Phyllanthus emblica L.; bot.); ellipse
(geom.)
اھليلجي ihlīlajī elliptic(al)
او au or; (with foll. subj.) unless except that
اوب) آب) 1 āba u (aub, اوبة auba, اياب iyab) to
return; ب آب to catch, contract, suffer,
incur s.th., be in for s.th., be left with, get
one’s share of
من كل اوب min kulli aubin from all sides
or directions; من كل اوب وصوب (ṣaubin) do.
اوبة auba return
اياب iyāb return │ ذھابا وايابا dahāban
wa-iyaban there and back; back and forth,
up and down
مآب ma’āb place to which one returns;
(used as verbal noun:) return │ ذھوب ومآب
coming and going
آب 2 look up alphabetically
اوبرا and اوبرا (It. opera) ōpərā opera; opera
house
اوبريت (Fr.) ōpərēt operetta
اوت (Fr. août) August (month; mağr.)
اوتوبيس (Fr. autobus) otobīs autobus, bus
اوتجراف (Fr.) otogrāf pl. -āt autograph
اوتوقراطي oṯūqrāṯī autocratic
اوتوماتيكي (Fr.) otomātīkī automatic
اوتوموبيل (Fr.) otombīl automobile
اوتيل (Fr.) ōtēl pl. -āt hotel
اوج auj highest point, acme, pinnacle;
culmination, climax; apogee (astron.);
peak (fig.; of power. of fame) 33
آح āḥ albumen, eggwhite
O آحين āḥīn albumin
اود) آد) āda u (aud) to bend, flex, curve, crook (
ھ s.th.); to burden, oppress, weigh down (
ھ s.o.); -- اود awida a (awad) to bend; to
be bent V to bend; to bow
اودة auda burden, load
اود awad: قام باوده to provide for s.o.’s needs,
stand by s.o. in time of need; أقام اوده
(awadahū) do.; to support s.o., furnish s.o.
with the means of subsistence
اوار uwār heat, blaze; thirst
اوربا urubbā Europe
اوربي urubbī Europesn
اورشليم ūrušalīm2 Jerusalem
اورطة (= ارطة ) urṯa pl. ارط uraṯ battalion
(formerly, Eg.; mil.)
اورغوي uruguwāy Uruguay
اوركسترا (It.) arkestrā orchestra
اورنيك (Turk. örnek) urnīk pl. ارانيك arānīk2
sample, specimen; model, pattern; form,
blank
اوروبا urubbā, اوروپا Europe
اوروبي urubbī Europesn
اوروجواي uruguwāy Uruguay
اوز II (eg.) to ridicule ( على s.o.), make fun of
s.o. ( (على
اوز iwazz (col1.; n. un.) goose, geese
آس ās myrtle; see also alphabetically
اوستراليا usturāliyā Australia
اوستريا (It.) austriyā Austria
اوسلو Oslo
اوسطى ūsṯā see اسطى
اوشية ūšīya pl. اواش awāšin prayer, oration
(Copt.-Chr.)
آفة āfa pl. -āt harm, hurt, damage, ruin, bane,
evil; epidemic, plague; plant epidemic
مؤوف ma’ūf stricken by an epidemic
اوفرول (Engl.) ovirōl overalls
l( اوق) آق āqa u to bring s.o. ( على ) bad luck,
cause discomfort or hardship ( على to) II to
burden ( ه s.o.) with s.th. unpleasant,
troublesome or difficult
اوقة 2 see اقة
اويقات 3 uwaiqāt (dimin. of اوقات ) short times;
good times
اويقيانس، اويقيانوس oqiyānus, oqiyānūs ocean
اوقية ūqīya pl. -āt ounce, a weight of varying
magnitude (Eg.: 37.44 g; Aleppo 320 g;
Jerusalem 240 g; Beirut 213.3 g)
اوكازيون (Fr. occasion) okazyōn clearing sale,
special sale
اوكرانيا ukrānīya Ukraine
اوكسجين (Fr. oxygène) oksižēn oxygen
اول) آل) āla u (aul, مآل ma’āl) to return, revert (
الى to); to go back, be attributed, be
attributable ( الى to), spring, derive ( الى
from); to lead, conduce, tend ( الى to),
result eventually ( الى in); to come or go
eventually ( الى to s.o.), pass into the hands
of ( آل الأمر الى │ ( الى the long and the short
of it was that ... ; آل به المطاف الى (maṯāfu)
he eventually got to the point where ... II
to interpret, explain ( ھ s.th.)
آل āl family, relatives, kinsfolk, clan;
companions, partisans, people; mirage,
fatamorgana
آلة āla pl. -āt instrument, utensil; tool;
apparatus; device, implement, appliance;
machine│ آلات الحس ā. al-ḥiss sensory
organs; آلة بخارية (buḳārīya) steam engine;
آلة الجر ā. al-jarr tractor; آلة جھنمية
(jahannamīya) infernal machine; آلة حربية
(ḥarbīya) instrument of war; آلة التحريك ٣٤
motor, engine; آلة حاسبة calculating
machine; آلة الحياكة a. al-ḥiyāka power
loom; آلة الخياطة sewing machine; آلة راديو
radio; آلة رافعة hoisting machine, crane,
derrick; pump; آلة التسخين and آلة مسخنة
(musaḳḳina) heater; آلة التصوير
(photographic) camera; آلة الطباعة printing
press; آلة الغسل a. al-gasl washing machine;
آلة التفريخ incubator; آلة الاستقبال receiver,
receiving set (radio); آلة مقطرة (muqaṯṯira)
distilling apparatus, still; آلة الكتابة and آلة
كاتبة typewriter; آلة لعب القمار a. la‘b alqimār
slot machine; آلة موسيقية (mūsīqīya)
musical instrument; آلة التنبيه alarm; siren
horn (of an automobile); آلة صماء
(ṣammā’) (fig.) tool, creature, puppet
آلى ālī mechanic(al); mechanized;
motorized; instrumental; organic│ محراث
آلي (miḥrat) motor plow; القوات الآلية
(quwāt) motorized troops; حركة آلية
(ḥaraka) a mechanical movement
آلية ālīya mechanics
آلاتى ālātī pl. آلاتية ālātīya (eg.) musician;
singer
اول awwal2, f. اولى ūlā, pl. m. -ūn, اوائل
awā’il2 first; foremost, most important,
principal, chief, main; first part,
beginning; (with def. article also) earlier,
previous, former; see a1so under │ ولى
الانسان الاول (insān) primitive man; طبيب اول
physician-in-chief; الاوائل, الاولون the
forebears, forefathers, ancestors; اوائل الشھر
a. aš-šahr the first ten days of a month,
beginning of a month; لاول مرة li-awwali
marratin or للمرة الاولى for the first time; من
اوله، من اوائله since its beginnings, from the
very beginning; من اوله الى آخره (āḳirihī)
from beginning to end, from A to Z; اول
الامر awwala l-amr at first, in the
beginning; الاول فالاول each time the first
available; اول ما (awwala) the moment
when, just when; at the very outset of; اكثر
من الاول (aḳtara) more than before
اولا awwalan first, firstly, in the first
place; at first, in the beginning│ اولا باول
and اولا فأولا by and by, gradually, one after
the other, one by one; اولا واخيرا and اولا
وآخرا (āḳiran) first and I~st, altogether;
simply and solely, merely
اولى awwalī prime, primary, primordial,
original, initial, first; elemental,
fundamental, basic, principal, chief, main;
elementary; primitive, pristine, primeval│
مدرسة اولية (madrasa) elementary school,
grade school; مواد اولية (mawādd) raw
materials; عدد اولى (‘adad) prime number;
فاتورة اولية (fātūra) pro forma invoice
اولية awwalīya pl. -āt fundamental truth,
axiom; primary constituent, essential
component, element; precedence; priority
ايل ayyil, iyyal, uyyal pl. ايائل ayā’il2 stag
ايالة iyāla pl. -āt province; regency
ايلولة ailūla title deed (jur.)
مآل ma’āl end; outcome, final issue,
upshot; result, consequence│ في الحال وفي
المآل at present and in the future
تأويل ta’wīl pl. -āt interpretation,
explanation
اولاء ulā’i, اولئك، اولائك ulā’ika these;
those, pl. of the demonstr. pron. ذا and ذلك
اولمبى olimbī Olympic│ الالعاب الاولمبية the
Olympic games
اولمبياد olimbiyād Olympiad
اولو ulū (pl. of ذو ) owners, possessors, people
(with foll.genit.: of)│ اولو الامر u. l-amr
rulers, powerful leaders; اولو الحل والعقد u. l-
ḥall wa-l-'aqd (lit.: masters of solving and
binding) do.; اولو الشأن u. š-ša’n the
responsible people
اوام 1 uwām thirst
اوم 2 ohm (el.) 35
اومنيبوس omnībūs omnibus, bus
آن 1 ān time; الآن al-āna now│ فى آن and فى آن
واحد at the same time, simultaneously; من
آن الى آخر (āḳara) from time to time; ما بين
آن وآخر (wa-āḳara) and آنا بعد آن sometimes,
at times, now and then: once in a while; آنا
فآنا gradually, by and by, little by little; آنا
وآونة -- (āwinatan) sometimes --
sometimes, at times -- at times; قبل الآن
qabla l-āna before, previously, formerly;
للآن li-l-āna and حتى الآن ḥattā l-āna until
now, hitherto, so far; بعد الآن ba‘da l-āna
from now on, henceforth, in the future; من
الآن فصاعدا min al-āna fa-ṣā‘idan do.
آنئذ āna’idin that day, at that time, then
آنذاك ānadāka that day, at that time, then
اون aun calmness, serenity, gentleness
اوان awān pl. آونة āwina time│ قبل اوانه
prematurely; في اوانه at the right time,
timely, seasonably, في غير اوانه at the
wrong time, untimely, unseasonably; بين
الآونة from time to time; بين الآونة والاخرى
(uḳrā) and آونة وأخرى (āwinatan, uḳrā) at
times, sometimes; آونة – وأخرى sometimes
– sometimes, at times – at times; فات الاوان
(fāta) it is too late; آن الاوان (āna) the time
has come, it is time ( ل for, to do s.th.)
ايوان 2 look up alphabetically
اونباشى onbašī corporal, see انباشى
اوه) آه) āha u and II to moan, sigh V to moan,
sigh; to sigh with admiration ( ل over),
exclaim “ah!”
اوه awwah (interj.) oh!
آه āhi, آھ āhan, اواه awwāhi oh!
آھة āha pl. -āt sigh, moan; pl. آھات sighs
of admiration; rapturous exclamations
تأوه ta’awwuh moaning. sighing;
admiring exclamation; plaintive sound,
wail
اوى awā i to seek refuge, seek shelter ( الى at a
place); to go ( الى to bed); to betake o.s.,
repair ( الى to a place); to shelter, house,
put up, lodge, accommodate, receive as a
guest ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) II to shelter, lodge,
put up, accommodate, receive as a guest ( ه
s.o.) IV to seek shelter ( الى at a place), to
retire ( الى to a place); to betake o.s., repair
الى) to a place); to shelter, house, put up,
lodge, accommodate ( ه s.o.)
ايواء īwā’ accommodation, lodging,
housing, sheltering
مأوى ma’wan pl. مآو ma’āwin place of
refuge, retreat, shelter; abode; resting
place; dwelling, habitation│ مأوى ليلى
(lailī) shelter for the night; doss house
ابن آوى ibn āwā pl. بنات آوى banāt a.
jackal
آية 1 āya, coll. آي āy, pl. -āt sign, token, mark;
miracle; wonder, marvel, prodigy; model,
exemplar, paragon, masterpiece ( فى of,
e.g., of organization, etc.); Koranic verse,
آي الذكر الحكيم (āy ad-dikr) the verses of the
Koran; passage (in a book), utterance,
saying, word; آيات (with foll. genit.) moat
solemn assurances (of love, of gratitude)
اى 2 ay that is (to say), i.e.; namely, to wit
اى 3 ī yes (with foll. ولله yes indeed! Yes, by
God!)
اى 4 ayy, f. اية ayya (with foll. genit. or suffix)
which? what? what kind of? Whoever,
whosoever; any, every, no matter what ... ;
(with neg.) no; ايما ayyumā whatever,
whatsoever│ اية كانت، ايا كان ayyan kāna,
ayyatan kānat whoever he (or she) is, no
matter who he (or she) is; اي من كان ayyu
man kāna whoever it may be, whosoever;
على اي حال (ayyi ḥālin) in any case, at any
36 rate, at all events, by all means; اى واحد
ayyu wāḥidin any one; ان له شأنا اى شأن inna
lahū ša’nan ayya ša’nin it is of the
greatest importance (lit.: it is of
importance, and of what importance!);
اعجب به ايما اعجاب u‘jiba bihi ayyama
i‘jābin how much he admired him! he
admired him greatly; اقبل عليه ايما اقبال
aqbala ‘alaihi ayyama iqbālin he showed
the greatest interest in it
ايا iyyā with nominal suffix to express the
accusative│ اياك ان take care not to ..., be
careful not to ...; اياك من، اياك و beware of ...
واياك ! (dial. wayyāk), واياه (wayyāh) with
you, with him
ايار see اير 2
ايد II to back, support ( ه, s.o., ھ a claim, an
aspiration, etc.); to confirm, corroborate,
endorse ( ھ news, a. judgment, etc.) V =
pass. of II
تأييد ta’yīd corroboration, confirmation,
endorsement, backing, support
ايدروجين (Fr. Hydrogène) idrožēn hydrogen
قنبلة ايدروجينية (qunbula) hydrogen bomb
اير 1 air pl. ايور uyūr penis
ايار 2 ayyār2 May (Syr., Leb., Ir., Jord.)
ايران īrān Iran, Persia
ايرانى īrānī Iranian, Persian; (pl. -ūn) a Persian,
an Iranian
ايرلندا irlandā Ireland
ايرلندى irlandī Irish; (pl. -ūn) Irishman
ايريال (Engl.) ēriyāl aerial, antenna
ايزيس īzīs Isis
ايس ayisa a ( اياس iyās) to despair ( من of s.th.)
اياس iyās despair
ايشرب (Fr. écharp,) sash
ايض) آض) āḍa i to return, revert ( الى to s.th.); to
become ( الى s.th.)
ايضا aiḍan also, too, as well, likewise,
equally; again; in addition, besides,
moreover
ايطاليا īṯālīyā Italy
ايطالى īṯālī Italian; (pl. -ūn) an Italian
ايقونة (Gr. είκών) īqūna and ايقونية īqūnīya pl.
-āt icon (Chr.)
ايك aik (coll.; n. un. ة) thicket, jungle
ايل 1 and ايالة see اول
ايلول 2 ailūl2 September (Syr., Leb., Ir., Jord.)
ايلولة 3 ailūla title deed (jur.)
ايم) آم) āma i: آم من زوجته (zaujatihī) to lose
one's wife, become or be a widower, آمت
من زوجھا (zaujiha) to lose one’s husband,
become or be a widow
ايمة aima, ايوم uyūm and تأيم ta’ayyum
widowhood
ايم ayyim pl. ايائم ayā’im ايامى , 2 ayāmā
widower, widow
ايوم aiwam2 see يوم
ايما ayyumā see اي 4 ayy
اين) آن) 1 āna i to come, approach, draw near
(time)│ آن الاوان (awān) the time has
come: آن له ان it’s time for him to ...
آن see اون
اين aina where? (= at or to what place?)│ من
اين min aina where … from? الى اين where?
(= to what place?) اين نحن من how far we
still are from … worlds separate us
from ... (fig.); اين ھذا من ذاك what is this
compared with that! 37
الاين al-ainu the where; space (philos.)
اينما ainamā wherever
ايان ayyāna when? (conj.) when
اين 2 II to ionize ( ھ s.th.) V to be ionized (el.)
ايون iyōn pl. -āt ion
تأيين ta’yīn ionization
متأين muta’ayyin ionized
ايه īhi, īha, īhin (interj.) well! now then! All
right!
ايھا ayyuhā, with fem. also ايتھا ayyatuhā
(vocative particle) O ... !
ايوب ayyūb2 Job
الايوبيون al-ayyūbīyūn the Ayubites
ايوم aiwam2 see يوم
ايون 1 see اين 2
ايوان 2 īwān pl. -āt recess-like sitting room with
a raised floor, usually opening on the main
room or courtyard through an arcade;
estrade
ب
ب 1 abbreviation of باب chapter
ب 1 bi (prep.) in, at, on (place and time); with
(indicating connection, association,
attendance); with, through, by means of
(designating instrumentality or agency,
also with pass. = by); for (= at the price
of); by (= to the amount of); by
(introducing an oath)│ بالليل bi-l-lail at (by)
night, بالنھار bi-n-nahār during the
daytime, by day; شمالا بشرق šamālan bišarqin
northeast; فبھا ونعمت fa-bihā wani’mat
in that case it’s all right; ليس بي ان it
is not my intention to ... ; ھذا بذاك hādā bidāka
now we are even, we are quits; قبل
مجيئه بساعة (majī’ihī) an hour before his
arrival; ب “with” frequently gives
causative meaning to a verb, e.g., نھض
بشيء (lit.: to rise with s.t ا., i.e.) to boost,
further, promote s.th.; بلغ به الى to cause
s.o. to arrive at, lead s.o. to; for its use as
copula after negations, etc., see grammar;
بلا bi-lā without; بما ان bi-mā anna in view
of the fact that; since, as, inasmuch as,
because; بما فيه bi-mā fīhi including
باء bā’ name of the letter ب
بابا bābā pl. بابوات bābawāt, باباوات pope; papa,
father, daddy
بابوى bābawī, باباوى papal
بابوية bābawīya papacy
بأبأ 1 ba’ba’a to say “papa” (child)
بؤبؤ 2 bu’bu’ root, source, origin; core, heart,
inmost part; pupil of the eye, also بؤبؤ لعين
b. al-‘ain
بابل bābil2 Babel, Babylon
بابلى bābilī Babylonian
بابه bābih the second month of the Coptic
calendar
بابوج bābūj pl. بوابج bawābij2 slipper
بابور bābūr pl. -āt, بوابير bawābīr (وابور=) 2
locomotive, engine; steamship, steamer
بابونج bābūnaj camomile (bot.)
باتسته bati.ta batiste
باثولوجى batōlōjī pathologic(al)
باثولوجيا batōlōjiyā pathology
باذنجان bādijān and بيذنجان baidinjān (coll.; n.
un. ة pl. -āt eggplant, aubergine 38
بار 1 bār pl. -āt bar; taproom
بأر 2 ba’ara a to dig a well
بئر bi'r f., pl. آبار ābār, بئار bi’ār well,
spring
بؤرة bu’ra pl. بؤر bu’ar center, seat
(fig.); site; pit; abyss
باراشوت (Fr. parachute) bārāšūt parachute
باراغواى bārāguwāy Paraguay
باربوني see بربونى
باركيه (Fr.) barkēh parquet, parquetry floor
بارنامج see برنامج
بارة bāra pl. -āt para (coin)
بارود bārūd saltpeter; gunpowder
بارودة bārūda pl. بواريد bawārīd2 rifle,
carbine
باريس bārīs2 Paris
باريسى bārīsī Parisian
باز bāz pl. بيزان bīzān and بأز ba’z pl. بؤوز
bu’ūz, بئزان bi’zān falcon
بازار bāzār pl. –āt bazaar
بازلت bāzalt basalt
بازوبند bāzūband bracelet
بؤس ba’usa u ( بأس ba’s) to be strong, brave,
intrepid; -- بئس ba’isa a ( بؤس bu’s) to be
miserable, wretched VI to feign misery or
distress VIII to be sad, worried, grieved
بئس الرجل bi’sa r-rajulu what an evil
man!
بأس ba’s strength, fortitude, courage,
intrepidity (as verbal noun of بؤس
ba’usa); harm, hurt, injury, impairment,
detriment, wrong│ شديد البأس courageous,
brave, intrepid; لا بأس (ba’sa) there is no
objection to it; unobjectionable; not bad,
rather important, considerable, e.g., كميات
لا بأس بھا (kammīyāt) considerable
quantities; لا بأس (ba'sa) never mind! it
doesn't matter! it's all right! لا بأس ان it
doesn't matter that ... ; ؟ اى بأس ayyu
ba'sin? what does it matter! what of it! ليس
عليه بأس من (ba’sun) he will be none the
worse for ... ; لا بأس عليك (ba’sa) it won't do
you any harm! don't worry! don't be afraid
بنات بئس banātu bi's calamities,
adversities, misfortunes
بئس bu’s, بأساء ba’sā’, بؤس bu’ūs and
بؤسى bu’sā pl. ابؤس ab’us misery,
wretchedness, suffering, distress
بئيس ba’īs pl. بؤساء bu’asā’2 miserable,
wretched
بائس bā’is miserable, wretched
باستيل (Fr.) bastē1 pastel
باسل bāsīl bacilli
باش bāš senior, chief (in compounds)
باشجاويش bašcāwīš and باشجاويش approx.:
master sergeant (formerly, Eg.)
باشحكيم bāšḥakīm physician-in-chief
باشريش bāšrayyis a naval rank, approx.:
petty officer 3rd class (Eg.)
باشكاتب bāškātib chief clerk
باشمفتى bāšmuftī chief mufti (Tun.)
باشمفتش bāamšmufattiš chief inspector
باشمھندس bāšmuhandis chief engineer
باشا bāšā pl. باشوات bāšawāt ( باشاوات ) pasha
باشق bāšaq, bāšiq pl. بواشق bawāšiq2 sparrow
hawk
الباشقرد al-bāšqird the Bashkirs
باشكير see بشكير
باص (Engl.) bāṣ pl. -āt bus, autobus
باطون bātūn concrete, béton 39
باغة bāgā celluloid; tortoise shell
الباكستان al-bākistān Pakistan
باكستانى bākistānī Pakistani (adj. and n.)
بال 1 bāl whale (zool.)
بالة 2 bala pl. -āt bundle, bale
بالطو balṯō pl. بالطوات balṯowāt, بلاطي balātī
overcoat; paletot
بالو (It. ballo ball, dance
بالون bālūn) balloon
جزر الباليار juzur al-bāliyār the Balearic Islands
باليه (Fr.) bālēh ballet
باميا and بامية bāmiya gumbo, okra (Hibiscus
esculentus L., bot., a popular vegetable in
Egypt)
بان see بون
شاشة بانورامية šāša bānōrāmīya (= Fr. écran
panoramique) cinemascope screen
بؤونة ba’ūna the tenth month of the Coptic
calendar
باى bāy, f. باية bāya pl. -āt formerly, in Tunisia,
a title after the names of the members of
the Bey's family
دار الباى dār al-bāy (formerly) the
Tunisian government
ببر babr pl. ببور bubūr tiger
ببغاء babgā2 (and babbayā’2) pl. ببغاوات
babgāwāt parrot
بت batta u i (batt) to cut off, sever ( ھ s.th.); to
complete, finish, achieve, accomplish,
carry out ( ھ s.th.); to fix, settle, determine
ھ) s.th.), decide ( ھ s.th., فى on s.th.) II to
adjudge, adjudicate, award ( ھ s.th.) VII to
be cut off; to be finished, be done; to be
decided│ قد انبت الامر بينه وبينھم it's all over
between him and them, they are through
with each other
بت batt settlement, decision; بتا battan
definitely, once and for all
بتة batta pl. -āt adjudication, award;
final decision; البتة al-battata and بتة
battatan definitely, positively, decidedly,
esp. with negations: absolutely not,
definitely not
بتى battī definite, definitive
بتية battiya, bittīya pl. بتاتى batātīy barrel;
tub
بتاتا batātan decidedly, definitely,
positively, categorically, unquestionably,
absolutely
تبتيت tabtīt adjudication, award
بات bātt definite, definitive│ منع بات
(man‘) categorical interdiction
بتر 1 batara u (batr) to cut off, sever ( ھ s.th.);
to amputate ( ھ s.th.); to mutilate, render
fragmentarily ( ھ a text) VII to be cut off,
be severed, be amputated
بتر batr cutting off, severance,
separation; amputation
ابتر abtar2 curtailed, docked, clipped,
trimmed; imperfect, defective,
incomplete; without offspring
بتار battār cutting, sharp
باتر bātir cutting, sharp
مبتور mabtūr broken, abrupt,
unconnected; fragmentary, incomplete
بتراء 2 bitrā’2, batrā’2 Petra (ancient city of
Edomites and Nabataeans; ruins now in
SW Jordan)
بترك batrak patriarch
بترول batrūl, bitrōl petroleum
ابتع abta‘2 an assonant intensifier of اجمع ajma‘2
all, altogether, whole, entire
باتع bāti‘ strong; full, whole, entire 40
بتك II to cut off ( ھ s.th.)
بتل 1 batala i u (batl) and II to cut off, sever ( ھ
s.th.); to make final, close, settle, make
conclusive, clinch ( ھ s.th.) V to retire
from the world and devote one's life to
God ( الى لله ); to be pious, chaste and selfdenying;
to live in chastity VII to be cut
off, be curtailed, be docked
بتول batūl virgin; البتول the Virgin Mary
بتولي batūlī virginal
بتولية batūlīya virginity
متبتل mutabattil an ascetic, a. recluse; a
pious, godly man
بتولا 2 batūlā birch tree
بث batta (batt) to spread, unroll, unfold ( ھ
s.th., e.g., a rug); to scatter, disperse ( ھ
s.th.); to disseminate, propagate, spread ( ھ
s.th., e.g., a spirit, an ideology, a
doctrine); to sprinkle ( ھ ھ s.th. on); to let
s.o. ( ه, also ل) in on s.th. ( ھ , esp. on a
secret); to broadcast, transmit by radio │
بث العيون to peer around; بث الألغام to plant,
or lay, mines IV to let ( ه s.o.) in on a
secret ( ھ ) VII to be spread; to be scattered
بث batta spreading, dissemina.tion,
propagation; grief, sorrow
بثر batara i (batira a) and V to break out with
pimples or pustules (skin)
بثر batr pl. بثور butūr (n. un. بثرة batra
pl. batarāt) pimples, pustules
بثر batir, بثير batīr pustulate, pimpled
بثق bataqa i u (with النھر an-nahra) to open
flood gates so that the river will overflow
its banks VII to break forth, burst out, well
out, pour out, gush out; to emanate,
proceed, spring ( من or عن from)
انبثاق outpouring, effusion, outpour, outburst;
emanation
بجح bajiḥa a (bajaḥ) to rejoice ( ب at) V to
vaunt, flaunt ( ب s.th.), boast, brag ( ب of)
تبجح tabajjuj bragging, braggery
متبجح mutabajjij braggart
بجدة bajda, bujda root, source. heart, essence,
basis│ بجدة الأمر the heart of the matter, the
actual state of affairs, the true facts; ھو ابن
بجدتھا (ibn bujdatihā) he knows the job
from the ground up, he is the right man for
it
ابجر abiar2 obese, corpulent
بجس bajasa u i (bajs) and II to open a passage
(for the water), cause (the water) to flow
V and VII to flow freely, pour forth
copiously, gush out
بجس bajs, بجيس bajīs flowing freely,
streaming
بجع baja‘ (n. un. ة) pelican
بجل II to honor, revere, venerate, treat with
deference ( ه s.o.), show respect ( ھ to s.o.);
to give precedence ( على ھ or ه to s.o. or
s.th. over) V to be honored, be revered, be
venerated
بجل bajal syphilis (ir.)
تبجيل tabjīl veneration, reverence;
deference, respect
مبجل mubajjal revered, respected;
venerable
بجم bajama i (bajm, بجوم bujūm) to be
speechless, dumfounded
بجن II to clinch ( ھ a nail)
بح baḥḥa a (baḥḥ, بحح baḥaḥ, بحوح buḥūḥ, بحاح
baḥāḥ, بحوحة buḥūḥa, بحاحة baḥāḥa) to be
or become hoarse, be raucous, husky,
harsh (voice) II and IV to make hoarse ( ه
s.o.)
بحة buḥḥa hoarseness
ابح abaḥḥ2 hoarse
مبحوح mabḥūḥ hoarse 41
بحبح II tabaḥbaḥa to be prosperous, live in
easy circumstances; to enjoy o.s. have a
good time
بحبوح baḥbūḥ gay, merry
بحبوحة buḥbūḥa middle; life of ease and
comfort, prosperity, affluence│ في بحبوحة
amidst
مبحبح mubaḥbaḥ well-to-do, prosperous;
enjoying an easy, comfortable life
بحت baḥt pure, unmixed, sheer; exclusive, also
بحت الأمر; بحتا baḥan merely, solely,
purely, exclusively, nothing but ...
بحتر buḥtur stocky, pudgy, thickset
بحتري buḥturī stocky, pudgy, thickset
بحث baḥata a (baḥt) to look, search ( ھ or عن
for s.th.), seek ( ھ or عن s.th.); to do
research; to investigate, examine, study,
explore ( ھ or عن s.th., less frequently with
في or على ), look into ( ھ or عن ); to discuss (
ھ a subject, a question) III to discuss ( ه
with s.o., في a question) VI to have a
discussion, discuss together; to confer,
have a talk ( مع with s.o., في about)
بحث baḥt pl. بحوث buḥūt, بحوثات، ابحاث abḥāt
search ( عن for), quest ( عن of);
examination, study; research;
investigation, exploration; discussion;
treatise; (pl. ابحاث ) study, scientific report (
في on)
بحاث baḥḥāt scholar, research worker
بحاثة baḥḥāta eminent scholar
مبحث mabḥāt pl. مباحث mabāḥit subject,
theme, field of investigation or discussion,
object of research; research, study,
examination; investigation
مباحثة mubāḥata pl. -āt negotiation,
parley, conference, talk, discussion
باحث bāḥit pl. -ūn and بحاث buḥḥāt
scholar, research worker; examiner,
investigator
بحثر baḥtara to disperse, scatter ( ھ s.th.); to
waste, squander, dissipate ( ھ s.th.) II
tabaḥtara pass. of I
بحثر baḥtara waste, dissipation
مبحثر mubaḥtir squanderer, wastrel, spendthrift
بحر 1 baḥira a to be startled, be bewildered
(with fright)
بحر 1 II to travel by sea, make a voyage IV do.;
to embark, go on board; to put to sea, set
sail, sail, depart (ship); to go downstream,
be sea-bound (ship on the Nile) V to
penetrate deeply, delve ( في into); to study
thoroughly ( في a subject) X = V
بحر baḥr pl. بحار biḥār, بحور , buḥūr, ابحار
abḥār, ابحر abḥur sea; large river; a noble.,
or great, man (whose magnanimity or
knowledge is comparable to the vastness
of the sea); meter (poet.) │ في بحر in the
course of, during, في بحر سنتين (sanatain) in
the course of two years, within two years;
البحر الأبيض المتوسط (abyaḍ, mutawassiṯ) the
Mediterranean (sometimes shortened to
البحر الأبيض); بحر البلطيق b. al-balṯīq the
Baltic Sea; بحر الجنوب b. al-janūb the South
Seas; البحر الأحمر the Red Sea (also بحر القلزم
b. al-qulzum); بحر القزر b. al-ḳazar the
Caspian Sea (also البحر الكسبياتي )؛ بحر الروم
b. ar-rūm the Mediterranean; البحر الأسود
(aswad) the Black Sea; بحر الظلمات b. aẓ-
ẓulumāt the ھ tlantic; بحر لوط b. lūṯ and البحر
الميت (mayyit) the Dead Sea; بحر النيل (eg.)
the Nile
البحرين al-baḥrain the Bahrein Islands
بحراني baḥrānī of the Bahrein Islands;
البحارنة al-baḥārina the inhabitants of the
Bahrein Islands
بحري baḥrī sea (adj.), marine; maritime;
nautical; naval; navigational; (in Eg.)
northern, baḥrīya (with foll. genit.) north
42 of; (pl. -ūn, ة) sailor, seaman, mariner│
بحري ماھر approx.: seaman apprentice
(Eg.); القوات البحرية (qūwāt) the naval
forces; نباتات بحرية (nabātāt) marine flora,
water plants
بحرية baḥrīya navy
بحرة baḥra pond, pool
بحار baḥḥār pl. -ūn, بحارة baḥḥāra
seaman, mariner, sailor; pl. بحارة crew (of a
ship, of an airplane)
بحيرة buḥaira pl. -āt, بحائر baḥā’ir2 lake;
(tun.)'vegetable garden, truck garden
بحران buḥrān crisis (of an illness);
climax, culmination (also, e.g., of ecstasy)
تبحر tabaḥḥur deep penetration, delving
في) into a subject), thorough study ( في of)
متبحر mutabaḥḥir thoroughly familiar (
في with); profound, erudite, searching,
penetrating
بحلق baḥlaqa: بحلق عينيه (‘ainaihi) to stare, gaze
في) at)
بخ بخ 1 baḳ baḳ excellent! well done! Bravo!
بخ 2 baḳḳa u (baḳḳ) to snore; to spout, spurt,
squirt ( ھ s.th.); to sprinkle, splatter ( ب ھ
s.th. with)
بخاخة baḳḳāḳa nozzle
بخيخة buḳḳēḳa squirt, syringe
مبخة mibaḳḳa nozzle
بخت baḳt luck; a kind of lottery│ قليل البخت
unIucky; سوء البخت bad luck
بخيت baḳīt lucky, fortunate
مبخوت mabḳūt lucky, fortunate
بختر II tabaḳtara to strut, prance
بخر II to vaporize, evaporate ( ھ s.th.); to
fumigate ( ھ s.th.); to disinfect ( ھ s.th.); to
perfume with incense, expose to aromatic
smoke ( ھ s.th.) V to evaporate (water); to
volatilize, tum into smoke or haze; to
perfume 0.8., or be perfumed, with incense
بخار buḳār pl. -āt, ابخرة abḳira vapor,
fume; steam
بخاري buḳārī steam (adj.), steam-driven
بخور baḳūr incense; frankincense│ بخور
مريم b. maryam cyclamen (bot.)
ابخر abḳar2 suffering from halitosis
مبخرة mabḳara pl. مباخر mabāḳir2 (also
-āt) censer; thurible; fumigator
تبخير tabḳīr fumigation
تبخر tabaḳḳur evaporation, vaporization
باخرة balfira pl. بواخر bawāḳir2 steamer,
steamship
بويخرة buwaiḳira small steamboat
بخس baḳasa a (baks) to decrease, diminish,
reduce ( ھ s.th.); to lessen (e.g., قيمته
qīmatahū the value of s.th.); to disregard,
neglect, fail to heed ( ھ s.th.)
بخس baḳs too little, too low; very low
(price)
باخس baḳis small, little, trifling,
unimportant
بخشيش baḳšīš pl. بخاشيش baḳāšīš 2 tip, gratuity
بخع baḳa‘a a (baḳ‘) with نفسه : to kill o.s. (with
grief, anger, rage)
ابخق abḳaq2 f. بخقاء baḳqā’2 one-eyed
بخل baḳila a (baḳal), baḳula u (buḳl) to be
niggardly, be stingy ( ب with s.th., عن or
على with regard to s.o.), scrimp ( عن, على
s.o., ب for), stint ( ب in, عن or على s.o.),
withhold ( عن, على from s.o., ب s.th.) VI to
give reluctantly, grudgingly ( عن, على to
s.o., y s.th.)
بخل buḳl avarice, cupidity, greed 43
بخيل baḳīl pl. بخلاء avaricious, greedy;
miser, skinflint
مبخلة mabḳala cause of avarice, that
which arouses avarice or greed
بخنق buḳnuq pl. بخانق baḳāniq2 kerchief, veil
(to cover the head)
 ب badda u (budd) to distribute, spread,
disperse II to divide, distribute, spread,
scatter, disperse ( ھ •.th.); to remove,
eliminate ( ھ s.th.); to waste, squander,
fritter away, dissipate ( ھ s.th.) V pass. of
II; X to be independent, proceed
independently ( ب in, e.g., in one's opinion,
i.e., to be opinionated, obstinate, headstrong);
to possess alone monopolize ( ھs.
th.); to take possession ( ھ of s.o.), seize,
grip, overwhelm, overcome ( ھ s.o.; said
of a feeling, of an impulse); to dispose
arbitrarily, highhandedly ( ب of s.th.); to
rule despotically, tyrannically,
autocratically ( ب over)
بد budd way out, escape│ اذا لم يكن بد من
ان (buddun) if it is inevitable that ... ; لا بد
(budda) definitely, certainly, inevitably,
without fail; by all means; لا بد من it is
necessary, inescapable, unavoidable,
inevitable, لا بد له منه he simply must do it,
he can't get around it; من كل بد min kulli
buddin in any case, at any rate
اباديد abādīd 2 (pl.) scattered
تبديد tabdīd scattering, dispersal,
dispersion; removal, elimination; waste,
dissipation
استبداد istibdād arbitrariness, highhandedness;
despotism; autocracy;
absolutism
استبدادي istibdādī arbitrary, highhanded,
autocratic, despotic; استبداديات istibdādīyāt
arbitrary acts
مبدد mubaddid scatterer, disperser;
squanderer, wastrel, spendthrift
مستبد mustabidd arbitrary, highhanded,
autocratic, tyrannical, despotic; autocrat,
tyrant, despot│ مستبد برأيه (bira’yihī)
opinionated, obstinate, headstrong
بدأ bada’a a ( بدأ bad’) to begin, start ( ب or في
with s.th., ھ s.th.; ه with s.o.; with foll.
imperf.: to do s.th. or doing s.th.
respectively); to set in, begin, start, arise,
spring up, crop up II to put ( ھ s.th., على
before s.th. else), give precedence or
priority ( ھ to s.th., على over s.th. else) III
to begin, start ( ب s.th., ه with regard to
s.o.), make the first step, take the initiative
or lead ( ب in s.th., ه toward s.o.) e.g., بادأه
بالكلام (kalām) to accost s.o., speak first to
s.o. IV to do or produce first ( ھ s.th.).
bring out ( ھ s.th. new)│ ما يبدئ وما يعيد mā
yubdi’u wa-mā yu‘īd he can't think of a
blessed thing to say; يبدئ ويعيد he says or
does everything conceivable VIII to begin,
start ( ب with s.th.)
بدء bad’ beginning, start│ منذ البدء from
the (very) beginning; فعله عودا وبدءا (‘audan
wa-bad’an) عوده على بدئه (‘audahū ‘alā
bad’ihī) or عودا الى بدء (ilā bad’in) he did it
all over again, he began anew
بدأة bad’a, بديئة badī’a, بداية bidāya
beginning, start│ في بداية الأمر in the
beginning, at first
بداءة badā’a beginning, start; first step,
first instance│ بداءة بدء badā’ata bad’in
right at the outset, at the very beginning
بدائي budā’ī primitive
مبدأ mabda' pl. مبادئ mabādi’2
beginning, start, starting point; basis,
foundation; principle; invention; pl.
principles, convictions (of a person);
ideology; rudiments. fundamental
concepts, elements│ كتب المبادئ kutub al-m.
elementary books 44
مبدئي mabda’ī original, initial;
fundamental, basic; مبدئيا mabda’īyan
originally; in principle
ابتدائي ibtidā’ī beginning, start; novitiate
(Chr.)│ ابتداء من ibtidā’an min from,
beginning ... , as of (with foll. date)
ابتدائي ibtidā’ī initial; preparatory,
elementary, primary; of first instance
(jur.); original, primitive│ محكمة ابتدائية
(maḥkama) court of first instance; التعليم
الابتدائى elementary education; مدرسة ابتدائية
(madrasa) lower grades of a high school,
approx.: junior high school (as
distinguished from ثانوية)؛ شھادة ابتدائية
(šahāda) approx.: junior high school
graduation certificate
بادئ bādi’ beginning, starting│ بادئ الأمر
badi'a l-amr and في بادئ الأمر in the
beginning, at first; في بادئ الرأي right away,
without thinking twice, unhesitatingly;
بادئ ذي بدء badi’a dī bad’in above all, first
of all, in the first place, primarily; البادئ
ذكره al-badi’u dikruhu (the person or
thing) mentioned at the outset, the firstmentioned
مبتدئ mubtadi’ beginning; beginner;
novice (Chr.)
مبتدأ mubtada' beginning, start; (gram.)
subject of 8 nominal clause
بدر 1 badara u to come unexpectedly, by
surprise; to escape ( من s.o.; e.g., words in
excitement) III to come to s.o.’s ( ه) mind,
occur to s.o. (t) all of a sudden, strike s.o.
(idea, notion); to embark, enter ( الى upon
s.th.) or set out ( الى to do s.th.) without
delay; to rush, hurry ( الى to s.o., to a
place); to hurry up (", with s.th.), بادر الى
with foll. verbal noun: to do s.th.
promptly, without delay, hasten to do
s.th.; to fall upon s.o ( ه) with ( ب), accost,
assail, surprise ( ب ه s.o. with s.th.; e.g.,
بادره بكلام غليظ to snap rudely at s.o.); to
react, respond ( الى to s.th.)│ بادر الى انجاز
الوعد (injāzi l-wa‘d) to set out to fulfill a
promise VI تبادر الى الذھن (dihn) to suggest
itself strongly, be obvious; to appear at
first glance as if ( أن) ؛ تبادر الى ذھني أن
(dihnī) it occurred to me all of a sudden
that ... ; تبادر الى الفھم (fahm) to be
immediately understood VIII to hurry,
rush, hasten ( ھ to); to get ahead of s.o. ( ,(ه
anticipate, forestall ( ه s.o.)│ ابتدرھا قائلا
before she could say a word he
exclaimed ...
بدر badr, pl. بدور budūr full moon
بدرة badra pl. badarāt, بدار bidār huge
amount of money (formerly = 10,000
dirhams)│ بدرات الأموال enormous sums of
money
بدار badārī hurry! quick!
مبادرة mubādara undertaking, enterprise
بادرة bādira pl. بوادر bawadir2 herald,
harbinger, precursor, forerunner, first
indication, sign; unforeseen act; stirring,
impulse, fit (e.g., of rage); blunder,
mistake; بوادر stirrings, impulses│ بادرة خير
b. ḳairin a good, or generous, impulse
بيدر 2 baidar pl. بيادر bayādir 2 threshing floor
بدروم and بدرون (Turk. bodrum) badrūm,
badrūn pl. -āt basement
بدع bada‘a a (bad‘) to introduce, originate,
start, do for the first time ( ھ s.th.), be the
first to do s.th. ( ھ ); to devise, contrive,
invent ( ھ s.th.) II to accuse of heresy ( ه
s.o.) IV = I; to create ( ھ s.th.); to achieve
unique, excellent results ( في in); to be
amazing, outstanding ( في in s.th.) VIII to
invent, contrive, devise, think up ( ھ s.th.)
X to regard as novel, as unprecedented ( ھ
s.th.)
بدع bad‘ innovation, novelty; creation│
بدعا وعودا bad‘an wa-‘audan repeatedly 45
بدع bid‘ pl. ابداع abdā‘ innovator; new,
original; unprecedented, novel│ لا بدع lā
bid‘a no wonder! لا بدع ان lā bid‘a an no
wonder that ... ; بدع من s.th. else than;
unlike, different from
بدعة bid‘a pl. بدع bida‘ innovation.
novelty; heretical doctrine, heresy; pl.
creations (of fashion, of art)│ اھل البدع ahl
al-b. heretics
بديع badi', بدع bud‘ unprecedented,
marvelous, wonderful, amazing,
admirable, singular, unique; creator│ علم
البديع ‘ilm al-b. the art or science of
metaphors and (in general) of good style
بديعة badī‘a pl. بدائع badā’i‘2 an
astonishing, amazing thing, a marvel, a
wonder; original creation
بديعي badī‘ī rhetorical
ابدع abda‘2 more amazing, more
exceptional; of even greater originality
ابداع ibdā‘ creation, fashioning, shaping;
a marvelous, unique achievement;
uniqueness, singularity, originality;
creative ability
O ابداعي ibdā‘ī romantic (lit.)
O ابداعية ibdā‘īya romanticism (lit.)
مبدع mubdi‘ producing, creating;
creative; creator; exceptional, unique,
outstanding (in an achievement, esp. of an
artist)
مبتدع mubtadi‘ innovator; creator; heretic
بيدق look up alphabetically
بدل badala u to replace ( ب ھ s.th. by),
exchange ( ب ھ s.th. for) II to change, alter
ھ ھ) s.th. to), convert ( ھ ھ s.th. into); to
substitute ( ھ for s.th., ب or من s.th.),
exchange, give in exchange ( ھ s.th., ب or
من for); to change ( ھ s.th.) III to exchange
ھ ه) with s.o. s.th.) IV to replace ( ب ھ s.th.
by), exchange ( ب ھ for s.th. s.th. else); to
compensate ( ھ ب ه s.o. for s.th. with s.th.
else), give s.o. ( ه) s. th. ( ھ ) in exchange
for ( ب) V to change; to be exchanged VI
to exchange ( ھ s.th., also words, views,
greetings) X to exchange, receive in
exchange, trade, barter ( ب ھ and ھ ب s.th.
for); to replace ( ھ ب and ھ ب s.th. by),
substitute ( ب ھ and ھ ب for s.th. s.th. else)
بدم badal pl. ابدال abdāl substitute,
alternate, replacement; equivalent.
compensation, setoff; reimbursement,
recompense, allowance; price. rate;
(gram.) appositional substantive standing
for another substantive│ بدل الجراية b. aljirāya
allowance for food; بدل السفرية b. assafarīya
travel allowance; بدل الاشتراك
subscription rate; بدل التمثيل expense
account, expense allowance
بدل badala (prep.) inetead of, in place
of, in lieu of
بدلا من badalan min in place of, instead
of, in lieu of
بدلة badla pl. badalāt, بدل bidal suit (of
clothes); costume│ بدلة الحمام b. al-
ḥammām bathing suit; بدلة رسمية (rasmīya)
uniform; بدلة تشريفاتية (tašrīfātīya) fulldreas
uniform
بدلية badalīya compensation, smart
money
بدال badāla (prep.) instead of, بدال ما
(conj.) instead of (being, doing, etc.)
بديل badīl pl. بدلاء budalā’ 2 substitute,
alternate ( عن or من for); stand-in, double
(theat.); (f. ة) serving as a replacement or
substitute│ مفرزة بديلة (mafraza) reserve
detachment (mil.)
بدال baddāl grocer; money-changer
بدالة baddāla culvert; pipeline; telephone
exchange, central
□ مبادل mabādil2 see بدل
تبديل tabdīl change, alteration 46
مبادلة mubādala pl. -āt exchange│ مبادلات
تجارية (tijārīya) commercial exchange,
trade relations
ابدال ibdāl exchange, interchange,
replacement ( ب by), substitution ( ب of);
change; phonetic change
تبدل tabaddul change, shift, turn;
transformation; transmutation, conversion
تبادل tabādul (mutual) exchange│ تبادل
السلام t. as-salam exchange of greetings,
تبادل الخواطر thought transference, telepathy
استبدال istibdāl exchange, replacement,
substitution
مبدل mubdil: مبدل الاسطوانات m. alusṯuwānāt
automatic record changer
متبادل mutabādil mutual, reciprocal
بدن baduna u and badana u to be fat, corpulent
بدن badan pl. ابدان abdān, ابدن abdun
body, trunk, torso
بدني badani bodily, corporal, physical,
somatic
بدانة badāna corpulence, obesity
بدين badīn pl. بدن budun stout, corpulent,
fat, obese
بدونة budūna corpulence, obesity
بادن bādin pl. بدن budn stout, corpulent,
fat, obese
بده badaha a to come, descend suddenly
ه) upon s.o.), befall unexpectedly ( ه s.o.);
to surprise ( ه s.o.) with s.th. ( ب) III to
appear suddenly, unexpectedly ( ب ه before
s.o. with s.th.) VIII to extemporize,
improvise, do offhand, on the spur of the
moment ( ھ s.th.)
بداھة badāha spontaneity, spontaneous
occurrence, impulse; simple, natural way,
naturalness, matter-of-factness; بداھة
badāhatan and بالبداھة all by itself,
spontaneously
بديھة badīha s.th. sudden or unexpected;
improvisation; impulse, inspiration,
spontaneous intuition; intuitive
understanding or insight, empathy,
instinctive grasp, perceptive faculty│ على
البداھية all by itself, spontaneously; offhand;
حاضر البديھة quick-witted, quick at
repartee; بديھة حاضرة presence of mind
بديھي badīhī and بدھي badahī intuitive,
self-evident, a priori (adj.)
بديھية badīhīya pl. -āt an axiom, a
fundamental or self-evident truth; truism,
commonplace, platitude
بدائه badii'ih' fundamental or selfevident
truths
بدو) بدا) badā u to appear, show, become
evident, clear, plain or manifest, come to
light; to be obvious; to seem good,
acceptable, proper ( ل to s.o.) III to shaw,
display, evince, manifest, reveal, declare
openly│ بادى بالعداوة (‘adāwa) to show open
hostility IV to disclose, reveal, manifest,
show, display, evince ( ھ s.th.), to
demonstrate, bring out, bring to light,
make visible ( ھ s.th.); to express, utter,
voice ( ھ s.th.)│ ابدى رأيه في (ra'yahū) to
express one's opinion about; ابدى رغبة
(ragbatan) to expreas a wish or desire V =
I, to live in the desert VI to pose as a
Bedouin
بدو badw desert; nomads, Bedouins
بدوي badawī Bedouin, nomadic; rural (as
distinguished from urban); a Bedouin
بدوية badawīya pl. -āt Bedouin woman,
Bedouin girl
بداة badaJl pl. بدوات badawāt whim,
caprice; ill-humor
بداوة badāwa and bidāwa desert life,
Bedouin life; Bedouinism, nomadism 47
بيداء baidā’2 desert, steppe, wilderness,
wild
ابداء ibdā’ expression, manifestation,
declaration
باد bādin apparent, evident, obvious,
plain, visible; inhabiting the desert; pl. بداة
budāh Bedouins
بادية bādiya desert, semidesert, steppe;
peasantry; (pl. بواد bawādin) nomads,
Bdouins
بداية bidāya = بداءة
بذ badda u (badd) to get the better of ( ه), beat,
surpass (s.o.)
بذ badd and bādd slovenly, untidy,
shabby, filthy, squalid
بذاذة badāda slovenliness, untidiness,
shabbiness, dirtiness, filth
بذأ bada’a a to revile, abuse ( على s.o.), rail (
على at s.o.); -- بذئ badi’a a, بذؤ badu’a u to
be obscene, bawdy
بذئ badī’ disgusting, loathsome,
nauseous, foul, dirty, obscene, bawdy,
ribald
بذاء badā’ and بذاءة badā’a obscenity,
ribaldry, foulness (of language); disgust,
loathing, aversion, contempt
بذخ badaḳa a to be haughty, proud
بذخ badaḳ luxury, pomp, splendor;
haughtiness, pride
باذخ bādiḳ pl. بواذخ bawādiḳ2 high, lofty;
proud, haughty
بذر badara u (badr) to sow, disseminate ( ھ
s.th., seed, also fig. = to spread) II to
waste, squander, dissipate ( ھ s.th.)
بذر badr pl. بذور budūr, بذار bidār seeds,
seed; seedling; pl. بذور pips, pits, stones
(of fruit)
بذرة badra (n. un.) a seed, a grain; pip,
pit, stone (of fruit); germ; (fig.) germ cell
(of a development, and the like)
بذار bidār seedtime
تبذير tabdīr waste, squandering,
dissipation
مبذر mubaddir squanderer, wastrel,
spendthrift
بيذق look up alphabetically
بذل badala i u (badl) to give or spend freely,
generously ( ھ s.th.); to sacrifice ( ھ s.th.);
to expend ( ھ s.th.); to offer, grant ( ھ
s.th.)│ بذل جھده (jahdahū) to take pains; بذل
مجھودا do.; بذل كل مساعدة (kulla
musā‘adatin) to grant every assistance; بذل
المساعى to make efforts; بذل الطاعة ل to obey
s.o., defer to s.o.; بذل كل غال (kulla gālin)
and بذل الغالى والرخيص في سبيل to spare no
effort, go to any length, give everything,
pay any price for or in order to; بذل ماء
وجھه (mā’a wajhihī) to sacrifice one's
honor; ( عن فلان or) بذل نفسه دون فلان to
sacrifice o.s. for s.o.; بذل وسعه (wus‘ahū) to
do one’s utmost, do one’s best V to fritter
away one’s fortune, be over-generous; to
prostitute o.s. (woman); to display
common, vulgar manners VIII to wear out
in common service, make trite, vulgar,
commonplace, to hackney ( ھ s.th.); to
abuse ( ھ s.th.); to express o.s. in a vulgar
manner, use vulgar language; ابتذل نفسه to
degrade o.s. demean o.s., sacrifice one's
dignity
بذل badl giving, spending; sacrifice,
surrender, abandonment; expenditure;
offering, granting
بذلة badla suit (of clothes)
مبذل mibdal pl. مباذل mabādil2 slipper; pl.
مباذل casual clothing worn around home│
فلان في مباذله so-and-so in his private life
ابتذال ibtidāl triteners, commonness,
commonplaceness; banality; debasement,
degradation
باذل bādil spender 48
متبذل mutabaddil vulgar, common
مبتذل mubtadal trite, hackneyed, banal,
common, vulgar; everyday, commonplace
(adj.)
بر 2 barra (1st pers. perf. barirtu, barartu) a I
(birr) to be reverent, dutiful, devoted; to
be kind ( ه or ب to s.o.); to be charitable,
beneficent, do good ( ب to s.o.); to obey ( ه
s.o., esp. God); to treat with reverence, to
honor ( ب or ه the parents); to be honest,
truthful; to be true, valid (sworn
statement); to keep ( ب a promise, an oath)
II to warrant, justify, vindicate; to acquit,
absolve, exonerate, exculpate, clear ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.)│ برر وجھه (wajhahū) to justify
o.s. by IV to carry out, fulfill ( ھ s.th., a
promise, an oath) V to justify o.s.; to be
justified
بر birr reverence, piety; righteousness,
probity; godliness, devoutness; kindness;
charitable gift
بر barr and بار bārr pl. ابرار abrār and
بررة barara reverent, dutiful ( ب toward),
devoted ( ب to); pious, godly, upright,
righteous.; kind
مبرة mabarra pl. -āt and مبار mabar2
good deed, act of charity, benefaction;
philanthropic organization; charitable
institution, home or hospital set up with
private funds
تبرير tabrīr justification, vindication
بار bārr reverent, faithful and devoted;
see also under بر barr above
مبرور mabrūr (accepted into the grace of
the Lord, i.e.) blessed (said of a deceased
person)
مبرر mubarrir pl. -āt justification;
excuse│ لا مبرر له (mubarrira) unjustifiable
بر 2 barr land (as opposed to sea), terra firma,
mainland; open country; برا barran out,
outside│ برا وبحرا barran wa-baḥran by
land and sea
برى barrī terrestrial, land (adj.); wild (of
plants and animals)│ سيارة برية مائية
(sayyāra, mā’īya) amphibious vehicle
ā برية barrīya pl. برارى barāarīy open
country, steppe, desert; see also برأ 1
برانى barrānī outside, outer, exterior,
external; foreign, alien
بر burr wheat
برأ 1 bara’a a ( برء bar’) to create ( ھ s.th., said
of God)
برء bar’ creation
برية barīya pl. -āt, برايا barāyā creation
(= that which is created); creature; see
also .بر 2
البارى ~J~I aI-bari' the Creator (God)
برئ 2 bari’a a ( براءة barā’a) to be or become
free, be cleared ( من from, esp. from guilt
blame, etc., الى toward s.o.); to recover ( من
from an illness) II to free, clear, acquit,
absolve, exculpate ( ه s.o., من from
suspicion, blame, guilt)│ برأ ساحة الرجل
(sāḥata r-rajul) he acquitted the man IV
to acquit, absolve, discharge, exculpate ( ه
s.o.); to cause to recover, cure, heal ( ه
s.o.)│ ابرأ ذمته (dimmatahū) to clear s.o. or
o.s. from guilt, exonerate s.o. or o.s. V to
clear o.s. ( من from suspicion, from a
charge), free o.s. ( من from responsibility,
etc.), rid o.s. ( من of); to declare o.s.
innocent, wash one’s hands ( من of); to be
acquitted X to restore to health, cure, heal
ه) s.o.); to free o.s. ( من from), rid o.s. ( من
of)
برء bur’ and burū’ convalescence,
recovery
برئ barī’ pl. ابرياء abriyā’ براء , 2 burā’,
birā’ free, exempt ( من from), devoid ( من
of); guiltless, innocent; guileless,
harmless; healthy, sound 49
براء barā’ free, exempt ( من from)│ ذمته
براء من (dimmatuM) he is innocent of ...
براءة barā’a being free; disavowal,
withdrawal; innocence, guiltlessness;
naiveté, guilelessness, artlessness; (pl. -āt)
license, diploma, patent│ براءة اختراع
patent on an invention; براءة التنفيذ
exequatur (a written authorization of a
consular officer, issued by the government
to which he is accredited); براءة الثقة b. attiqa
(Tun.) credentials (dipl.); على براءة
harmless; without guilt, innocent
تبرئة tabri’a freeing, exemption;
acquittal, absolution, discharge,
exoneration
مبارأة mubāra’a mubarat, divorce by
mutual consent of husband and wife,
either of them waiving all claims by way
of compensation (Isl. Law)
ابراء ibrā’ acquittal, absolution, release;
release of a debtor from his liabilities,
remission of debt (Isl. Law)
استبراء istibrā’: استبراء الحمل ist. al-ḥamal
the ceremony of selecting and purifying
the Host before Mass (Copt.-Chr.)
براجواى baraguwāy Paraguay
البرازيل al-bərāzīl Brazil
براسيرى (Fr. brasserie) brāseri beer parlor,
taproom
براغ Prague
برافان (Fr. paravent) baravān folding screen
براھما bərahmā Brahma
بربة birba and بربا birbā pl. برابى barābī
ancient Egyptian temple, temple ruins
doting back to ancient Egypt (eg.);
labyrinth, maze
بربخ barbaḳ pl. برابخ barābiḳ2 water pipe, drain,
culvert, sewer pipe
بربر barbara to babble noisily (e.g., a large
crowd), jabber, mutter, prattle
البربر al-barbar the Berbers
بربرى barbarī Berber (adj.); barbaric,
uncivilized; -- (pl. برابرة barābira) a
Berber; a barbarian
بربرية barbarīya barbar(ian)ism,
barbarity, savagery, cruelty
متبربر mutabarbir barbaric, uncivilized
بربيس look up alphabetically
بربيش barbīš (syr.) tube (of a narghile, of an
enema, etc.)
بربط barbata to splash, paddle, dabble (in
water)
بربونى (It. barbone) barbūnī, also بربون red
mullet (Mullus barbatus; zool.)
بربى see بربة
بربيس barbīs barbel (zool.)
برتغال burtugāl Portugal
برتغالى burtugālī Portuguese
برتقال burtuqāl, برتقان burtuqān orange
برتقالى burtuqālī, برتقانى burtuqānī
orange, orange-colored
برثن burtun, pl. براثن barātin claw, talon
برج 1 V to display, show, play up her charms
(woman); to adorn herself, make herself
pretty (woman)
برج 2 burj pl. بروج burūj, ابراج abrāj tower;
castle; sign of the zodiac│ برج الحمام b. al-
ḥamām pigeon house, dovecot; برج المياه b.
al-miyāh water tower
بارجة 2 bārija pl. بوارج bawārij warship,
battleship; barge
لعب البرجاس 1 la‘b al-birjās a kind of equestrian
contest, joust, tournament
البرجيس 2 al-birjīs Jupiter (astron.)
برجل barjal pl. براجل barāhil2 compass, (pair
of) dividers 50
برجمة burjuma pl. براجم barājim2 knuckle,
finger joint
برح bariḥa a ( براح barāḥ) to leave ( ھ or من a
place, الى for), depart ( ھ from, الى on one’s
way to); with neg.: to continue to be (=
ما برح في │ ( زال he is still in ... ; ما برح غنيا
(ganīyan) he is still rich; برح الخفاء (ḳafā’)
the matter hall come out, has become
generally known; غدا وبرح to come and go
II to beset, harass, trouble, molest ( ب s.o.)
III to leave ( ھ a place, الى for), depart ( ھ
from, الى on one's way to)
براح departure; cessation, stop; a wide,
empty tract of land, vast expanse, vastness;
براحا barāḥan openly and plainly, patently
تباريح tabārīh2 agonies, torments (e.g., of
longing, of passion)
مبارحة mubāraḥa departure
بارح bāriḥ (showing the left side. i.e.)
ill-boding, inauspicious, ominous (as
opposed to سانح) ؛ البارح al-bāriḥa yesterday
البارحة al-bāriḥata yesterday│ الليلة
البارحة (lailata) last night; اول البارحة
awwala l-b. the day before yesterday. two
days ago
مبرح mubarriḥ, violent, intense,
excruciating, agonizing (esp., of pains)
مبرح به mubarraḥ bihi stricken. afflicted,
tormented
برد 1 barada u to be or become cold; to
cool, cool off (also fig.); to feel cold; to
cool, chill ( ھ s.th.); to soothe. alleviate ( ھ
pain); -- baruda to be or become cold II to
make cold ( ھ s.th.); to refrigerate ( ھ s.th.);
to cool, chill ( ھ s.th., also fig.); to soothe,
alleviate ( ھ pain) V to refresh o.s., cool
o.s. off; to be soothed, be alleviated VIII to
become cold, cool off
برد bard coldness, chilliness, coolness;
cooling; alleviation; cold, catarrh
برد barad hail, بردة barada (n. un.)
hailstone
برود barūd collyrium
برود burūd coldness, coolness,
chilliness; emotional coldness, frigidity
برودة burūda coldness, coolness,
chilliness; emotional coldness, frigidity│
برودة الدم b. ad-dam cold-bloodedness
بردية bardīya ague, feverish chill; see
also below
برداء buradā’ 2 ague, feverish chill
برادة barrāda cold-storage plant;
refrigerator, icebox
تبريد tabrīd cooling, chilling; cold
storage, refrigeration; alleviation,
mitigation│ جھاد التبريد jahāz at-t. coldstorage
plant, refrigerator; غرفة التبريد
gurfat at-t. cold-storage room
بارد bārid cold; cool, chilly; easy; weak;
stupid, inane, silly, dull; dunce,
blockhead│ الحرب الباردة (ḥarb) the cold
war; غنيمة باردة an easy prey; عيش بارد (‘aiš)
an easy life; حجة باردة (ḥujja) a weak
argument; تبغ بارد (tibg) light, mild tobacco
مبرد mubarrid cooling, refreshing; pl.
-āt refreshments (beverages, etc.)
مبرد mubarrad cooled, chilled
برد 2 barada u to file ( ھ a piece of metal, etc.)
براد barrād fitter (of machinery)
برادة birāda fitter's trade or work
برادة burāda iron filings
مبرد mibrad pl. مبارد mabcirid2 file, rasp
برد 3 burd pl. ابراد abrād garment
بردة burda Mohammed's outer garment
برداية burdāya curtain, drape 51
برد 4 IV to send by mail, to mail ( ھ a letter)
بريد barīd post, mail│ البريد الجوى (jawwī)
air mail
بريدى barīdī postal; messenger, courier;
mailman
بارود 5 look up alphabetically
بردى 6 bardī, burdī papyrus (bot.)
بردية bardīya pl. -āt papyrus│ علم البرديات
‘ilm al-b. papyrology
برداق bardāq pl. براديق barādīq2 jug, pitcher
لعب البردج la‘b al-b. bridge (game)
بردخ bardaḳa to polish, burnish ( ھ s.th.)
□ بردعة = برذعة
بردقان = برتقان
بردقوش bardaqūš (= مردقوش ) marjoram
بردورة (Fr. bordure) badūra curbstone, curb
برذعة barda‘a pl. براذع barādi‘2 saddle, packsaddle
(for donkeys and camels)
براذعى barādi‘ī maker of donkey saddle,
saddler
برذون birdaun pl. براذين barādīn2 work horse
jade, nag
برز 1 baraza u to come out, show, appear, come
into view, emerge; to jut out, protrude,
stand out, be prominent (also fig.); to
surpass, excel ( على s.o.) II to cause to
come out, bring out, expose, show, set off,
accentuate ( ھ s.th.); to excel, surpass ( فى
على s.o. in), stand out ( فى for), distinguish
o.s. ( في by) III to meet in combat or duel ( ه
s.o.); to compete in a contest ( ه with s.o.)
IV to cause to come out, bring out,
expose, make manifest ( ھ s.th.); to
publish, bring out ( ھ a book, etc.); to
present, show ( ھ e.g., an identity card) V
to evacuate the bowels VI to vie, contend
بروز burūz prominence, projection,
protrusion
براز birāz excrement, feces; competition,
contest, match (in sports); duel
بريزة buraiza (birēza; eg.) ten-piaster
coin
ابرز abraz2 more marked, more
distinctive; more prominent
مبارزة mubāraza competition, contest,
match, esp. in sports; duel; fencing
ابراز ibrāz bringing out, displaying,
setting off, accentuation; production;
presentation
بارز bāriz protruding, projecting, salient;
raised, embossed, in relief; marked,
distinct, conspicuous; prominent
(personality)
مبرز mubarriz surpassing ( على s.o.),
superior ( على to s.o.); winner. victor (in
contest)
مبارز mubāriz competitor, contender;
combatant, fighter; fencer
بريز 2 (Fr. prise) brīz pl. -āt (plug) socket, wallplug,
outlet (syr.); بريزة barīza pl. برائز
barā’iz2 do. (eg.)
ابريز 2 look up alphabetically
برزان 2 barazān trumpet
برزخ barzaḳ pl. برازخ barāziḳ interval, gap,
break, partition, bar, obstruction; isthmus
برزوق burzūq sidewalk
برسام 1 birsām pleurisy
ابريسم 2 look up alphabetically
برسيم 3 birsīm clover, specif., berseem, Egyptian
clover (Trifolium alexandrinum bot.)
برش 1 burš pl. ابراش abrāš mat
ابرش abraš2 spotted, speckled 52
برش 1 look up alphabetically
برشت birišt: بيض برشت (baiḍ) soft-boiled eggs
برشلونة baršīlōna Barcelona (seaport in NE
Spain)
برشم baršama to stare, gaze ( الى at s.th.); to
rivet ( ھ s.th.)
برشمة baršama riveting
برشام buršām and برشان (n. un. ة) pl. -āt
wafer; Host (Chr.)
برشامة buršāma rivet
برشامجى buršāmjī riveter
برشمجية buršamjīya riveting
برص 1 bariṣa a (baraṣ) to be a leper
برص burṣ wall gecko (Tarentola
mauritanica, zool.)
برص baraṣ leprosy
ابراص abraṣ2 leprous; leper│ سام ابرص
sāmm a. wall gecko
برصة 2 burṣa stock exchange
برض baraḍa u ( بروض burūḍ) to germinate,
sprout (plant)
برطوز barṯūz: برطوز البحرية b. a1-baḥrīya
forecastle, crew quarters (on a merchant
vessel)
برطع barṯa‘a ( برطعة barṯa‘a) to gallop
برطل barṯala ( برطلة barṯala) to bribe ( ه s.o.) II
tabarṯala to take bribes, be venal
برطيل birṯīl pl. براطيل barāṯīl2 bribe
برطم 1 barṯama to rave, talk irrationally
برطوم burṯūm, barṯūm trunk of an
elephant
برطمان 2 barṯamān pl. -āt (syr. eg.) tall earthen
or glass vessel (for preserves, oil. etc.)
برع bara‘a a to surpass excel ( ه s.o.); (also
baru‘a u) to distinguish o.s., be skilful,
proficient V to contribute. Give, donate ( ب
s.th.); to undertake (voluntarily, ب s.th.).
volunteer ( ب or), be prepared, willing ( ب
to do s.th.); to be ready, be on hand ( ب
with)
براعة barā‘a skill, proficiency;
efficiency, capability, capacity
بروعة burū‘a superior skill, outstanding
proficiency
تبرع tabarru‘ pl. -āt gift, donation;
contribution
بارع bāri‘ skilled, skillful, proficient,
capable. efficient; brilliant, outstanding
(work of art)
برعم bar‘ama to bud, burgeon, sprout
برعم bur‘um pl. براعم barā‘im2 and برعوم
bur‘ūm pl. براعيم bard'im' bud, burgeon;
blossom, flower
برغوث burgūt pl. براغيث barāgīt2 f1ea; pl.
براغيث (syr.) small silver coins│ برغوث
البحر b. a1-baḥr shrimp (zool.)
برغش bargaš (coll.; n. un. ة) gnat(s), midge(s)
برغل burgul cooked, parched and crushed
wheat, served together with other food
(eg., syr.)
برغى (Turk. بورغى burğų) burgī pl. براغى
barāgī screw
برفير birfīr pl. برافير barāfīr2 purple
بروفة look up alphabetically
برق 1 baraqa u to shine, glitter, sparkle, flash│
برقت السماء (samā’u) there was lightning IV
= I; to emit bolts of lightning (cloud); to
flash up, light up; to brighten (face); to
cable, wire, telegraph ( الى to)
برق barq pl. بروق burūq lightning; flash
of lightning; telegraph│ برق خلب (ḳullab)
lightning without a downpour, used fig.
e.g.. of s.o. given to making promises
without ever living up to them 53
برقى barqī telegraphic, telegraph- (in
compounds)
برقية barqīya pl. -āt telegram, wire, cable
بريق barīq pl. برائق barā’iq2 glitter,
shine, gloss, luster│ ذو بريق معدني (ma‘dinī)
lustered, coated with metallic luster
براق burāq Alborak, name of the
creature on which Mohammed made his
ascension to the seven heavens ( (معراج
براق barrāq shining, lustrous, sparkling,
flashing, glittering, twinkling
مبرق mabraq glitter, flash│ فى مبرق الصبح
fī m. iṣ-ṣbḥ with the first rays of the
morning sun
بارق bāriq: بارق b. al-amal glimpse of
hope
بارقة bāriqa pl. بوارق bawāriq2 gleam,
twinkle
مبرق mubriq: مبرق كاتب teletype
البرقة 2 al-barqa Cyrenaica (region of E Libya)
ابريق 3 look up alphabetically
استبرق 4 look up alphabetically
برقش barqaša ( برقش barqš) to variegate, paint
or daub with many colors ( ھ s.th.); to
embellish ( ھ s.th.; قوله one’s speech) II
tabargaša reflex. and pass. of I
برقش birqiš finch
برقش barqaša colorful medley, variety,
variegation
مبرقش mubarqaš colorful, variegated,
many-colored
برقع barqa‘a to veil, drape ( ھ , s.o., s.th.) II
tabarqa‘a to put on a veil, veil o.s.
برقع burqu‘ pl. براقع barāqi‘2 veil (worn
by women; long, leaving the eyes
exposed)
برقوق barqūq (coll.; n. un. ة) plum
برك 1 baraka u to kneel down II and IV to make
ھ) the camel) kneel down II to invoke a
blessing ( على or فى on s.th., ل on s.th.) III
to bless ( فى or ه s.th., also ل or على ), invoke
a blessing on; to give one's blessing ( ھ to
s.th.), sanction ( ھ s.th.) V to be blessed ( ب
by); to enjoy ( ب s.th.), find pleasure,
delight ( ب in); to ask s.o.’s ( ب) blessing VI
to be blessed, be praised; ... تبارك tabāraka
... God bless …! X to be blessed
بركة birka pl. برك birak pond, small lake;
puddle, pool│ بركة السباحة b. as-sibāḥa
swimming pool
بركة baraka pl. -āt blessing,
benediction│ قلة البركة qillat al-b.
misfortune, bad luck
ابرك abrak2 more blessed
تبريك tabrīk pl. -āt good wish; blessing,
benediction
مبارك mubārak blessed, fortunate, lucky
براريك 2 barārīk2 (mor.) barracks
بركار birkār compass, (pair of) divideers
بركان burkān pl. براكين barākīn2 volcano
بركانى burkānī volcanic
برلمان barlamān parliament
برلمانى barlamānī parliamentary
برلمانية barlamānīya parliamentarianism
برلنتى (It. brillante) brillantī brilliant, diamond
برلين barlīn Berlin
برم 1 barima a (baram) to be or become weary,
tired ( ب of), be fed up, be bored ( ب with),
find annoying, wearisome ( ب s.th.) V to
feel annoyed ( ب by), be displeased ( ب
with); to be fed up ( ب with), be sick and
tired ( بof, also من ); to be impatient,
discontented, dissatisfied; to grieve, be
pained 54
برم barim weary, tired ( ب of), disgusted
ب) at, with); dissatisfied, discontented
تبرم tabarrum weariness, boredom,
disgust; discontent, dissatisfaction;
uneasiness, discomfort, annoyance
متبرم mutabarrim cross, peevish, vexed,
annoyed
برم 2 barama u (barm) to twist, twine ( ھ a
rope); to shape ( ھ s.th.) round and long; to
roll up ( ھ the sleeves); to settle, establish,
confirm ( ھ s.th.) IV to twist, twine ( ھ a
rope); to settle, establish, confirm ( ھ s.th.);
to conclude ( ھ a pact); to confirm ( ھ a
judicial judgment); to ratify ( ھ a treaty, a
bill) VII to be settled, be established, be
confirmed; to be twisted, be twined
برامة barrāma pl. -āt drilling machine
بريم barīm rope; string, cord, twine
بريمة barrīma pl. –āt drill, borer, gimlet,
auger, bit; ○ corkscrew برم
○ بريمية barrīmīya spirochete
ابرام ibrām settlement, establishment;
confirmation; conclusion (of a pact, etc.);
ratification│ محكمة النقض والابرام maḥkamat
an-naqḍ wa-l-i. Court of Cassation (Eg.)
مبروم mabrūm:○ سلك مبروم (silk) wire
rope, cable
مبرم mubram firm, strong; irrevocable,
definitely established; confirmed, ratified│
قضاء مبرم (qaḍā’) inescapable fate; بصورة
مبرمة irrevocably
برمة 3 burma pl. برم buram, برام birām
earthenware pot
برما burmā Burma
برمائى barmā’ī amphibious│ دبابة برمائية
(dabbāba) amphibious tank (mil.)
○ برمائية barmā’īya amphibian
برماننت (Engl.) barmanant permanent wave│
برماننت على البارد cold wave (in hair)
برمق barmaq pl. برامق barāmiq2 baluster; spike
(of a wheel)
برمھات baramhāt the seventh month of the
Coptic calendar
برمنكھام Birmingham
برمودة barmūda the eighth month of the Coptic
calendar
برميل barmīl pl. براميل barāmīl2 barrel; keg,
cask; tun
برنية barnīya pl. برانى barānīy clay vessel
برنامج barnāmaj pl. برامج barāmij2 program,
plan, schedule; roster, list, index;
curriculum
برنجك burunjuk gauze, crepe
برنس 1 burnus pl. برانس barānis2 (also برنوس
barnūs, burnūs pl. برانيس baranīs2)
burnoose, hooded cloak; casula, chasuble
(of Coptic priests)│ برنس الحمام b. al-
ḥammām bathrobe
برانسى barānisī pl. -īya maker of
burnooses
جبال البرانس 2 jibāl al-barānis the Pyrenees
برنس brins prince
برنسيسة brinsēsa princess
برنط II tabarnaṯa to wear a hat
برنطية burnaiṯa pl. -āt, برانيط barānīt2
(European) hat (men’s and women’s);
lamp shade
برھة burha pl. burahāt, بره burah a while, a
time; short time; instant, moment; برھة
burllatan a little while│ برھتين (after two
moments =) in a short time
□ برھم barham (syr.) = مرھم marham
برھمن barahman pl. براھمة barāhima Brahman
55
برھمية barahmīya Brahmanism
برھن barhana to prove, demonstrate ( على or عن
s.th.)
برھن burhān pl. براھين barāhīn2 proof
برھنة barhana proving, demonstration
بروة bawa waste, scrap
بروتستانتي brotostantī Protestant; (pl. -ūn) a
Protestant
بروتستانتية brotostantīya Protestantism
بروتستو (It. protesto) brotostō protest (of a bill
of exchange)
بورتوكول brotokōl protocol
بروتون proton
بوجرام brogrām program
بروجى burūjī pl. -īya trumpeter, bugler
بروز barwaza to frame
برواز barwāz, birwāz pl. براويز barāwīz2 frame
بروسيا (It. Prussia) burūsiyā Prussia
بروسي burūsī Prussian
بروفة and بروڤة (It. prova) brōva, brōfa pl.
-āt test. experiment; proof sheet;
rehearsal
برونز (Fr.) bronz bronze
برونزى bronzi bronze, bronzy│ العصر
البرونزى (‘aṣr) the Bronze Age
برى 1 barā i (bary) to trim, shape ( ھ s.th.), nib (
ھ a pen), sharpen ( ھ a pencil); to scratch
off, scrape off ( ھ s.th.); to exhaust, tire
out, wear out, emaciate, enervate ( ه s.o.),
sap the strength of ( ه) III to vie, compete ( ه
with s.o.). try to outstrip ( ه s.o.) VI to vie,
compete, contend, be rivals; to meet in a
contest, try each other’s strength (esp. in
games and sports) VII to be trimmed, be
nibbed, be sharpened; to defy, oppose ( ل
s.o.); to undertake, take in hand ( ل s.th.),
set out to do s.th. ( ل), enter, embark ( ل
upon); to break forth ( من from); to get
going; to break out, lot fly, explode (with
words, esp. in anger or excitement)
برى baran dust, earth
براية barrāya, براية الافلام b. al-aqlām
pencil sharpener
مبراة mibrāh pocketknife
مباراة mubārāh pl. مباريات mubārayāt
contest tournament, match (in games and
sports); competition, rivalry
بار: اعط القوس باريھا a‘ṯi l-qausa bāriyahā
give the bow to him who knows how to
shape it, i.e. always ask an expert
متبار mutabārin participant in a contest,
contestant, contender; competitor, rival
برية 2 see برأ 1 and بر 2
بريطانيا barīṯāniyā, biriṯāniyā Britain, بريطانيا
الكبرى (uẓmā) Great Britain
بريطاني barīṯānī, biriṯānī British;
Britannic
بز 1 bazza u (bazz) to take away, steal, wrest,
snatch ( ھ ه from s.o. s.th.). rob, strip ( ھ ه
s.o. of s.th.); to defeat, beat, outstrip, excel
ه) s.o.), triumph, be victorious ( ه over)
VIII to take away, steal, pilfer ( ھ s.th.); to
take away, snatch ( ھ money, من from
s.o.); to rob, fleece ( ه s.o.)│ ابتز اموال الناس
to lift money out of people’s pockets,
relieve people of their money
ابتزاز ibtizāz theft, robbery; fleecing,
robbing (of s.o.)
بز 2 bazza u to bud, burgeon
بز buzz, bizz pl. بزاز bizāz, ابزاز abzāz
nipple, mammilla (of the female breast);
teat, female breast 56
بز 3 bazz pl. بزوز buzūz linen; cloth, dry goods
بزة bizza clothing, clothes, attire;
uniform│ بزة رسمية (rasmīya) uniform
بزاز bazzāz draper, cloth merchant
بزازة bizāza cloth trade
بزبوز bazbūz pl. بزابيز bazābīz2 nozzle, spout
بزر bazara i (bazr) to sow
بزر bizr pl. بزور buzūr seed(s); pl. ابزار
abzār and ابازير abāzīr2 spice
بزرة bizra (n. un.) seed; kernel, pip, pit,
stone (of fruit); germ
بزار bazzār seedsman
بزيرة buzaira pl. -āt spore (bot.)
بزغ bazaga u to break forth, come out; to
dawn (day); to rise (sun)
بزوغ buzūg appearance, emergence; rise
(of the sun)
بزق bazaqa u (bazq) to spit
بزاق buzāq spit, spittle, saliva
بزاقة bazzāqa snail; cobra
مبزقة mibzaqa pl. مبازق mabāziq2
spittoon, cuspidor
بزل 1 bazala u (bazl) to split ( ھ s.th.); to pierce
ھ) s.th.), make a hole ( ھ in); to tap,broach
ھ) s.th.; a cask); to puncture, tap ( ه s.o.;
med.); to clear, filter ( ھ a liquid)
بزل bazl puncture, tapping, paracentesis
(med.)
بزال buzāl bung (of a cask)
مبزل mibzal pl. مبازل mabazil 2 spile,
spigot, tap; cock, faucet
بزلة 2 (It. piselli) bizilla and بزلا green peas
ابزيم ibzīm pl. ابازم abāzim2 buckle, clasp
بزموت bizmūt bismuth
بزنطى bizanṯī Byzantine
باز bāzin pl. بزاة buzāh, بواز bawāzin, بيزان
bīzān falcon
بس bass and بسة bassa pl. بساس bassās cat
بسأ basa’a a ( بسء bas’) to treat amicably ( ب
s.o.); to be intimate, be on familiar terms (
ب with)
بسارابيا besārābiyā Bessarabia
بسباس basbās, بسباسة basbāsa (eg.) mace (bot.);
(magr.) fennel
بسبوسة basbāsa (eg.) pastry made of
flour, melted butter, sugar and oil
بستيلية (Fr.) bastīliya pastilles, lozenges
بستان 1 bustān pl. بساتين basātīn2 garden
بستانى bustānī gardener; garden (adj.);
horticultural
بستنة bastana gardening, horticulture
بستون 2 (Fr. piston) bistōn, بستن (Engl.) bistan
pl. بساتن basātin2 piston
بستون 3 (It. bastone) bastūnī spades (suit of
playing cards)
بسخة basḳa Easter; Passion Week (Chr.)
بسر basara u ( بسور busūr) to scowl, frown; --
basara u (basr) and VIII to begin too
early ( ھ with), take premature action, be
rash ( ھ in s.th.)
بسر busr (n. un. ة) pl. بسار bisār unripe
dates
باسور bāsūr pl. بواسير bawāsīr2
hemorrhoids
بسط basaṯ u (basṯ) to spread, spread out ( ھ
s.th.); to level, flatten ( ھ s.th.); to enlarge,
expand ( ھ s.th.); to stretch out, extend ( ھ
s.th.); to unfold, unroll ( ھ s.th.); to grant,
offer, present ( ھ s.th.); to submit, state, set
forth, expound, explain ( ھ s.th., ل or على
to s.o.); to flog ( ه s.o.; Nejd); to please
delight ( ه s.o.)│ بسط ذراعيه (dirā‘aihi) to
spread one’s arms; بسط يد المساعدة ل 57
(yada l-musā‘ada) to extend helping hand
to s.o.; بسط المائدة to lay the table; -- basuṯa
u ( بساطة basāta) to be simple,
openhearted, frank, candid II to spread,
spread out, extend, expand ( ھ s.th.); to
level, flatten ( ھ s.th.); to simplify, make
simple ( ھ s.th.) III to set forth, state,
expound, explain; to be sincere ( ب ه with
s.th. about or in s.th.), confess frankly ( ب ه
to s.o. s.th.) V to be spread, be unrolled,
be spread out, be extended; to speak at
great length ( فى about), enlarge ( فى on),
treat exhaustively, expound in detail ( فى a
theme); to be friendly, communicative,
sociable, behave unceremoniously, be
completely at ease│ تبسط في الحديث to talk
freely, without formality VII to spread,
extend, expand (intr.); to be glad, be
delighted, be or become happy
بسط basṯ, extension, spreading,
unrolling, unfolding; presentation,
statement, explanation, exposition;
cheering, delighting, delectation;
amusement; (Eg.) numerator (of a
fraction)│ بسط اليد b. al-yad avarice, greed,
cupidity
بسطة basṯa extension, extent, expanse;
size, magnitude; skill, capability, abilities;
excess, abundance; (pl. -āt) statement,
exposition, presentation; -- (pl. بساط bisāṯ)
landing (of staircase); estrade, dais,
platform (eg.)
بساط bisāṯ pl. -āt, ابسطة absiṯa, بسط busuṯ
carpet, rug│ بساط الرحمة b. ar-raḥma
winding sheet, shroud; مسألة (وضع or) طرح
على بساط البحث (mas‘alata, baḥtan) to raise
a question, bring a question on the carpet,
also على بساط المناقشة (b. il-munāqaša) for
discussion; طوى البساط بما فيه to bring the
matter to an end, settle it once and for all
بسيط basīṯ pl. بسطاء busaṯā’2 simple;
plain, uncomplicated; slight, little, modest,
inconsiderable, trivial, trifling; البسيط name
of a poetical meter; pl. بسطاء simple souls),
ingenuous people│ بسيط اليدين b. al-yadain
(pl. بسط busuṯ) generous, openhanded
البسيطة al-basīṯa the earth, the world
بسائط basā’iṯ2 elements; simple remedies,
medicinal plants; basic facts
بساطة basāṯa simplicity, plainness
O ابسوطة ubsūṯa pl. اباسيط abāsīṯ2 rim,
felly (of a wheel)
ابسط absaṯ2 simpler; wider, more
extensive
تبسيط tabsīṯ simplification
انبساط inbisāṯ (n. vic. ة) extensity,
extensiveness, extension; expansion,
expanse; joy. delight, happiness, gaiety,
cheerfulness
عضلة باسطة ‘aḍla bāsiṯa extensor (anat.)
مبسوط mabsūṯ extended, outstretched;
spread out; extensive, large, sizeable;
detailed, elaborate (book); cheerful, happy,
gay; feeling well, in good health; (tun.)
well-to-do
منبسط munbasiṯ extending, spreading;
gay, happy, cheerful; level surface
بسطرمة (Turk.) basṯurma a kind of jerked,
salted meat (eg.)
البوسفور al-busfūr the Bosporus
بسق basaqa a ( بسوق busūq) to be high, tall,
lofty, towering; to excel, surpass ( ه or على
s.o.)
باسق bāiq high, tall, lofty, towering
منبسق munbasiq high, tall, lofty,
towering
بسكليت (Fr. bicyclette) biskilēt, baskilēt bicycle
بسكوت (It. biscotto) baskūt biscuit
بسكويت baskawīt biscuit
بسل 2 basula u ( بسالة basāla) to be brave,
fearless, intrepid V to scowl, glower X to
be reckless, defy death 58
بسالة basāla courage, intrepidity
استبسال istibsāl death defiance
بسالة bāsil pl. بسلاء busalā’ بواسل , 2
bawāsil2 brave, fearless, intrepid
مسبسل mustabsil death-defying, heroic
بسلة 2 bisilla peace
بسم basam i (basm), V and VIII to smile
بسم basma pl. basamāt smile
بسام bassām smiling
مبسم mabsim, pl. مباسم mabāsim2 mouth;
mouthpiece, holder (for cigars, cigarettes,
etc.)
ابتسام ibtisām and (n. vic.) ابتسامة pl. -āt
smile
بسمل basmala to utter the invocation بسم لله
الرحمن الرحيم “In the name of God, the
Benificent, the Merciful”
بسمل basmala utterance of the above
invocation; the invocation itself
بسينة busaina kitty
بسيكولوجى psikolōjī psychological(aI)
بش bašša a (bašš, بشاشة bašāša) to display a
friendly, cheerful, happy mien; to smile;
to be friendly ( ل to s.o.). give s.o. ( ل) a
smile
بشوش bašūš, baššāš smiling, friendly,
cheerful
بشاشة bašāša smile; happy mien
باش bāšš smiling, happy; friendly, kind
بشت bušt (Nejd, Baḥr., Ir.) a kind of cloak, =
عباءة ‘abā’a
بشتة bišta (eg.) woolen cloak worn by
Egyptian peasants
بشر 1 bašar i, bašira a to rejoice, be delighted,
be happy ( ب at s.th.) II to announce (as
good news; ب ه to s.o. s.th.); to bring news
ب ه) to s.o. of s.th.); to spread, propagate,
preach ( ب s.th.; a religion, a doctrine)│
بشر نفسه ب (nafsahū) to indulge in the
happy hope that … IV to rejoice (at good
news) X to rejoice, be delighted, be happy
ب) at s.th., esp. at good news), welcome, (
ب s.th.); to take as good omen ( ب s.th.)│
استبشر به خيرا (ḳairan) to regard s.th. as
auspicious
بشر bišr joy
بشر bušr glad tidings
بشرى bušrā glad tidings, good news
بشارة bišāra pl. -āt, بشائر bašā’ir2 good
news, glad tidings; annunciation,
prophecy; gospel; بشائر good omens,
propitious signs│ عيد البشارة ‘īd al-b. the
Annunciation, the Day of Our Lady (Chr.)
بشير bašīr pl. بشراء bušarā’2 bring.r of
glad tidings, messenger, herald, harbinger,
forerunner, precursor; evangelist (Chr.)
تبشير tabšīr announcement (of glad
tidings); preaching of the Gospel;
evangelization, missionary activity
تبشيري tabšīrī missionary
تباشير tabāšīr2 foretokens, prognostics,
omens, first signs or indications, heralds
(fig.); beginnings, dawn│ تباشير الفجر t. alfajr
the first shimmer of aurora, the first
glimpse of dawn
مبشر mubaššir pl. -āt announcer,
messenger (of glad tidings); evangelist
(Chr.); preacher; missionary (Chr.)
مستبشر mustabšir happy, cheerful
بشر 2 bašara u to peel ( ھ s.th.); to scrape off,
shave off, scratch off ( ھ s.th.); to grate,
shred ( ھ s.th.) III to touch ( ھ s.th.), be in
direct contact ( ھ with s.th.); to have
sexual intercourse ( ه with s.o.); to attend,
apply o.s. ( ب or ب to s.th.), take up, take
in hand, pursue, practice, carry out ( ھ
s.th., job, a task, etc.) 59
بشر bašar man, human being; men,
mankind
بشرى bašarī human; human being;
epidermal, skin (adj.)│ طبيب بشرى
dermatologist
بشرة bašara outer skin, epidermis,
cuticle; skin; complexion
بشرية bašarīya, mankind, human race
مبشرة mibšara pl. مباشر mabāšir2 scraper,
grater
مباشرة mubāšara pursuit, practice; direct,
physical cause (Isl. Law); mubāšaratan
immediately, directly
مبشور mabšūr: جبنة مبشورة (jubna)
shredded cheese
مباشر mubāšir pl. -ūn direct, immediate;
practitioner, pursuer, operator; director; O
manager (Eg.); court usher (Syr.); (mil.)
approx.: staff sergeant (Eg. 1939)│ غير
مباشر (iṣābāt) directs
بشروش bašrūš flamingo
بشع baši‘a a ( بشاعة bašā‘a) to be ugly,
loathsome II to make ugly, disfigure,
distort ( ھ s.th.); to disparage, run down ( ھ
s.th.) X to regard as ugly, find ugly or
repugnant ( ھ s.th.)
بشع baši‘ ugly; offensive, disgusting,
distasteful, repugnant; unpleasant
بشاعة bašā‘a ugly; offensive, disgusting,
distasteful, repugnant; unpleasant
بشاعة bašā‘a ugliness
ابشع abša2 uglier; more repulsive
باشق 1 look up alphabetically
بشقه 2 (eg.; Turk. baška; invar.) different
بشك VIII to lie, prevaricate
بشاك baššāk liar
ابتشاك ibtišāk lie, deceit, trickery
بشكور 1 baškūr pl. بشاكير bašākīr2 poker, fire
iron
بشكير 2 balkir pl. بشاكير bašākīr2 towel
بشلة (It.) bišilla pl. -āt bacillus
بشم bašima a (bašam) to feel nauseated, be
disgusted ( من by s.th.), be fed up ( من with)
IV to nauseate, sicken, disgust ( ه s.o.)
بشم bašam surfeit, satiety, loathing, disgust
بشمار bašmār (tun.) lacework, trimmings
بشامرى bašāmirī (tun.) laceworker, lacemaker
بشمق bašmaq slipper (worn by fuqahā’ and
women)
بشنة bašna (magr.) sorghum, millet
بشنس bašan the ninth month of the Coptic
calendar
بشنوقة bašnūqa pl. بشانيق bašānīq2 kerchief tied
under the chin (pal.)
بشنين bašnīn lotus
بص baṣṣa i (baṣṣ, بصيص basī􀀀ṣ) to glow,
sparkle, glitter, shine; -- (eg.) u to look
بصة baṣṣ embers
بصيص baṣīṣ glow, shine; glimpse, ray
(e.g., of hope); lustrous, shining
بصائص baṣā’iṣ lustrous, shining; (eg.)
spy, detective
بصبص baṣbaṣa ( بصبصة baṣbaṣa) to wag ( بذنبه
bi-danabihi its tail); (eg.) to ogle, make
sheep’s eyes, cast amorous glances
بصخة baṣḳa see بسخة
بصر 2 baṣura a (baṣar) to look, see; to realize,
understand, comprehend, grasp ( ب s.th.) II
to make ( ه s.o.) understand or realize ( ھ
or ب s.th.), make ( ه s.o.) aware ( ھ or ب of
s.th.); to enlighten ھ ه) 60 or ب ه s.o. on or
as to s.th.); to tell, inform ( ھ ه or ب ه s.o.
about) IV to see ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to make
out, behold, perceive, discern, notice ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.), set eyes on ( ھ ه ), catch sight of
ھ. ه) ); to recognize ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
reflect ( ب on). ponder ( ب s.th.) V to look (
ھ at), regard ( ھ s.th.); to reflect ( فى on
s.th.), ponder ( فى s.th.) X to have the
faculty of visual perception, be able to
see; to be endowed with reason, be
rational, reasonable, intelligent; to reflect (
فى on s.th.), ponder ( فى s.th.)
بصر baṣar pl. ابصار abṣār vision, eye-sight;
glance, look; insight; sight, discernment,
perception│ قصير البصر shortsighted,
myopic; لمح البصر lamḥ al-b.glance of the
eye; كلمح البصر، في لمح البصر، دون لمح البصر
(dūna), في اقل لمح البصر (aqalIa) in the
twinkling of an eye, in a moment, in a
flash. instantly; على مدى البصر (madā)
within sight; له بصر ب فى is
knowledgeable, in, h. is familiar with
بصرى baṣarī optic(al), visual, ocular
بصريات baṣarīyāt optics
بصارة basāra perception, discernment;
perspicacity, acuteness of the mind, sharpwittedness
بصير baṣīr pl. بصراء buṣarā’2 endowed
with eyesight; acutely aware ( ب of),
having insight ( ب into); possessing
knowledge or understanding ( ب of),
discerning, discriminating, versed,
knowledgeable, proficient ( ب in),
acquainted ( ب with s.th.);
بصيرة baṣīra pl. بصائر (keen) insight,
penetration, discernment, understanding,
(power of) mental perception, mental
vision│ عن بصيرة deliberately, knowingly;
كان على بصيرة من to have insight into s.th.,
be informed about s.th.; نافذ البصيرة
discerning, clear-sighted, perspicacious,
sharp-witted; نفاذ البصيرة nafād al.-b. sharp
discernment, perspicacity
ابصر abṣar2 more discerning
تبصرة tabṣira enlightenment; instruction,
information
تبصر tabaṣṣur reflection, consideration;
penetration, clear-sightedness,
perspicacity
باصرة bāṣira pl. بواصر bawāṣir2 eye
البصرة 2 al-baṣra Basra (port in S Iraq)
بصق baṣaqa u to spit ( على on s.o.)
بصقة baṣqa (n. vic.) expectoration;
(expectorated) spit, spittle, saliva
بصاق buṣaq spit, spittle, saliva
مبصقة mibṣaqa spittoon, cuspidor
بصل baṣal (coll.; n. un. ة) onion(s); bulb(s)│
بصل الفار b. al-fa’r sea onion (Scilla verna)
بصلى baṣālī bulbous
بصيلة buṣaila pl. -āt, بصيلة الشعر b. ašša‘
r bulb of the hair (anat.)
بصم baṣama u (baṣm) to print, imprint ( ھ
s.th.); to stamp ( ھ s.th.); to make, or leave,
an imprint ( ھ on)
بصمة baṣma pl. baṣamāt imprint,
impression│ بصمة الختم b. al-ḳatm stamp
imprint, stamp; بصمة الاصابع fingerprint
بصوة baṣwa embers
بض baḍḍ tender-skinned
بضع baḍa‘a a (baḍ‘) to cut, slash or slit open (
ھ s.th.); to cut up, carve up, dissect,
anatomize ( s.th.); to amputate (surg.) II to
cut up, carve up, dissect, anatomize III to
sleep ( ھا with a woman) IV to invest
capital ( ھ ) profitably in a commercial
enterprise V pass. of n; to trade; to shop,
make purchase X to trade 61
بضع baḍ‘ amputation
بضع 􀀀biḍ‘ (commonly, with genit. pl. of
f. nouns, بضعة with genit. pl. of m. nouns;
in classical Arabic بضع with both genders)
some, a few, several
بضعة biḍ‘a pl. بضائع baḍā’i‘ piece (of
meat); meat; see also biḍ‘ above
بضع buḍ‘ vulva
بضاعة biḍā‘a pl. بضائع baḍā’i2 goods,
merchandise, wares, commodities; that
which s.o. has to offer, which he has to
&how, with which he is endowed (also
attributes, qualities)│ قطار البضاعة freight
train; اخرج ما عنده من بضاعة he said what he
had intended to say
مبضع mibḍa‘ pl. مباضع mabāḍi‘2
dissecting knife, scalpel
ابضاع ibḍā‘ mandate for the
management of affairs (lsl. Law);
partnership in a limited company, capital
investment
مبضع mubḍi‘ pl. -ūn limited partner
(com.)
مستبضع mustabḍi‘ manager, managing
agent (Isl. Law)
بط baṯṯ (n. un. ة) duck; بطة baṯṯa leather flask│
بطة الساق calf (of the leg)
بطؤ baṯu’a u ( بطء buṯ’, بطاء biṯā’, بطاءة baṯa’a)
to he slow; to he slowgoing, slow-footed,
slow-paced; to tarry, linger, wait, hesitate
II to retard, slow down, delay, hold up ( ب
على s.o. in s.th.) IV to slow down,
decelerate, retard, delay, hold up ( ھ s.th.);
to he slow, go or drive slowly, slow down;
to be late ( عن for s.th., in meeting s.o.),
keep s.o. ( عن ) waiting V to be slow, tardy
فى) in) VI to he slow, leisurely, unhurried;
to go, drive, act or proceed slowly,
leisurely; to he slowgoing, slow-footed,
slow-paced; to slow down X to find slow (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to have to wait a long time
ه) for s.o.), be kept waiting ( ه by s.o.)
بطء buṯ’ slowness, tardiness│ ببطء
slowly, leisurely, unhurriedly
بطئ baṯI’ pl. بطاء biṯā’ slow, unhurried;
slowgoing, slow-footed, slow-paced;
tardy, late; sluggish, lazy; slow, gradual,
imperceptible│O بطىء التردد b. attaraddud
of low frequency (el.)
ابطأ abṯa’2 slower│ ابطأ من غراب نوح
(gurābi nūḥ) tardier than Noah’s raven,
i.e., slower than a ten years’ itch
(proverbially of s.o. who ia very tardy)
ابطاء ibṯā’ slowing down, retardation,
deceleration, reduction of speed; tarrying,
delay; slowness│ دون ابطاء without delay
تباطؤ tabātu’ slowness; slowing down,
retardation
بطارية baṯṯārīya pl. -āt battery (el. and mil.)
بطاطا baṯāṯā, بطاطا baṯāṯā sweet potato, yam
بطاطس baṯāṯis potatoes
بطاقة see بطق
بطبط baṯbaṯa ( بطبطة baṯbaṯa) to quack (duck)
بطح baṯaḥa a (baṯḥ) to prostrate, lay low, fell,
throw to the ground, throw down ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.) V and VII to he prostrated, be
laid low; to lie prostrate, sprawl, stretch
out; to extend, stretch; to lie
ابطح abṯaḥ2 flat, level; (pl. اباطح abāṯiḥ2)
basin-shaped valley, wide bed of a wadi
بطحاء baṯḥā’ pl. بطاح biṯāḥ, بطحاوات
baṯḥawāt basin-shaped valley; plain, level
land, flatland, open country; (tun.) public
square
بطيحة baṯīḥa pl. بطائح baṯā’iḥ wide bed of
a stream or wadi; a stagnant, shallow and
broad body of water
منبطح munbaṯiḥ prostrate; flat, level;
level land, plain 62
بطيخ biṯṯīḳ, baṯṯīḳ (n. un. ة) melon, watermelon;
baṯṯīḳ hub (of a wheel; syr.)
مبطخة mabṯaḳa melon patch
بطر 1 baṯira a (baṯar) to be wild, wanton,
reckless; to be proud, vain; to be
discontented ( ھ with s.th.); to disregard ( ھ
s.th.) IV to make reckless
بطر baṯar wantonness, cockiness,
arrogance, hubris, pride, vanity
اباطرة abāṯira (pl.) bona vivants,
playboys, epicures
البطراء 2 al-baṯrā’ Petra (ancient city of
Edomites and Nabataeans; ruins now in
SW Jordan)
بطرخ baṯraḳ pl. بطارخ baṯāriḳ2 roe (of fish)
بطرس buṯrus Peter
بطرشيل baṯrašīl and بطرشين baṯrašīn stole
(Chr.)
بطريق biṯrīq pl. بطارقة baṯāriqa, بطاريق baṯārīq2
patrician; Romaean general; penguin
(zool.)
بطرك baṯrak, بطريك baṯrīk, بطريرك baṯriyark pl.
بطاركة baṯārika Patriarch (as. an
ecclesiastic title, Chr.)
بطركية baṯrakīya, بطريركية baṯriyarkīya
patriarchate (Chr.)
بطش baṯaša i u (baṯš) to attack with violence;
to bear down on, fall upon s.o. ( ب or ;(فى
to knock out ( ه s.o.); to hit, strike ( ب s.th.).
land with a thud ( ب on)
بطش baṯš strength, power, force,
violence; courage, valor, bravery;
oppression, tyranny
بطشة baṯša impact
بطاقة biṯāqa pl. –āt, بطائق baṯā’iq2 slip (of
paper), tag; card, calling card; ticket;
label│ بطاقة الزيارة calling card; بطاقة شخصية
(šaḳṣīya) and بطاقة التعريف identity card;
بطاقة المواد الغذائية b. al-mawādd al-gidā’īya,
بطاقة التموين food ration card; بطاقة المعايدة b.
al-mu‘āyada greeting card
بطل 1 baṯala u (buṯl, بطلان buṯlān) to be or
become null, void, invalid, false,
untenable, vain, futile, worthless; to be
abolished, fall into disuse, become
obsolete; to cease, stop, be discontinued;
to be inactive. be oat of work II to thwart,
foil, frustrate, make ineffective counteract,
neutralize, nullify, invalidate ( ھ s.th.); to
abolish, cancel, annul, suppress ( ھ s.th.)
IV = II; to talk idly, prattle; to paralyze,
immobilize, hold down, pin down ( ه the
opponent)
بطل buṯl nullity; uselessness, futility.
vanity; falsity, falseness, untruth
بطالة biṯāla and baṯāla idleness,
inactivity; free time, time off, holidays,
vacations; unemployment
بطال baṯṯāl pl. –ūn idle, inactive;
unemployed, out of work
بطلان buṯlān nullity; uselessness, futility,
vanity; falsity, untruth; invalidity
ابطال ibṯāl thwarting, frustration,
invalidation; ruin, destruction; abolition,
cancellation
باطل bāṯil nugatory, vain, futile; false,
untrue; absurd, groundless, baseless;
worthless; invalid, null, void; deception,
lie, falsehood; بالباطل and باطلا bāṯila
falsely; futilely, in vain; pl. اباطيل abāṯīl2
vanities, trivialities, trifles, flimflam, idle
talk, prattle
مبطل mubṯil prattler, windbag; liar
مبطل mubṯal nugatory, futile, vain
متبطل mutabaṯṯil unemployed
بطل 2 baṯula u ( بطالة baṯāla, بطولة buṯūla) to be
brave, be heroic, be a hero
بطل baṯal pl. ابطال abṯāl brave, heroic; hero;
champion, pioneer; hero, protagonist (of a
narrative, etc.), lead, star 63 (of a play);
champion (athlet.)│ بطل العالم b. Al-‘alam
world champion
بطلة baṯala heroine (of a narrative),
female lead, star (of a play); woman
champion (athlet..)
بطالة baṯāla bravery, valor, heroism
بطولة buṯūla bravery, valor, heroism;
leading role, starring role (theater, film);
championship (athlet.)│ البطولة العالمية
(‘ālamīya) and بطولة العالم b. al-‘ālam world
championship (athlet.); دور البطولة the part
or role of the hero, leading role
بطالسة baṯālisa Ptolemies
بطم buṯm, buṯūm terebinth (bot.)
بطن 1 baṯana u (baṯn, بطون bulan) to he hidden,
concealed, to hide; -- baṯuna u ( بطانة
baṯāna) to be paunchy II to line ( ھ a
garment, ب ھ s.th. with); to cover the
inside ( ب ھ of s.th. with), hang, face, fill (
ب ھ s.th. with) IV to hide, conceal, harbor
ھ) s.th.) V to be lined, have a lining
(garment); to penetrate, delve ( ھ into),
become absorbed, engrossed ( ھ in) X to
penetrate, delve ( ھ into), become
absorbed, engrossed ( ھ in); to try to
fathom ( ھ s.th.); to fathom ( ھ s.th.), get to
the bottom of ( ھ ); to have profound
knowledge ( ھ of s.th.), know thoroughly,
know inside out ( ھ s.th.)
بطن baṯn pl. بطون buṯūn, ابطن abṯun
belly, stomach, abdomen; womb; interior,
inside, inner portion; depth│ بطن القدم b.
al-qadam sole of the foot; بطن الكف b. alkaff
palm of the hand; رقص البطن and رقص
البطون raqṣ al-b. belly dance; فى بطن
(baṯni) in, within, in the midst of; فى بطون
inside, within, in; ولدت بطنا واحدا (waladat)
she gave birth only once; بطنا لظھر (li-
ẓahrin) upside down
بطنى baṯnī ventral, abdominal
بطن baṯin paunchy
بطنة biṯna gluttony; overeating,
indigestion
بطان biṯān pl. ابطنة abṯina girth (of a
camel)
بطانة biṯāna pl. بطائن baṯā’in2 inside,
inner side; lining (of a garment); retinue,
suite, entourage│ فى بطانة among, amidst;
within
بطين baṯīn pl. بطان biṯān and مبطان
mibṯān, paunchy, fat, corpulent, stout;
gluttonous
بطين buṯain ventricle (of the heart; anat.)
بطانية baṯṯānīya pl. -āt, بطاطين baṯāṯīn2
cover; blanket; quilt
باطن bāṯin pl. بواطن bawāṯin2 inner,
interior, inward, inmost, intrinsic; hidden,
secret; الباطنة coastal plain of E Oman; باطنا
bāṯinan inwardly, secretly│ باطن الكف b.
al-kaff palm of the hand; باطن القدم b. alqadam
sole of the foot; فى باطن الامر at
bottom, after all, really; بواطن الامر the
factors, circumstances or reasons at the
bottom of s.th.; بواطن الارض b. al-arḍ the
secret depths of the earth
باطني bāṯinī internal│ مرض باطني
(maraḍ) internal disease; الطب الباطني (ṯibb)
internal medicine
الباطنية al-bāṯinīya name of a school of
thought in Islam, characterized by
divining a hidden, secret meaning in the
revealed texts
مبطون mabṯūn affected with a gastric or
intestinal ailment
مبطن mubaṯṯan lined; filled ( ب with)
بطن 2 II (tun.) to full ( ھ s.th.)
باطان (Span. batán) bāṯān fulling mill
باطية bāṯiya pl. بواط bawāṯin pitcher, jug
بظ baẓẓa u to spout, gush out, well out
بظر baẓr pl. بظور buẓur clitoris (anat.) 64
بعبع bu‘bu‘ pl. بعابع ba‘ābi‘2 bugaboo, bogey
بعث ba‘ata a (ba‘t) to send, send out, dispatah
الى ب) or ھ، ه s.o. or s.th. to); to forward (
الى ب or ھ s.th. to); to delegate ( ب or ه الى
s.o. to); to emit ( ب or ھ s. th.); to evoke,
arouse, call forth, awaken ( ھ s.th.); to stir
up, provoke, bring on ( ھ s.th.); to revive,
resuscitate ( ھ s.th.); to resurrect ( ه s.o., من
الموت from death); to incite, induce ( على to
s.th.), instigate, ( على s.th.); to cause ( على
s.th.; e.g., astonishment)│ بعث اليه ھزة الخوف
(hazzat al-ḳauf) to scare the wits out of
s.o.; بعث روح الحياة في (rūḥa l-ḥayāh) to
breathe life into s.th. or s.o., revive s.th.
VII to be Bent out, be emitted, be
dispatched, be delegated; to be triggered,
be caused, be provoked; to be resurrected
من الموت) from death); to originate ( من in),
come ( من from), be caused ( من by); to
emanate (fragrance); to arise, spring,
proceed, develop ( من from), grow out of (
من ); to set out to do s.th. (with foll.
imperf.) VIII to send, dispatch ( ه s.o.)
بعث ba‘t sending out, emission,
dispatching, delegation, etc.; resurrection;
pl. بعوث bu‘ūt delegations, deputations│
حزب البعث ḥizb al-b. approx.: Renaissance
Party, a political party with strong
socialist tendencies; يوم البعث Day of
Resurrection (from the dead)
بعثة ba‘ta pl. ba‘atāt delegation,
deputation, mission; expedition; student
exchange; group of exchange students;
revival, rebirth, renaissance, rise│ بعثة
عسكرية (‘askarīya) military mission; بعثة
دبلوماسية diplomatic mission; بعثة اثرية
(atarīya) archaeological expedition; رئيس
البعثة ra’īs al-b. chief of mission (dipl.)
باعوث bā‘ūt Easter (Chr.)
مبعث mab‘at sending, forwarding,
dispatch; emission; awakening, arousal; --
(pl. مباعث mabā‘it2) cause; factor
باعث bā‘it pl. بواعث bawā‘it2 incentive,
inducement, motive, spur, reason, cause,
occasion
مبعوث mab‘ūt dispatched, delegated;
envoy, delegate; representative, deputy (in
the Ottoman Empire)
منبعث munba‘at source, point of origin
بعثر ba‘tara ( بعثرة ba‘tara) to scatter, strew
around, fling about ( ھ s.th.); to disarrange,
throw into disorder ( ھ s.th.); to squander,
waste, dissipate ( ھ s.th.) II tabatara pass.
مبعثر muba‘tar scattered, widespread
بعج ba‘aja a (ba‘j) to slit open ( ھ the belly); to
groove, dent, notch ( ھ s.th.) VII to have
indentations or notches; to be bruised,
dented, bumpy; to get battered
منبعج munba‘ij notched, indented
بعد ba‘uda u (bu'd) to be distant, far away, far
off; to keep away, keep one’s distance ( عن
from); to go far beyond ( عن ), exceed by
far ( عن s.th.); to be remote, improbable,
unlikely│ بعد به عن he kept him away from;
لا يبعد ان it is not unlikely that ... II to
remove ( ه s.o.); to banish, exile, expatriate
ه) s.o.) III to cause a separation ( بين
between)│ باعد بين فلان وبين الشيء to prevent
s.o. from attaining s.th.; باعد بين اجفانه
(ajfānihī) to stare wide-eyed IV to remove
ھ) s.th.); to take away ( ھ s.th.); to
eliminate ( ھ s.th.), do away with ( ھ ); to
send away, dismiss ( ه s.o.); to expatriate,
banish, exile ( ه s.o.); to exclude, make
unlikely, improbable, impossible ( ھ s.th.);
to go or move far away; to go very far ( فى
in or with s.th.) VI to be separated, lie
apart, lie at some distance from one
another; to separate, part company,
become estranged; to move away, go
away, withdraw, depart ( عن from); to keep
away, keep one’s distance ( عن from); to
quit, leave, avoid ( عن s.th.); to follow in
regular 65
intervals VIII to move or go away; to keep
away, withdraw ( عن from); to quit, leave,
avoid ( عن s.th.); to leave out of
consideration, disregard ( عن s.th.) X to
single out, set aside ( ھ s.th.); to think
remote, farfetched ( ھ s.th.); to regard as
unlikely ( ھ s.th.); to disqualify ( ه s.o.)
بعد bu‘d remoteness, farness; (pl. ابعاد
ab‘ād) distance; dimension; interval
(mus.)│ على بعد and على البعد in the distance,
far off; على بعد مئة متر at a distance of 100
meters; عن بعد and من بعد from a distance,
from afar; ذو ثلاثة ابعاد three-dimensional;
قياس الابعاد qiyās al-a. linear measure; بعد
الھمة b. al-himma high aspirations,
loftiness of purpose; بعد الشقة b. aš-šiqqa
wide interval, wide gap; بعد الصيت b. aṣ-ṣīt
renown, fame, celebrity; بعد الصوت b. aṣ-
ṣaut do.; بعد النظر b. an-naẓar far
sightedness, foresight; بعدا bu‘dan li away
with ... !
بعد ba‘du then, thereupon; afterwards,
later, after that, in the following; still,
yet│ فيما بعد afterwards, later; اما بعد see اما؛ 1
ھو بعد صغير he is only a small boy, be is
still young; لم يأت بعد (ya’ti) he hasn’t come
yet
بعد ba‘da (prep.) after; in addition to,
beside; aside from│ بعد كونه ... (kaunihī)
aside from the fact that he is ... ; بعد ذلك
afterwards, after that, later (on); besides,
moreover; بعد ذاك besides, moreover; بعد ان
ba‘da an (conj.) after; اذ (id), بعد ما and من
بعد ما (ba‘di) do.; سفه ما بعده سفه (safahun)
the height of stupidity
بعدئذ ba‘da’idin then, thereafter,
thereupon, after that, afterwards
بعيد ba‘īd pl. بعداء bu‘adā’, بعد bu‘ud,
بعدان ba‘dān, بعاد bi‘ād distant, far away,
fur (or from); remote, outlying, out-of-theway;
far-reaching, extensive; farfetched,
improbable, unlikely; unusual, strange,
odd, queer; incompatible, inconsistent ( عن
with)│ من بعيد from afar, from a distance;
منذ عھد بعيد (‘ahd) along time ago; بعيد الاثر
b. al-atar of far-reaching consequence; بعيد
التاريخ remote in time, going way back in
history, ancient; بعيد الشأر b. aš-ša’w highminded,
bold; بعيد الشقة b. aš-šiqqa far
apart; بعيد الغور b. al-gaur deep;
unfathomable; بعيد المدى b. al-madā longdistance,
long-range; extensive, farreaching;
بعيد النظر b. an-naẓar farsighted;
farseeing; بعيد المنال b. al-manāl hardly
attainable, hard to get at; ذھب بعيدا to go far
away, go to distant land.; تطلع الى بعيد to
look off into the distance
بعيد bu'aida (prep.) shortly after, soon
after
ابعد ab‘ad2 pl. اباعد abā‘d2 farther,
remoter, more distant; more extensive;
less likely, more improbable; pl. اباعد
abā‘d2 very distant relative│ الشرق الابعد
(šarq) the Far East; الابعد the absent one
(used as a polite periphrasis for s.o. who is
being criticized or blamed for s.th.; also
when referring to the 1st and 2nd persons)
ابعادية ab‘adīya pl. -āt country estate
تبعيد tab‘īd banishment
بعاد bi‘ād distance
مباعدة mubā‘ada sowing of dissension,
estrangement, alienation
ابعاد ib‘ād removal, separation, isolation;
elimination; expatriation, banishment,
deportation
تباعد tabā‘ud interdistance; mutual
estrangement
مبعد mub‘ad deported; deportee
متباعد mutabā‘id separate│ في فترات
متباعدة (fatarāt) in wide intervals; في فترات
متباعدة من الزمن (zaman) at infrequent
intervals, from time to time
مستبعد mustab‘ad improbable, unlikely
66
بعر 1 ba‘r, ba‘ar, droppings, dung (of animals)
بعير 2 ba‘īr pl. ابعرة ab‘ira, بعران bu‘ran, اباعر
abā‘ir بعارين , 2 ba‘ārīn2 camel
بعزق ba‘zaqa ( بعزقة ba‘zaqa) to scatter,
dissipate, squander, waste ( ھ s.th.)
مبعزق muba'ziq squanderer, spendthrift,
wastrel
بعض II to divide into parts or portions ( ھ s.th.)
V to be divided, be divisible
بعض ba‘ḍ part, portion; one; some, a
few; a little of, some of│ بعض العلماء b.
al-‘ulamā’ one (or Borne) of the scholars;
رفعنا بعضھم فوق بعض (rafa‘na) we have
exalted some of them above the others;
البعض—البعض الآخر some—some, a few
others; بعضھم بعضا one another, each other,
mutually, reciprocally; بعضه فى بعض one in
the other, within one another; بعض الشيء
ba‘ḍa š-šai’ to some extent, somewhat, a
little, rather; ماثلة بعض المماثلة (ba‘ḍa l-m.)
he resembled him somewhat, to some
extent; منذ قرن وبعض قرن (qarn) for the last
hundred years and more
بعوض ba‘ūḍ (n. un. ة) gnats, mosquitoes
تبعيض tab‘īḍ division, partition.
portioning
بعكوكة bu‘kūka club, society
بعل ba‘l the god Baal; land or plants thriving
on natural water supply; -- (pl. بعول bu‘ū,
بعولة bu‘ūla) lord; husband
بعلة ba'w wife
بعلى ba‘l, unirrigated (land. plants)
بعلبك ba‘lbakk2 Baalbek (ancient Heliopolis,
village in E Lebanon)
بغت bagata a (bagt, بغتة bagta) to come
unexpectedly, descend unawares ( ه upon
s.o.) III do.; to surprise (. s.o.) VII to be
taken by surprise; to be taken aback, be
aghast, he nonplused
بغتة bagta surprising event, surprise;
bagtatan, على بغتة bagtatin all of a sudden,
suddenly, surprisingly
مباغتة mubāgata sudden arrival,
surprising incident or event, surprise;
sudden attack, raid
بغاث bugāt pl. بغثان bigtan small birds
بغادة see بوغادة
بغدد II tabagdada to swagger, throw one's
weight around, be fresh (properly, to
behave like one from Baghdad)
بغداد bagdād2 Baghdad
بغدادى bagdādī pl. -ūn, بغاددة bagādida a
native of Baghdad
بغش 1 bagaša a: بغشت السماء (samā’u) there was
a light shower
بغشة bagša light rain shower
بغشة 2 bugša = بقشة
بغاشة 3 bagāša stuffed pastry made of flour,
eggs and butter
بغض bagiḍa a, baguḍa u (bugḍ, بغاضة bagāḍa)
to be hated, hateful, odious II to make ( ه
s.o.) hateful ( الى to s.o.) III to loathe,
detest, hate ( ه s.o.) IV to loathe, detest,
hate ( ه s.o.) VI to hate each other
بغض bugḍ, بغضة bigḍa and بغضاء
bagḍā’2 hatred, hate
بغيض bagīḍ, hateful, odious ( الى to s.o.),
loathsome, abominable
تباغض tabāguḍ mutual hatred
مبغوض mabgūḍ detested, hateful, odious
مبغض mubgiḍ pl. -ūn hater; -- mubgaḍ
detested, hateful, odious
بغل bagl pl. بغال bigāl, ابغال abgal mule; بغلة
bagla pl. bagalāt female mule│ بغال القنطرة
b. al-qanṯara the piers of the bridge
بغال baggāl pl. -ūn mule driver, muleteer
67
بغى bagā i ( بغاء bugā’) to seek, desire, covet,
seek to attain ( ھ s.th.), wish for s.th. ( ;(ھ
-- (bagy) to wrong, treat unjustly ( على s.o.)
, to oppress ( على s.o.), commit outrage (
على upon); to whore, fornicate VII ينبغى it
is desirable, necessary; it is proper,
appropriate, seemly, it ought to be, should
be; with له : it behooves him, with عليه : he
must, he should, he ought to VIII to seek,
desire ( ھ s.th.), aspire ( ھ to s.th.), strive (
ھ for)
بغى bagy infringement, outrage,
injustice, wrong
بغى bagīy pl. بغايا bagāyā whore,
prostitute
بغية bugya object of desire, wish, desire,
bugyata (prep.) with the aim of, for the
purpose of
بغاء bigā’ prostitution
بغاء bugā’ wish(ing), desire, endeavor,
effort
مبغى mabgan pl. مباغ mabāgin brothel
مباغ mabāgin coveted things, desiderata,
wishes, desires
ابتغاء ibtigā’ desire, wish; ibtigā’a
(prep.) for the purpose of
باغ bāgin pl. بغاة bugāh desiring,
coveting, striving; committing outrages,
oppressive, unjust; oppressor, tyrant
مبتغى mubtagan aspired goal, aspiration,
desire, endeavor, effort
بفتة bafta calico, Indian cotton cloth
بفتيك biftēk beefsteak
بق 1 baqq (n. un. ة) bedbug, chinch│ شجرة البق
elm (bol.)
بق 2 baqqa u (baqq) to give off in abundance
بقاق baqqāq garrulous, loquacious,
chatterbox, prattler
بقبق baqbaqa ( بقبقة baqbaqa) to gurgle, bubble,
splutter, purl (water); to chatter, prattle
بقباق baqbāq garrulous, loquacious,
chatterbox, prattler
بقبوقة baqbūqa blister (of the skin)
بقجة buqja pl. بقج buqaj bundle, pack, package
بقدونس baqdūnis, baqdūnas parsley
بقر baqara u to split open, rip open, cut open (
ھ s.th.) IV do.
بقر baqar (coll.) bovines, cattle; n. un.
بقرة baqara pl. -āt cow
بقرى baqarī bovine, cattle-, cow- (in
compounds)
بقار baqqār pl. ة cowhand, cowboy
بقس baqs box, boxwood (bot.)
بقسمات buqsumāt rusk, zwieback; biscuit
بقشة buqša Yemenite copper coin
بقشيش baqšīš pl. بقاشيش baqāšīš2 present of
money; tip, gratuity, baksheesh
بقع II to spot, stain, smudge; ( ھ s.th.) V to
become stained, get smudged; to be
spotted, stained
بقعة buq‘a pl. بقع buqa‘, بقاع biqā‘ spot,
blot, smudge, stain; place, spot, site, plot.
patch, lot
ابقع abqa‘2 spotted, speckled
باقعة bāqi‘a pl. بواقع bawāqi‘ sly dog,
shrewd fellow
بقل baqala u (baql) to sprout (plant)
بقل baql (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. بقول buqūl, ابقال
abqāl herbs, potherbs, greens, herbaceous
plants, specif., legumes│ الفصيلة البقلية the
Leguminosae; البقلة الباردة hyacinth bean
(Dolichos lablab L.), البقلة الحمقاء (ḥamqā’)
purslane (bot.), البقلة الذھبية (dahabīya)
garden orach (bot.), بقلة الخطاطيف
celandine (bot.), بقلة الملك b. al-malik
common fumitory (bot.) 68
بقال baqqāl pl. -ūn بقالة baqqāla
greengrocer; grocer
بقالة biqāla the grocery business
بقلاوة baqlāwa, بقلاوا a kind of Turkish delight,
pastry made of puff paste with honey and
almonds or pistachios
بقام baqqām brazilwood
بقي baqiya a ( بقاء baqā’) to remain, stay,
continue to be ( على in a state or condition);
to keep up, maintain ( على a state or
condition); to be left behind, be left over;
to last, continue, go on; (with foll. imperf.
or part.) to continue to do s.th., keep doing
s.th.; to become│ لم يبق طفلا (yabqa ṯiflan)
he is no longer a child II to leave, leave
over, leave behind ( ھ s.th.) IV to make ( ه
s.o.) stay; to retain, leave unchanged,
leave as it is, preserve, maintain, keep up (
ھ s.th.); to leave, leave over, leave behind
ھ) s.th. ه s.o.); to leave untouched, save,
spare ( على s.o., s.th., e.g., s.o.’s life) V to
remain, stay, continue to be ( على in a state
or condition); to be left, be left over X to
make stay, ask to stay, hold back, detain ( ه
s.o.); to spare, save, protect ( ه s.o., ھ
s.th.); to preserve ( ھ s.th.); to retain, keep
ھ) s.th.); to store, put away ( ھ s.th.)
بقية baqīya pl. بقايا baqāyā remainder,
rest; remnant, residue│ بقية الدول b. adduwal
the remaining countries, the rest of
the countries; البقية الباقية (bāqiya) the last
remnant
بقاء baqā’ remaining, staying, lingering,
abiding; continuation, continuance,
duration; survival, continuation of
existence after life; immortality, eternal
life; existence; permanence│ دار البقاء the
hereafter
ابقى abqā more lasting. more durable.
more permanent; better preserving;
conducive to longer wear. better
protecting
ابقاء ibqā’ continuation, retention;
maintenance, conservation, preservation│
ابقاء الحالة على ما كانت عليه maintenance of the
status quo
استبقاء istibqā’ continuation, retention;
maintenance, conservation, preservation
باق bāqin staying; remaining; left;
remainder (arith.); lasting, continuing,
permanent, unending; surviving; living
on; everlasting, eternal (God)│ الباقيات
الصالحات the good works
متبق mutabaqqin residue, remnant,
remainder, rest
بك bē (Eg. pronunciation) pl. بكوات bakawāt,
بھوات bahawāt bey (title of courtesy; cf.
(بيك
بكوية bekawīya rank of a bey
بكيء bakī’ pl. بكاء bikā’ having or giving little,
sparing (e.g., of words)
بكاسين bikāsīn bécassine, snipe (zool.)
بكالوريا (Fr. baccalauréat) bakālōriyā
baccalaureate, bachelor’s degree
بكالوريوس bakālōriyūs bachelor (academic
degree)
بكباشى (Turk. binbaşı) bimbāšī, bikbāšī major
(mil; formerly, Eg.)
بكت to censure, blame ( ه s.o.)
تبكيت tabkīt blame, reproach│ تبكيت
الضمير remorse
بكتيرى baktērī bacterial, caused by bacteria
بكتيريا baktēriyā bacteria
بكر bakara u to set out early in the morning,
get up early; to come early ( الى to), be
early ( الى at) II do.; بكر فى and بكر ب with
foll. verbal noun: to do s.th. early,
prematurely, ahead of its time III to be
ahead of s.o. ( ه), anticipate, forestall ( ه
s.o.) IV = I; VIII to be the first to take ( ھ
s.th.), be the first to embark ( ھ ٦٩ on
s.th.); to deflower ( ھا a girl): to invent ( ھ
s.th.); to create, originate, start ( ھ s.th.)
بكر bakr pl. ابكر abkur, بكران bukrān
young camel
بكر bikr pl. ابكار abkār first-born, eldest;
firstling: unprecedented, novel, new;
virgin; virginal
بكرى bikrī first-born, first
بكرية bikrīya primogeniture
بكرة bakra and bakara pl. بكر bakar, -āt
reel; pulley (mech.); spool, coil; winch,
windlass│ خيط بكرة ḳaiṯ b. thread
بكرة bakra: على بكرة ابيھم ‘alā bakrati
abīhim, عن بكرة ابيھم and عن بكرتھم all
without exception, all of them, all
together; خرجت الجماھير عن بكرتھا the crowd
went forth as one man
بكرة bukra pl. بكر bukar early morning;
بكرة bukratan early in the morning;
tomorrow; on the following day, next day
بكير bakīr coming early; early,
premature; precocious
بكور bakūr and باكور bākūr coming early;
early, premature; precocious
بكور bukūr earliness, prematureness,
premature arrival│ بكورى فى العود (‘aud)
my early return
بكارة bakāara virginity
بكارة bakkāra pulley (mech.)│ بكارة مركبة
(murakkaba) set of pulleys, block and
tackle
بكورة bukūra and بكورية bukūrīya
primogeniture
باكورة bakūra pl. بواكير bawākīr2
firstlings; first results, first fruits;
beginning, rise, dawn; (with foll. genit.)
initial, early, first; pl. بواكير first signs or
indications; initial symptoms; heralds,
harbingers (fig.)│ باكورة الفواكه early fruit;
كان باكورة اعماله the first thing he did was...
ابكر abkar2 rising earlier
مبكر mibkār precocious
ابتكار ibtikār pl. -āt novelty, innovation;
creation; invention; origination, first
production; initiative; creativity,
originality; pl. ابتكارات specif., creations of
fashion, fashion designs
باكر bākir early; premature; باكرا bākiran
in the morning; early (adv.)│ فى الصباح
الباكر (ṣabāḥ) early in the morning; الى الباكر
till tomorrow
باكرة bākira pl. بواكر bawākir2 firstlings,
first produce, early fruits, early
vegetables; pl. first indications or
symptoms, heralds, harbingers
مبكر mubakkir doing early; early;│ مبكرا
mubakkiran early in the morning, early
مبتكر mubtakir creator; creative;
inventor; -- mubtakar newly created,
novel, new, original; (pl. -āt) creation,
specif., fashion creation, invention│ ثوب
مبتكر (taub) original design, model. dress
creation
بكرج bakraj pl. بكارج bakārij2 kettle, coffee pot
بكسماد، بكسماط , see بقسمات
بكل II to buckle, buckle up, button up ( ھ s.th.);
to fold, cross ( ھ the arms)
بكلة bukla pl. بكل bukal, -āt buckle
بكلاه (It. baccalá) bakalāh codfish
بكلوريوس bakalōriyūs bachelor (academic
degree)
بكم bakima a to be dumb: -- bakuma u to be
silent, hold one’s tongue IV to silence ( ه
s.o.) V to become silent; to become dumb
بكم bakam dumbness
ابكم abkam2, f. بكماء bakmā’, pl. بكم bukm
dumb 70
بكوات and بكوية see بك
بكى bakā i ( بكاء bukā’, بكى bukan) to cry, weep
على) over); to bemoan, lament, bewail ( ه
s.o.), mourn ( ه for) II and IV to make ( ه
s.o.) cry X to move ( ه s.o.) to tears, make (
ه s.o.) cry
بكاء bakkā’ given to weeping frequently,
tearful, lachrymose
حائط المبكى ḥā’iṯ al-mabkā the Wailing
Wall (in Jerusalem)
باكية bākiya pl. بواك bawākin wailingwoman,
hired mourner; (eg.) arch, arcade
باك bākin pl. بكاة bukāh weeping, crying;
weeper, wailer, mourner
مبك mubkin, mubakkin, causing tears,
tearful; sad, lamentable, deplorable
بكين bikīn Peking
بل 1 bal (also with foll. و wa-) nay, --rather... ;
(and) even; but, however, yet
بل 2 balla u (ball) to moisten, wet, make wet ( ھ
s.th., ه s.o.);--balla i to recover ( من مرض
from an illness) II to moisten, wet, make
wet ( ھ s.th., ه s.o.) IV to recover ( من مرض
from an illness) V and VIII to be
moistened, be wetted; to become wet
بل ball moistening, wetting; moisture
بل bill recovery, convalescence,
recuperation
بلة billa moisture, humidity│ ما زاد الطين
بلة mā zālda ṯ-ṯīna billatan what made
things even worse ...
بل balal moisture, humidity; moistness,
dampness, wetness
بليل balīl a moist, cool wind
بليلة balīla (eg.) dish made of stewed
maize and sugar
ابلال iblāl recovery, convalescence,
recuperation
بل taballul moistness, dampness,
humidity
مبلول mablūl, مبلل muballal, مبتل mubtall
moist, damp, wet
بلى 3 billī (from Fr. bille): كرسي بلى (kursī) ball
bearing
بلا see ب 2
بلاتين، پلاتين blātī., plātīn platinum
بلاج (Fr. plage) blāž beach
بلاجرا balagrā pellagra
بلارج balāraj stork
بلاستيك (Fr. p1astique) blāstīk plastik
بلاط see بلط
بلاك (Engl. plug) spark plug (ir.)
بلان, بلانة see بلن
بلبط balbaṯa to gurgle
بلبل 1 balbala to disquiet, make uneasy or
restive, stir up, rouse, disturb, trouble,
confuse ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.) II tabalbala to feel
uneasy, be anxious; to be or become
confused, get all mixed up
بلبلة balbala pl. بلابل balābil2 anxiety,
uneasiness, concern; confusion, muddle,
jumble, chaos
بلبال balbāl anxiety, uneasiness, concern
بلابل balabil2 anxieties, apprehensions
تبلبل tabalbul muddle, confusion│ بلبل
الالسنة t. al-alsina confusion of tongues (at
the tower of Babel)
بلبل 2 bulbul pl. بلابل balabil2 nightingale
بلج balaja u ( بلوج bulūj) to shine; to dawn
(morning, aurora); -- balija a (balaj) to be
happy, be glad ( ب about), be delighted ( ب
at) IV to shine (sun) V and VII = balaja
ابلج ablaj2 gay, serene, bright, clear, fair,
nice, beautiful
انبلاج الفجر inbilāj al-fajr daybreak
بلجيكا beljīka Belgium
بلجيكى beljīkī Belgian (adj. and n.)
بلح balaḥ (coll.; n. un. ة) dates (bot.)
بلد baluda u ( بلادة balada) to be stupid, idiotic,
dull-witted II to acclimatize, habituate ( ھ
s.th., to a country or region) V pass. of II;
to become .tupid, be.otted, lapse into a
state of idiocy; to show o.s. from the
stupid side VI to feign stupidity
بلد balad m. and f., pl. بلاد bilād country;
town, city; place, community, village; بلاد
country; بلدان buldān countries│ بلاد الحبش
b. al-ḥabaš Ethiopia; بلاد الصين b. aṣ-ṣīn
China; بلاد الھند b. al-hind India
بلدة balda town, city; place, community,
village; rural community; township
بلدى baladī native, indigenous, home (as
opposed to foreign, alien); (fellow)
citizen, compatriot, countryman; a native;
communal, municipal│ مجلس بلدى (majlis)
city council, local council
بلدية baladīya pl. -āt township,
community, rural community; ward,
district (of a city); municipality, municipal
council, local authority
بليد balīd and ابلد ablad2 stupid, doltish,
dull-witted, idiotic
بلادة balāda stupidity, silliness
تبلد taballud idiocy, dullness, obtuseness,
apathy
متبلد mutaballid besotted, dull, stupid
ابليز look up alphabetically
ابليس pl. ابالسة look up alphabetically
بلسان ba1asān balsam, balm; balsam tree; black
older (bot.)
بلسم balsam pl. بلاسم balāsim2 balsam, balm
بلسم balsamī balsamic, balmy
بلشف balšafa to Bolshevize II tabalšafa to be
Bolshevized
بلشفة balšafa Bolshevization
بلشفى bulšifī pl. بلاشفة balāšifa
Bolshevist(ic); Bolshevik, Bolshevist
بلشفية bulšifīya Bolshevism
بلشون balašūn heron (zool.)
بلص 1 balaṣa u (balš) and II to extort wring
forcibly ( من ه from s.o. s.th.); to blackmail
ه) s.o.)
بلص balṣ extortion, blackmail; forcible
imposition of taxes
بلاص 2 ballāṣ pl. بلاليص balālīṣ2 (eg.)
earthenware jar
بلط 1 II to pave ( ھ s.th., with flagstones or tiles)
بلاط balāṯ pavement, tiled floor; floor
tiles; palace; pl. ابلطة abliṯa floor tiles│
البلاط الملكى (malakī) the royal court; حداد
البلاط ḥidād al-b. court mourning
بلاطة balāṯa floor tile; flagstone,
slabstone; paving stone
تبليط tablīṯ paving, tile-laying
مبلط muballaṯ paved, tiled
بلوط 2 ballūṯ oak; acorn
بلطة 3 balta pl. -āt, بلط bulaṯ ax
بلطجى balṯajī pl. -īya engineer, sapper,
pioneer (mil.); gangster; procurer,
panderer, pimp; sponger, hanger-on,
parasite
بلطة 4 balaṯa balata gum
بلطو 5 (Fr. paletot) balṯō pl. –āt, بلاطى balāṯī
paletot, overcoat
بلطى 6 bulṯī bolti (Tilapia nilotica), a food fish
of the Nile
بلطيق al-.balṯīq the Baltic countries│ بحر البلطيق
baḥr al-b. the Baltic Sea
بلوظة bālūẓa hand pres.; (eg.) a kind of cream
made of cornstarch, lemon juice and
honey, or the like
بلع bala‘a and bali‘a a (bal‘) to swallow,
swallow up ( ھ s.th.); to gulp down ( ھ
s.th.); to put up ( ھ with s.th.), swallow,
stomach, brook ( ھ s.th.)│ بلع ريقه (rīqahū)
lit.: to swallow one’s saliva, i.e., to catch
one’s breath, take a little rest, have a
break; to restrain o.s., hold back (said of
one in a rage) II and IV to make ( ه s.o.)
swallow ( ھ s.th.)│ بلعه ريقه (rīqahū) to
grant s.o. a short rest VIII = I
بلعة bal‘a large bite, big gulp
بلاعة ballā‘a, بلوعة ballū‘a pl. –āt, بلاليع
ba1ālī‘2 sink, drain
بالوعة bālū‘a pl. –āt, بواليع bawālī‘2
sewer, sink, drain
بلعم bul‘um pl. بلاعم balā‘im2 and بلعوم bul‘ūm
pl. بلاعيم balā‘īm2 pharynx (anat.); بلعوم
gullet, esophagus (anat.)
بلغ 1 balaga u ( بلوغ bulūg) to reach ( ه s.o. ھ
s.th.), get ( ھ، ه to), arrive ( ھ at); to come,
amount ( ھ to), be worth ( ھ so and so
much); to come to s.o.’s ( ه) ears; to attain
puberty (boy); to ripen, mature (fruit, or
the like); to come of age; to exhaust, wear
out ( من s.o.); to act ( من upon s.o.), have its
effect ( من on), affect ( من s.o.); to go far (
فى، من in s.th.), attain a high degree ( فى، من
of s.th.)│ بلغ به الى to make s.o. or s.th. get
to or arrive at, lead or take s.o. or s.th. to,
get s.o. or s.th. to the point where, بلغ به
الترنح ان (tarannuḥ) he began to reel so
violently that ... ; بلغ الامر مبلغ الجد (mablaga
l-jidd) the matter became serious; بلغ السيل
الزبى b. s-sailu z-zubā the matter reached a
climax, things came to a head; بلغ مبلغ
الرجال (mablaga r-rijāl) to be sexually
mature, attain manhood, come of age; بلغ
اشده (ašuddahū) to attain full maturity,
come of age; to reach its climax; بلغ فى
الشيء مبلغا (mablagan) to attain a high
degree of s.th.; حين بلغت بذكرياتي ھذا المبلغ
(ḥīna, dikrayātī, mablaga) when I had
come to this point in my reminiscences; بلغ
منه كل مبلغ (kulla mablagin) to work havoc
on s.o.; بلغ منتھاه (muntahāhū) to reach its
climax, come to a head II to make ( ه s.o.)
reach or attain ( ھ s.th.); to take bring ( الى
ھ s.th. to s.o.) see that s.th. ( ھ ) gets ( الى
to); to convey, transmit, impart,
communicate, report ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.); to
inform, notify ( ھ ه s.o. of s.th.), tell, let
know ( ھ ه s.o. about); to report ( عن about),
give an account of ( عن ); to inform ( عن
against s.o.), report, denounce ( عن s.o.)│
بلغ رسالة to fulfill a mission, بلغه سلامى
ballighu salāmī give him my best regards!
III to exaggerate ( فى in s.th.); to overdo.
do too long ( فى s.th.); to go to greatest
lengths, do one’s utmost ( فى in) IV to
make ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) reach or attain ( الى
s.th.); to make ( ھ s.th.) amount ( الى to),
raise ( ھ an amount, a salary, الى to); to
inform, notify ( ب or عن s.o. of s.th.), tell,
let know ( ب or عن ه s.o. about); to
announce, state, disclose ( ھ s.th.); to
inform ( عن against s.o.), report, denounce
عن) s.o.)│ ابلغ البوليس ب to report s.th. to the
police V to content o.s., be content ( ب
with); to eke out an existence; to still
one’s hunger ( ب with), eat ( ب s.th.): to b.
delivered, be transmitted
سمعا لا بلاغا sam‘an lā balāgan! may it be
heard but not fulfilled, i.e. God forbid!
(used at the mention of s.th. unpleasant)
بلغة bulga and بلاغ balāg sufficiency,
competency, adequacy (see also بلغة 2
below)
بلاغ balāg pl. -āt communication,
information, message, report;
announcement, proclamation;
communiqué; statement; notification (of
the police)│ بلاغ اخير ultimatum
بليغ balīg pl. بلغاء bulagā’ eloquent;
intense, lasting, deep, profound (e.g., an
impression); serious, grave (e.g., an
injury)
بلوغ bulūg reaching, attainment, arrival
(at); maturity, legal majority
بلاغة balāga eloquence; art, of good
style, art of composition; literature│ علم
البلاغة ‘ilm al-b. rhetoric
ابلغ ablag2 intenser, deeper, more lasting;
more serious, graver
مبلغ mablag pl. مبالغ mabālig2 amount,
sum of money; extent, scope, range; (see
also examples under بلغ I)│ مبلغ اسمى (ismī)
nominal par; المبالغ المودعة (mūda‘a) the
deposits (at a bank); ليتبين مبلغ قولى من الجد
(li-yatabayyana, qaulī, jidd) in order to
find, out to what extent my words were
meant seriously
تبليغ tablīg pl. -āt conveyance,
transmission, delivery ( الى to s.o.);
information ( عن about); report,
notification ( عن of); communication,
announcement, notice│ كتاب التبليغ
credentials
مبالغة mubalaga pl. -āt exaggeration
ابلاغ iblāg conveyance, transmission
بالغ bālig extensive, far-reaching;
considerable; serious (wound), deep,
profound, violent, vehement (feelings),
strong, intense; mature; of age, legally
major
مبلغ muballig bearer (of news),
messenger; informer, denouncer; detective
بلغة 2 bulga, balga pl. -āt, bulag slipper of
yellow leather
بلغاريا bulgāriyā Bulgaria
بلغارى bugārī Bulgarian (adj. and n.)
بلغم balgam phlegm; (pl. بلاغم balagim2)
expectoration, sputum
بلغمى balgamī phlegmatic; phlegmy,
mucous
بلف balafa i (balf) to bluff II do.
بلف balf, بلفة balfa bluff
ابلق ablaq2 piebald
بلقيس bilqīs2 Muslim name of the Queen of
Sheba
البلقان al-balqān the Balkans
بلقانى balqānī Balkan
بلقع balqa‘ and بلقعة balqa‘a pl. بلاقع balāqi‘2
wasteland
بلك see بلوك
بلكون balkōn balcony
بلم 1 balam anchovy
بلم 2 balam pl. ابلام ablām sailing barge (ir.)
بلم 3 IV to be silent, hold one's tongue
بلان ballān bathhouse attendant; name of a
plant growing near stagnant waters
بلانة ballāna female bathhouse attendant;
lady's maid
بلنسية balansiya2 Valencia (region and city in E
Spain)
بلين pl. بلالين look up alphabetically
بله baliha a to be stupid, simple-minded VI to
feign foolishness, pretend to be stupid X
to deem ( ھ s.o.) stupid or simple-minded
بله balah and بلاھة balāha stupidity,
foolishness, simple-mindedness; idiocy,
imbecility│ بلاھة مبكرة (mubakkira)
dementia praecox
بله balha let alone, not to speak of, not to
mention
ابله ablah2 stupid, doltish, dull-witted;
idiotic
بلھارسيا bilkarsiyā bilharziasis, schistosomiasis
(med.)
بلھنية bulahniya abundance, wealth, variety (of
earthly possessions)
بلھوان 1 see بھلوان
2□ بلھون bulhōn pl. بلاھين balāhīn ابو الھول =) 2
eg.) sphinx
بلو) and بلى) بلا balā u (balw, بلاء balā’) to test,
try, put to the test ( ھ s.o., • s.tb.); to know
from long experience ( ھ s.th.); to afltict (
ھ s.o.); -- بلى baliya a ( بلى bilan, بلاء balā’)
to be or become old, worn, shabby
(clothes); to dwindle away, vanish; to
deteriorate, decline, become decrepit; to
disintegrate (a corpse), decay, rot, spoil III
to care, be concerned ( ب or ھ, ه about), be
mindful ( ب or ھ, ه of s.o., of s.th.); to pay
attention ( ب or ھ to), mind, heed, take into
consideration, take into account ( ب or ھ
s.th.); to take notice ( ب of)│ ما ابالى mā
ubālī, لا ابالى I don’t care! I don’t mind! it's
all right with me! لا يبالى (as a relat. clause)
unconcerned, heedless, careless, reckless
IV to try, test, put to the test ( ھ s.o.); to
make experienced, harden, inure ( ه s.o.;
said of trials, experiences); to work havoc
ھ) on s.th.); to wear out ( ھ s.th.) │ ابلى بلاء
حسنا (balā’an ḥasanan) to stand the test; to
prove o.s. brave (in war) VIII to try,
tempt, put to the test ( ھ s.o.); to afflict ( ب
ه s.o. with), visit ( ب ه on s.o. s.th.); pass.
ubtuliya to become or be afflicted ( ب with,
by), suffer ( ب from)
بلى bilan decline, deterioration; decay,
putrefaction, decomposition; worn
condition; wear; shabbiness
بلي balīy worn, old, shabby, threadbare;
decrepit, dilapidated, decaying,
decomposed, rotten
بلية balīya pl. بلايا balāyā trial,
tribulation, visitation, affliction, distress,
misfortune, calamity
بلاء balā’ trial. tribulation, visitation,
affliction, distress, misfortune; scourge,
plague; creditable performance, bravery,
gallantry, heroic action│ بلاء حسن (ḥasan)
favor, blessing, grace (of God); good
performance
بلوى balwā trial; tribulation, visitation,
affliction, distress, misfortune, calamity;
necessity, need│ عمت البلوى (‘ammat) it has
become a general necessity
مبالاة mubālāh consideration, regard,
heed, attention│ لا مبالاة lā-mubālāh
indifference, unconcern, carelessness
ابتلاء ibtilā’ trial, tribulation, affliction,
visitation
بال bālin old, worn, worn out; shabby,
threadbare, ragged, tattered; decrepit,
dilapidated; decayed, rotten; obsolete,
antiquated
مبال mubālin observant, heedful, mindful
ب) of)│ غير مبال ب heedless of
مبتلى mubtalan (less correctly مبتل
mubtalin) afflicted ( ب with, by), suffering
ب) from)
بلور II tabalwara to crystalize; to be
crystalized; to be covered with crystals
بلور ballūr, billaur pl. -āt crystal; crystal
glass, flint glass, glass│O بلور صخرى
(ṣaḳrī) rock crystal, transparent quartz
بلورة billaura (n. un.) pl. -āt crystal;
crystal glass, flint glass, glass; tube
(radio); crystal, quartz plate (of a
detector; radio); (syr., pronounced
ballōra) negative (phot.)
بلورى ballūrī, billaurī crystalline; crystal
(adj.)
بلورية ballūrīya, billaurīya pl. -āt lense
(opt.)
مبلور mubalwar: فواكه مبلورة candied
fruits 75
بلوز (Fr. blouse) bəlūz, bəlūza pl. –āt blouse
بلوك (Turk. bölük) bulūk pl. -āt company (mil.;
Eg.)│ بلوك امين b. amīn (mil.) approx.:
quartermaster sergeant (formerly, Eg.)
بلون ballūn balloon
بلى 1 balā yes, yes indeed, certainly, surely
بلى 2 baliya etc., see بلو
بلياتشو (It. paglaccio) palyatšō clown, buffoon
بلياردو (It. bigliardo) bilyardō billiards
بليسيه bilīsēh plissé, pleating
بلين 1 ballīn pl. بلالين balālīn2 pallium, liturgical
vestment of a bishop worn over the
chasuble (Chr.); monk's robe (Copt.·Chr.)
بليون 2 balyūn pl. بلايين balayīn (U.S.) billion,
(G.B.) milliard; (U.S.) trillion, (G.B.)
billion
بم bamm lowest string of a musical instrument
بمباغ bumbāg, بمباغة bumbāga bow tie
بمباى bombāy Bombay
بامية look up alphabetically
بن 1 V تبنى to adopt as son ( ه s.o.); to adopt.
embrace ( ھ s.th.)
ابن ibn pl. ابناء abnā’, بنون banūn son;
descendant. scion; offspring, son (of a
nation or people)│ ابن آدم pl. بنو آدم (son of
Adam) man, human being; ابن آوى ibn āwā
jackal; ابن البلد ibn a1-balad local
inhabitant, native; ابناء البلد natives, native
population; ابن الحرب ibn al-ḥarb warrior;
soldier; warlike, bellicose; ابن السبيل
wayfarer, wanderer; ابن خمسين سنة ٥٠ years
old; ابن ساعته ibn sā‘atihī temporal,
transient, passing; ابن صلبه ibn ṣulbihī his
own son; ابن عرس ibn ‘irs weasel; بنو ماء
السماء banū mā’ as-samā’ the Arsbs; بنو
سويف Beni Suef (city in Egypt, S of Cairo)
ابنة ibna and بنت bint pl. بنات banāt
daughter; بنت girl│ ابنة العم i. al-‘amm
(female) cousin; periphrastically for wife:
ابنة عمك your wife; بنت الفك b. a1-fikr pl.
بنات الافكار thought, idea; بنات الارض b. a1-
arḍ insects and worms; بنات بئس b. bi’s
calamities, afflictions; بنات الدھر b. ad-dahr
do.; بنت الشفه b. aš-šafa word; بنات الصدر b.
aṣ-ṣadr worries, fears, anxieties; بنات وردان
b. wardāna earth worms, rainworms
بني bunaiya my little son
بنوة bunuwwa sonship, filiation
بنوى banawi filial
تبن tabannin adoption (also fig., e.g. of
ideas, principles, etc.)
بن 2 bunn coffee beans, coffee
بنى bunnī coffee-colored, brown
بنان banān finger tips│ يشار عليه ببنان (yušāru
lit.: he is pointed at with fingers, i.e., he is
famous man; انا طوع بنانك anā tau‘a
banānika I am at your disposal, I am at
your service
بنادورة banādōra (syr.; from It. pomodoro)
tomato(es)
بنارس banāris2 Banaras or Benares (the Holy
City of the Hindus, in N India)
بنباشى see بكباشى
بنت see بن 1
بنتو bintū napoleon, louis d'or (gold coin of 20
francs)
بنج II to dope, narcoticize (with banj; ه s.o.); to
anesthetize (. s.o.)
بنج banj henbane (Hyoscyamus niger;
bot); an anesthetic, a narcotic
البنجاب al-banjāb the Punjab (region, NW
Indian subcontinent)
بنجر banjar red beet (eg.)
بند band pl. بنود bunūd article, clause,
paragraph (of a. la.w, contract, etc.);
banner; large body of troops
بندر bandar pl. بنادر banādir2 seaport;
commercial center; district capital (Eg.);
بنادر see also under بنديرة below│ بندر عباس
‘abbās Bandar Abbas (seaport in S Iran)
بندورة look up alphabetically
بندق bunduq (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. بنادق banādiq2
hazelnut(s), filberts; hazel, hazel tree; بندقة
hazelnut, filbert; bullet
بندقى bunduqī Venetian sequin
بندقية bunduqīya pl. بنادق banādiq2 rifle,
gun│ بندقية رش b. rašš shotgun
البندقية al.bunduqīya Venice
بندقانى bunduqani pl. -ūn, بنادقة banādiqa
a Venitian
بندوق bundūq pl. بناديق banādīq2 bastard
بندورة banadōra (syr.; from It. pomodoro)
tomatoes
احمر بندورى aḥmar2 banadōrī tomato-red
بندول (Fr. pendule) bandūl pendulum
بنديرة (Span. bandera) bandēra pl. بنادر
banadir2 pennon, flag, banner
بنور bannūr (= بلور ballūr) glass
بنزھير banzahīr bezoar, bezoar stone
بنزين banzīn, benzīn gasoline, benzine
بنس (Engl.) pence
بنسلين benisilīn penicillin
بنسيه (Fr. pensée) banēh pansy (bot.)
بنسيون bansiyōn pl. -āt boardinghouse;
boarding school
بنصر binṣir f., pl. بناصر banāsir2 ring finger
بنط bunṯ pl. بنوط bunūṯ point (stock market)
بنطلون banṯalūn (from It. pantaloni) pl. –āt
trousers, pants
بنغازى bangāzī Bengasi (city in NE Libya,
capital of Cyrenaica)
البنغال al-bangāl Bengal (region, NE Indian
subcontinent)
بنفسج banafsaj (coll.; n. un. ة) violet (bot.)
بنفسجى banafsajī violetlike, violetish;
violet (adj.)│ فوق البنفسجى or وراء البنفسجى
ultraviolet
بنفش banfaš, banafš amethyst (min.)
بنقة binaqa and بنيقة banīqa gore, gusset (of a
shirt or garment)
بنك 1 bunk root, core, heart, best part│ بنك العمر
b. al-‘umr the prime of life, the best years
بنك 2 bank pl. بنوك bunūk bank, banking house│
بنك التسليف credit bank; بنك التوفير deposit
bank; بنك الدم b. ad-dam blood bank; البنك
الدولى (daulī) the World Bank
مبنك 3 mubannak stranded
محنك مبنك 4 muḥannak mubannak shrewd, sly,
astute
بنكنوت (Engl.) banknōt banknote
بنوة and بنوى see بن 1
بنوار (Fr. baignoire) banwār baignoire, theater
box of the lowest tier
بنى 1 bana i ( بناء binā’, بنيان bunyān) and VIII to
build, erect, construct, set up ( ھ s.th.); to
build, establish, rest ( على ھ s.th. on); to
consummate the marriage ( بھا and عليھا
with a woman); pass. buniya, ubtuniya to
be based, be built, rest ( على on)│ بنى كلمة
على (kalimalan) to give a word an
indeclinable ending in (a certain vowel or
a vowelless consonant; gram.) V see بن 1
بناء binā’ building, construction,
erection, setting up; structure (also, e.g.,
of an organism), setup, make-up; (pl. ابنية
abniya) building, structure, edifice│ اعادة
البناء i‘ādat al-b. reconstruction; البناء الحر
(ḥurr) Freemaaonry; بناء على binā’an ‘alā
according to, in accordance with, on the
basis of, by virtue of, on the strength of;
بناء على ھذا accordingly, thus
بنائى binā’ī constructional, building
(used attributively); architectural;
structural
بنية binya, bunya pl. بنى binan, bunan
structure, setup, make-up; binya build,
frame, physique, physical constitution│
ضعيف البنية of delicate constitution; صحيح
البنية and سليم البنية of sound constitution,
healthy; قوي البنية qawīy al-b. husky, sturdy
بناء bannā’ pl. -ūn builder; mason;
constructive│ بناء حر (ḥurr) Freemason
بناية bināya pl. -āt building, structure,
edifice
بنيان bunyān building, construction,
erection, setting up; building, structure,
edifice; physique, stature
مبنى mabnan pl. مبان mabānin building,
construction, erection, setting up;
building, structure. edifice; form;
foundation, fundament, basis │ الرأى
والمبنى (ra’y) content and form
تبن tabannin see بن 1
بان bānin pl. بناة bunāh builder
مبنى mabnīy built, set up. erected;
founded, based, resting ( على on); fixed,
established; indeclinable; ending
indeclinably ( على in; gram.)
پنى 2 (Engl.) penny
بنيو (It. bagno) banyō batb, bathtub
بھت bahita a, bahuta u and pass. buhita (baht)
to be astonished, amazed, bewildered,
startled, perplexed, flabbergasted,
speechless; -- bahita to be or become pale,
fade (color); -- bahata a to astonish,
amaze, bewilder, startle, stagger,
flabbergast ( ه s.o.); ( بھتان buhtān) to
slander, defame ( ه s.o.) III to come or
descend unexpectedly ( ه upon s.o.); to
startle, stagger, flabbergast ( ه s.o.) IV to
surprise, astonish, amaze ( ھ s.o.) VII = I
بھت buht and بھتان buhtān slander, false
accusation; lie, untruth
بھتة bahta perplexity, amazement,
bewilderment, stupefaction
باھت bāhit pale, pallid, faded (color);
perplexed, aghast
مبھوت mabhūt perplexed, astonished,
amazed, startled, flabbergasted, aghast
بھج bahija a to be glad, he bappy ( ب about),
he delighted ( ب at); -- bahuja u to be
beautiful, look wonderful IV to gladden,
delight, make happy ( ب s.o.) VIII to be
glad, be happy ( ب about), be delighted ( ب
at)
بھجة bahja splendor, magnificence,
beauty, resplendence; joy, delight│ بھجة
الانظار delight of the eyes, welcome sight
بھج bahij, بھيج bahīj magnificent,
splendid, beautiful; happy, joyous;
delightful
مبھجة mabhaja a moment of happiness
and joy
مباھج mabāhij joys, delights; pleasures,
amusements, diversions; splendid things;
splendor, pomp, magnificence
ابتھاج ibtihāj joy, rejoicing, delight ( ب at)
مبھج mubhij pleasant, charming,
delightful
مبتھج mubtahij happy, glad, delighted
بھدل bahdala to insult ( ه s.o.); to treat
contemptuously, meanly ( ه s.o.); to expose
ه) s.o.) to ridicule, make a laughingstock ( ه
of s.o.) II tabahdala pass. of I
بھدلة bahdala insult, affront, abuse,
outrage; meanness; triteness, insipidity
مبھدل mubahdal maltreated, oppressed,
miserable
بھر bahara a (bahr) and IV to glitter, shine; to
dazzle, overwhelm ( ه s.o., ھ s.o.’s eyes)│
شيء يبھر الابصار a dazzling, overwhelming
thing; -- pass. buhira to be out of breath,
to pant VII to be dazzled, blinded; to be
smitten with blindness; to. be out of breath
VIII to flaunt, parade, show off, present in
a dazzling light ( ب s.th.)
بھر bahr deception, dazzlement ( ب by)
بھر buhr difficult respiration, labored
breathing
بھر bahra (n. vic.) being dazzled,
dazzlement
بھرة buhra middle, center│ ... فى بھرة
amidst
ابھر abhar2 more brilliant, more
magnificent
ابھر abhar2 aorta (anat.)
بھار bahār pl. -āt spice
ابتھار ibtihār dazzling display, show ( ب
of s.th.)
باھر bāhir dazzling, brilliant, splendid
مبھور mabhūr breathless, out of breath,
panting
بھرج bahraja ( بھرج bahraja) to adorn, deck
out, dress up showily; to give a deceptive
brightness ( ھ to); to glamorize ( ھ s.th.); to
reject as false ( ه a witness); to fake,
counterfeit ( ھ s.th.) II tabahraja to adorn
o.s., spruce o.s. up, dress up; to be fake
بھرج bahraj false, spurious, fake, sham,
worthless, bad; counterfeit money; tinsel,
frippery, cheap finery; trash, cheap stuff
بھرجة bahraja empty show, hollow
pomp
بھرجان bahrajan tinsel, frippery
مبھرج mubahraj showy, tawdry, gaudy,
ornate, ostentatious; trashy, rubbishy,
cheap, inartistic
بھريز bahrīz (eg.) a soup
بھظ bahaza a (bahz) to oppress weigh down ( ه
s.o.; a load, work), weigh heavily ( ھ on
s.o.) IV do.
باھظ bāhiẓ heavy, oppressive, trying;
excessive, exorbitant, enormous;
expensive, costly
بھق bahaq a kind of lichen (bot.); herpetic
eruption, tetter; vitiligo alba, a mild form
of leprosy (med.)
بھل bahala a (bahl) to curse ( ه s.o.) V and VI
to curse one another VIII to supplicate,
pray humbly (to God)
ابھل abhal savin (Juniperus sabina; bot.)
ابتھال ibtihāl supplication, prayer
باھل bāhil pl. بھل buhl, buhhal free,
independent
بھلول buhlūl, bahlūl pl. بھاليل bahālīl2 buffoon,
jester, clown, fool
بھلوان bahlawān pl. -āt, -īya acrobat, tumbler,
equilibrist, ropedancer, tightrope walker
بھلوانى bahlawānī acrobatic│ حركات
بھلوانية (ḥarakāt) acrobatics; antics, capers
of a tumbler; طيران بھلوانى (ṯayarān) aerial
acrobatics, stunt flying
بھم IV to make obscure, dubious, unintelligible
ھ) s.th.) V and X to be obscure,
ambiguous, unintelligible ( على to s.o.)
بھمة bahma lamb, sheep
بھيم bahīm pl. بھم buhum jet-black
بھيمة bahīma pl. بھائم bahā’im beast,
animal, quadruped; pl. livestock, cattle,
(large) domestic animals
بھيمى bahīmī animal, bestial, brutish
بھيمية bahīmīya brutishness, bestiality,
brutality
ابھام ibhām obscurity; vagueness,
ambiguity
ابھام ibhām pl. اباھيم abāhīm2 thumb; big
toe
باھم bāhim big toe
مبھم mubham obscure, dark, cryptic,
doubtful, vague, ambiguous│ عدد مبھم
(‘adad) abstract number (math.); O العصب
المبھم (‘aṣab) the vagus (anat.); الاسم المبھم
(ism) the demonstrative pronoun (gram.)
بھو) بھا) 1 bahā u, bahuwa u and بھى bahiya a (
بھاء bahā’) to be beautiful III to vie,
compete ( ب ه with s.o. in s.th.); to pride
o.s. ( ب on) و be proud ( ب of), boast ( ب of,
ب ه to s.o. of s.th.) VI to compete with one
another; to be proud ( ب of), pride o.s. ( ب
on)
بھو bahw pl. ابھاء abhā’ hall; parlor,
drawing room, reception hall
بھى bahīy beautiful, magnificent,
splendid; brilliant, radiant, shining
بھاء bahā’ beauty, magnificence,
splendor; brilliancy
بھائى bahā’ī Bahai (adj.); (pl. -ūn) an
adherent of the Bahai sect, a Bahai
ابھى abhā more splendid, more brilliant
مباھاة mubāhāh and تباه tabāhin pride,
vainglory, boastfulness
بھوات 2 see بك
بوء) باء) bā’a u to come again, return; to
come back ( ب with s.th.), bring back,
yield, bring in ( ب s.th.)│ باء بالخيبة or بالفشل
(ḳaiba, fašal) to fail II to provide
accommodations ( ل and ه for s.o., ھ at a
place), put up ( ل or ه s.o., ھ at)│ بوأ مكانا
(makānan) to take a place, settle down,
live or stay at a place IV to provide
accommodations ( ه for s.o., ھ at a place);
to settle down, reside, live ( ب at a place) V
to settle down ( ھ at a place), occupy (
مركزا markazan a place), hold ( مقاما
maqāman a position)│ تبوأ مكانا (makānan)
to gain ground, become generally
accepted; تبوأ العرش (‘arš) to ascend the
throne; تبوأ الحكم (ḥukm) to come to power,
take over power
بيئة bī’a pl. -āt (usually pronounced
bai’a) pl. -āt residence, domicile, seat;
situation; surroundings, environment,
milieu; home, habitat
مباءة mabā’a place to which s.th. comes;
abode, dwelling, habitation
تبوء tabawwu’: تبوء العرش t. al-‘arš
accession to the throne
بوب II to divide into chapters or sections ( ھ
s.th.); to arrange in groups, arrange
systematically, class, classify ( ھ s.th.)
باب bāb pl. ابواب abwāb, بيبان bībān
door;; gate; opening, gateway; entrance;
chapter, section, column, rubric; group,
class, category; field, domain (fig.)│ الباب
العالى the Sublime Porte; باب المندب b. almandab
Bab el Mandeb (strait between
SW Arabia and Africa; geogr.); على الابواب
near, imminent; فتح بابا جديدا to open up a
new way, a new possibility; فتح باب futiḥa
bāb ... was (were) begun, ... got under
way; قفل باب الشيء (qafala) to put an end to
s.th., terminate, close s.th.; من باب الفضل (b.
il-faḍl) as a favor; من باب اولى (aulā) with
all the more reason, the more so; فى ھذا
الباب about this matter, about this; من باب
الضرورة ان (b. iḍ-ḍarūra) it is necessary
that ... ; ھذا ليس من باب الصدفة (b. iṣ-ṣudfa)
that’s no coincidence; كان من باب or دخل في
باب (with foll. genit.) to belong to, fall
under; فريد في بابه unique of its kind; طلع
على باب لله to pursue one's livelihood, earn
one’s bread 80
بابة bāba pl. -āt kind, sort, class,
category
بواب bawwāb pl. -ūn doorman,
gatekeeper
بوابة biwāba office of gatekeeper
بوابة bawwāba pl. -āt (large) gate,
portal│ بوابة القنطرة b. al-qanṯara lock gate
تبويب tabwīb division into chapters,
sectioning, classification, systematic
arrangement, grouping
مبوب mubawwab arranged in groups,
classed, classified
بوبلين boblīn poplin
بوبينة (Fr. bobine) bobīna spool, reel
بويت see بيت
بوتاسا، بوتاس (It. potasa) būtāsā, būtās potash
بوتقة būtaqa (usually pronounced bautaqa)
crucible, melting pot│ في بوتقة الزمان
(zamān) in the melting pot of time
بوجية (Fr. bougie) bužīh pl. -āt spark plug (eg.)
بوح) باح) bāḥa u (bauḥ) to become known, be
revealed, be divulged, leak out (secret); to
reveal, disclose, divulge ( ھ or ب s.th., a
secret; الى and ل to s.o.) IV to disclose,
reveal ( ھ or ب s.th., ل to s.o.); to release,
abandon, make public property, declare
ownerless ( ھ s.th.); to permit, allow, leave
(s.th., ل to s.o.); to justify, warrant ( ھ
s.th.) X to reveal ( ھ s.th.); to regard as
public property, as ownerless, as fair
game; to deem permissible, lawful ( ھ
s.th.); to hurt ( حرمته ḥurmatahū s.o.’s
honor); to take possession ( ھ of),
appropriate, take as booty ( ھ s.th.); to
seize, confiscate ( ھ s.th.)│ استباح دمه
(damahū) to proscribe, outlaw s.o.
بوح bauḥ divulgence, disclosure (of a
secret); confession
بوح būḥ wide, open space; courtyard;
hall
باحة bāḥa pl. -āt wide, open space; open
place, square, plaza; courtyard; hall
اباحة ibāḥa divulgence, disclosure (of a
secret); permission, authorization;
licentiousness
اباحى ibāḥī licentious, unrestrained,
uninhibited; anarchist; freethinker
اباحية ibāḥīya freethinking, libertinism;
anarchism
استباحة istibāḥa appropriation, capture,
seizure; spoliation, confiscation
مباح mubāḥ permitted, allowed,
permissible; legal, lawful, licit, legitimate;
open to everyone, permitted for all, free;
ownerless (1.1. Law); indifferent (said of
actions for which neither reward nor
punishment is to be expected, but which
are permissible, pl. مباحات indifferent,
permissible actions, Isl. Law)
بوخ) باخ) bāḳa u to abate, subside, let up,
decrease; to die, go out (fire); to fade,
bleach; to spoil, rot (e.g., meat) II to spoil
ھ) s.th.)
بواخ buwāḳ evaporation, exhalation,
vapor, steam
تبويخ tabwīḳ: تبويخ النكتة an-nukta the
spoiling of the point of a story
□ بايخ bāyiḳ spoiled, bad; vapid, insipid,
stale (also, e.g., of a joke)
بوخارست būḳārest Bucharest
بودرة (Fr. poudre) būdra powder
بودقة būdaqa pl. بوادق bawādiq2 crucible,
melting pot
بوذا būdā Buddha
بوذى būdī Buddhistic; Buddhist
بوذية būdīya Buddhism
بور ) بار) bāra u (baur, بوار bawār) to perish; to
lie fallow, be uncultivated (land); to be
futile, unsuccessful, unprofitable, lead to
nothing (work); to be unsalable, be dead
stock (merchandise)│ بارت البنات (bint) the
girl could not get a husband II to let lie
fallow ( ھ land); to make unprofitable,
useless ( ھ s.th.) IV to destroy
بور būr uncultivated, fallow│ ارض بور
(arḍ), pl. اراض بور (arāḍin) fallow land,
wasteland
بوار bawār perdition, ruin│ دار البوار hell
بائر bā’ir uncultivated, fallow (land)
بورانى baurānī (eg.) a vegetable stew
بور سعيد būr sa‘īd Port Said (seaport in NE
Egypt)
بور سودان būr sūdān Port Sudan (seaport in NE
Sudan)
بورتوريكو burturīkū Puerto Rico
بورتغال burtugāl Portugal
بورصة būrṣa pl. -āt stock exhange
بور فؤاد Port Fuad (seaport in NE Egypt,
opposite Port Said)
بورق bauraq borax
بورما burma Burma
بورى 1 (Turk. boru) būrī trumpet, bugle
بوروجى biūjī pl. -īya trumpeter, bugler
بورى 2 būrī (pl. بوارى bawārī) striped mullet
(Mugil cephalus; zool.)
بوريه 3 (Fr.) būrēh purée
بوز 1 II to pout, sulk, look glum, sullen
بوز būz pl. ابواز abwāz muzzle, snout
تبويزة tabwīza sullen mien
مبوز mubawwaz sullen, glum
بوز 2 būz, بوزة bum ice cream
بوزة 3 būza a beerlike beverage
باز 4 bāz pl. ابواز abwāz, بيزان bīzān falcon
بوس 1 būs bus
بوس)) باس 2 bāsa u (baus) to kiss ( ه s.o.)
بوسة bausa, būsa kiss
بوستو (It. busto) bustū corset
بوسطة، بوستة (It. posta) busṯa, busta post, mail
البوسفور al-busfūr the Bosporus
باش (بوش ) bāša u (bauš) to be boisterous,
shout, roar (crowd) II do.
بوش bauš pl. اوباش aubāš (for ابواش ) mob.
rabble
بوص 1 būṣ (coll.; n. un. ة) reed
بوصة būṣa pl. -āt inch
بوص 2 būṣ pl. ابواص abwāṣ, linen or silk fabric
بوصلة (It. bussola) bōṣla compass
بوطة būṯa crucible, melting pot
بوظة būẓa a beerlike beverage
بوع 1 bū‘ metatarsal bone (anat.)│ لا يعرف الكوع
من البوع h ث wouldn’t know his knee from
his elbow (proverbially, of a stupid
person)
باع 2 bā‘ pl. ابواع abwā‘ the span of the
outspread arms, fathom; in Eg. today = 4
ḍirā‘ mi‘mārīya = 3 m│ طويل الباع mighty,
powerful; capable, able; knowledgeable;
generous, liberal; قصير الباع powerless,
helpless, impotent, weak, incapable;
niggardly, stingy; قصير الباع impotence,
weakness; incapability ( عن of); بالباع والذراع
with might and main
بوغ 1 II to surprise
باغة 1 bāga celluloid; tortoise shell
بوغادة būgāda and بوغاضة būgāḍa potash, lye
بوغاز būgāz pl. بواغيز bawāgīiz2 strait(s);
harbor│ بوغاز الدردنيل the Dardanelles
بوفيه (Fr. buffet) būfēh buffet; bar; sideboard
بوق II to blow the trumpet
بوق būq pl. -āt, ابواق abwāq trumpet,
bugle; fanfare; horn (of an automobile, of
a gramophone); acoustic signaling device;
megaphone; mouthpiece, spokesman;
duplicity, treachery, betrayal│ بوق الصوت
b. aṣ-ṣaut or بوق الراديو loudspeaker
(radio); O بوق رحمى (raḥimi) oviduct,
Fallopian tube (anat.)
بواق bawwāq trumpeter, bugler
باقة bāqa bundle; bunch of flowers,
nosegay, bouquet
بائقة bā’iqa pl. بوائق bawā’iq2 misfortune,
calamity
بوقال būqāl, بوقالة būqala pl. بواقيل bawāqīl2
vessel without handles, mug
بوكسفورد boksəford patrol wagon, paddy
wagon, Black Maria
بوكسكاف (Engl.) bokəkāf box calf
بول) بال) 1 bāl u (baul) and V to make water,
urinate IV to be diuretic X to cause to
urinate
بول baul pl. ابوال abwāl urine│ مرض البول
السكرى maraḍ al-b. as-sukarī diabetes
بولى baulī uric, urinary, urinous│ المسالك
البولية the urinary passages; الامراض البولية
diseases of the kidney and urinary
bladder; تسمم بولى (tasammum) uremia
(med.)
بيلة bīla: O بيلة آحانية (āḥīnīya)
albuminuria; O بيلة دموية (damawīya)
hematuria (med.)
بوالة bawwāla public lavatory
مبولة mabwala pl. مباول mabāwil2 urinal;
a diuretic; -- mibwala chamber pot; toilet,
water closet
استبوال istibwāl: O استبوال ist. ad-dam
uremia (med.)
بال 2 bāl state, condition; heart, mind; notice,
regard, attention│ ذو بال significant,
notable, considerable, important, serious,
grave; فراغ البال farāg al-b. leisure; مشغول
البال anxious, uneasy, concerned, worried.;
طويل البال long-suffering, patient; ... ما باله
(with verb) why is it that he (it) ... ?
why ... ? ما بالك how about you? what do
you think? خلا باله ḳalā bāluhū his mind is
at rest, he has no worries; خطر بباله it
occurred to him, it came to his mind; اعطى
القى، جعل) باله الى (ل ) ) (a‘ṯā, alqā, ja‘ala) to
turn one’s mind to, give one’s attention to,
pay attention to, take into account, be
mindful of, bear in mind, heed s.th.; لم يلق
لقولى بالا lam yulqi li-qaulī bālan he didn't
pay any attention to what I said; لا يقل عنه
بالا (yaqillu) no less significant than this
بول 3 būl postage stamp
بال 4 bāl whale (zool.)
بالة 5 look up alphabetically
□ بولاد būlād (= فولاذ ) steel
بولصة see بوليسة
بولاق būlāq2 a district of Cairo
بولندة bōlanda Poland
بولندى bōlandī Polish; (pl. -ūn) Pole
بولو bōlō polo
بولونيا (It. Polonia) būlūniya Poland
بولوني būlūnī Polish; Pole
بوليس 1 (Fr. police) būlīs police│ بوليس الآداب vice
squad;  البوليس الجنا (jinā’ī) criminal
police; البوليس الحربى (ḥarbī) military
police; البوليس السرى (sirrī) secret police;
بوليس المرور traffic police
رواية بوليسية riwāya būlīsīya detective
story
بوليسة 2 and بوليصة (Fr. police) būlīsā, būlīṣa pl.
بوالص bawāliṣ بوالس , 2 bawālis2 certificate
of insurance, policy│ بوليسة الشحن b. aššaḥn
bill of lading
بوليفيا būlīfiyā Bolivia
بوليفى būlīfī Bolivian
O داء البولينا dā’ al-baulīnā uremia
بوم būm (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. ابوام abwām owl
بون 1 baun, būn interval, distance; difference
بان 2 coll.; n. un. ة) ben tree (Moringa; bot.;
horse-radish tree (Moringa oleifera; bot.);
Egyptian willow (Salix aegyptiaca L.;
bot.)
بونسايرس Buenos Aires
بونى (Engl.) bōnī pl. بوانى bawānī pony
باه bāh coitus; sexual potency; sexuality
بوھيميا (Engl.) bōhīmiyā Bohemia
بوھيمي bōhēmī Bohemian (adj. and n.)
بوھيمية bōhēmīya Bohemianism,
Bohemian life
بؤونة ba’ūna the tenth month of the Coptic
year
بوية (Turk. boya) bōya paint; shoe polish
بويجى، بوياجى (eg.) boyagī house painter,
painter; shoeshine, bootblack
بية bayya = باية look up alphabetically
بيئة see بوء
بيادة biyāda infantry (Eg.)
بيادى biyādī infantryman, foot soldier
بيان، بيانة، بيانو biyān, biyāna, biyānō pl. بيانات
biyānāt piano
بيب 1 bīb pipe, tube; feed pipe, spout (of a
reservoir or tank)
بيبة 2 bība (Western) smoking pipe
بيت) بات) bāta i ( مبيت mabīt) to pass or spend
the night; to stay overnight; to become; to
be ( فى in a situation); with foll. imperf.: to
get into a situation. Get to the point
where; to continue to do s.th., go on or
keep doing s.th., stick to s.th. II to brood
(by night; ھ about s.th.); to contrive, hatch
ھ) an evil plan, ل against s.o.), plot ( ل
against s.o.); to put up for the night ( ه
s.o.)│ بيت فى الصف (ṣaff; eg.) to flunk, fail
promotion (pupil) IV to put up for the
night ( ه s.o.)
بيت bait pl. بيوت buyūt, بيوتات buyūtāt
house, building; tent (of nomads); room;
apartment, flat; (garden) bed; family; case,
box, covering, sheath; pl. بيوتات large,
respectable houses; respectable families;
(pl. ابيات abyāt) verse│ بيت الابرة b. al-ibra
(navigator’s) compass; اھل البيت ahl al-b.
family, specif., the family of the Prophet;
اھل البيوتات people from good, respectable
families; بيوتات تجارية (tijārīya) commercial
houses; البيت الحرام (ḥaram) the Kaaba; بيت
الخلاء b. al-ḳalā’ and بيت الادب b. al-adab
toilet, water closet; بيت الداء origin or seat
of the disease; بيت ريفى (rīfī) country
house; بيت القصيدة and بيت القصيد (the
essential, principal verse of the kasidah,
i.e.) the quintessence; the gist, the
essential, the hit of s.th.; s.th. that stands
out from the rest, the right thing; بيت لحم
baitalaḥm2 Bethlehem; البيت الملك the ruling
house; بيت المال treasure house; fisc,
treasury, exchequer (Isl. Law); (Tun.)
administration of vacant Muslim states
بيتى baitī domestic, private, home, of the
house, house- (in compounds);
domesticated (animals); home made
بويت buwait pl. -āt small house; small
tent
بيات bayyāt pl. -ūn and بياتة bayyāta
boarder (student); (pl. -ūn) pupil of a
boarding school (tun.)
بيوت bayyūt stale, old
مبيت mabīt overnight stop, overnight
stay; shelter for the night
بائت bā’it stale, old; (eg.) not promoted,
فى الصف (ṣaff) in school
مبيت mubayyit plotter, schemer, intrigant
بيجاما bījāmā and بيجامة bījāma pajama
بيد) باد) 1 bāda i to perish, die, pass away,
become extinct IV to destroy, exterminate,
extirpate ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
بيد ان baida anna although, whereas;
(esp., introducing a sentence:) yet,
however, but, ... though
بيداء baidā’2 pl. بيد bīd, بيداوات baidawāt
desert, steppe, wilderness
ابادة ibāda annihilation, extermination,
eradication, extirpation
بائد bā’id passing, transitory, temporal;
past, bygone
مبيد mubīd destructive, annihilative; (pl.
-āt) means of extermination│ مبيدات حشرية
(ḥašarīya) insecticides
بيادة 2 look up alphabetically
بيدر baidar pl. بيادر bayādir2 threshing floor
بيدق baidaq (and بيذق ) pl. بيادق bayādiq2 pawn
(in chess)
بيذنجان see باذنجان alphabetically
1□ بيارة bayyāra pl. -āt (pal.) irrigation wheel;
plantation
بيرا، بيرة 2 (It. birra) bīrā, bīra beer│ مصنع البيرا
maṣna‘ al-b. brewery
بيرق bairaq pl. بايرق bayāriq2 flag, banner,
standard
بيرقدار bairaqdār color-bearer, standardbearer
جبال البيرنيه (Fr. Pyrénées) jibāl al-bīrinēh the
Pyrenees
بيرو 1 bērū Peru
بيرو 2 (Fr. bureau) bīrō pl. -āt office, bureau
بيروت bairūt2 Beirut (capital of Lebanon)
بيروتى bairūtī pl. بوارتة bawārita, بيارتة
bayārita a native or inhabitant of Beirut
بيروقراطى bīruqrāṯī bureaucratic
بيروقراطية bīrūqrāṯīya bureaucracy; red tape
بيزنطيا bīzanṯiyā Byzantium
بيزنطي bīzanṯī Byzantine
بيسون bīsōn bison
بيض) باض) bāḍa i to lay eggs (also ھ ); to stay,
settle down, be or become resident ( ب at a
place)│ باض بالمكان وفرخ (wa-farraḳa) to be
born and grow up in a place; to establish
itself and spread (plague) II to make
white, paint white, whitewash, whiten ( ھ
s.th.); to bleach, blanch ( ھ s.th., textiles,
laundry, rice, etc.); to tin, tinplate ( ھ
s.th.); to make a fair copy ( ھ of s.th.)│
بيض الوجه (wajhahū) to make s.o. appear
blameless, in a favorable light, to
whitewash, exculpate, vindicate, justify
s.o., play s.o. up, make much of s.o.; to
honor s.o., show honor to s.o.; بيض لله وجھه
may God make him happy! لا يبيض من
صحيفته this doesn't show him in a
favorable light V pass. of II; IX to be or
become white
بيض baiḍ pl. بيوض buyūḍ eggs
بيضة baiḍa (n. un.) pl. -āt egg; testicle; helmet;
main part, substance, essence│ بيضة الديك
b. ad-dīik (the egg of a rooster i.e.) an
impossible or extraordinary thing; بيضة البلد
b. al-balad a man held in high esteem in
his community; فى بيضة النھار (b. in-nahār)
in broad daylight; بيضة الصيف b. aṣ-ṣaif
the hottest part of the summer; بيضة الاسلام
the territory or pale of Islam; الدفاع عن بيضة
الدين، ٨٥ عن بيضة الوطن (b. id-dīn, b. ilwaṯan)
defense of the faith, of the country;
بيضة الخدر b. al-ḳidr a woman seluded from
the outside world, a chaste, respectable
woman
بيضى baiḍī, بيضوى baiḍawī and بيضاوى
baiḍāwī egg-shaped, oviform, oval, ovate
بييضة buyaiḍa and بويضة buwaiḍa pl. -āt
small egg, ovule; ovum
بياض bayāḍ white, whiteness:
whitewash; -- (pl. -āt) barren, desolate,
uncultivated land, wasteland: gap, blank
space (in a manuscript); blank; leucoma
(med.); linen, pl. بياضات linen goods,
linens; (syr.) milk, butter, and eggs│ بياض
البيت b. al-bait white of egg, albumen: بياض
العين b. al-‘ain the white of the eye: بياض
النھار b. an-nahār daylight, (acc.) by day,
during the daytime; بياض يومه وسواد ليله
bayāḍa yaumihi wa-sawāda lailihi by day
and by night: بياض الوجه b. al-wajh tine
character, good reputation; سمك بياض
samak b. a Nile fish (eg.); على بياض blank,
free from writing, printing or marks,
uninscribed; ( ارتدى or) لبس البياض (labisa,
irtada) to dress in white
بيوض bayūḍ pl. بيض buyūḍ, bīḍ (egg-)
laying
ابيض abyaḍ2, f. بيضاء baiḍā’2, pl. بيض bīḍ
white; bright; clean, shiny, polished;
blameless, noble, sincere (character);
empty, blank (sheet of paper); pl. البيضان
al-bīḍān the white race; الابيض white of
egg, albumen│ ارض بيضاء (arḍ) barren,
uncultivated land, wasteland; ثورة بيضاء
(ṯaura) peaceful, bloodless revolution;
الخيط الابيض (ḳaiṯ) first light of dawn; الذھب
الابيض (dahab) platinum; بالسلاح الابيض with
cold steel; صحيفته بيضاء (ṣaḥīfatuhū) his
reputation is good: he has noble de.ds to
his credit, he has a noble character; صحف
بيضاء (ṣuḥuf) noble, glorious deeds: اكذوبة
بيضاء (ukdūba) white lie, fih: ليلة بيضاء
(laila) a sleepless night, a night spent
awake: الموت الابيض (maut) natural death; يد
بيضاء (yad) beneficent hand, benefaction
مبيض mabīḍ, mibyaḍ ovary (anat.)
تبييضة tabyīḍa fair copy
O ابيضاض ibyiḍāḍ leukemia (med.)
بائض bā’iḍ pl. بوائض bawā’iḍ2 (egg-)
laying
مبيض mubayyiḍ pl. -ūn whitewasher;
bleacher; tinner; copyist, transcriber (of
fair copy)
مبيضة mubayyaḍa fair copy
بيطر baiṯara to practice veterinary science; to
shoe ( ھ a horse)
بيطار baiṯar pl. بياطرة bayātira
veterinarian; farrier
بيطرى baiṯarī veterinary│ الطب البيطرى
(ṯibb) veterinary medicine; طبيب بيطرى
veterinarian
بيطرة baiṯara veterinary science; farriery
بيع) باع) 1 bā‘a i (bai‘, مبيع mabī‘) to sell ( ھ s.th.,
ه or ل to s.o., ب for a price) III to make a
contract ( ه with s.o.); to pay homage ( ه to
s.o.); to acknowledge as sovereign or
leader ( ه s.o.), pledge allegiance ( ه to) IV
to offer for sale ( ھ s.th.) VI to agree on
the terms of a sale, conclude a bargain VII
to be sold, be for sale VIII to buy,
purchase ( من ھ s.th. from s.o. and ھ ه from
s.o. s.th.)│ لا ابتاع منه ولا ابيعه (abtā‘u,
abī‘uhū) I don't trust him
بيع bai‘ pl. بيوع buyū‘, بيوعات buyū‘āt
sale│ للبيع for sale; جبرية (بيوعات or) بيوع
(jabrīya) forced sales, compulsory sale by
auction: بيع بالجملة (jumla) wholesale sale;
بيع بالخيار (ḳiyār) optional sale (Isl. Law);
بيع لآخر راغب (li-āḳir rāgibīn) sale to the
highest bidder; بيع العينة b. al-‘īna credit
operation (Isl. Law)
بيعة bai‘a agreement, arrangement;
business deal, commercial transaction,
bargain; sale; purchase; homage│ على البيعة
into the bargain
بياع bayyā‘ salesman, merchant, dealer,
commission agent, middleman
مبيع mabī‘ sale, pl. -āt sales (esp. on the
stock market)
مبايعة mubāya‘a pl. -āt conclusion of
contract; homage; pledge of allegiance;
transaction
ابتياع ibtiyā‘ purchase
بائع bā’i‘2 pl. باعة bā‘a seller, vendor;
dealer, merchant; salesman
بائعة bā’i‘a saleswoman
مبيع mabī‘ and مباع mubā‘ sold
مبتاع mubtā‘ buyer, purchaser
بيعة 2 bai‘a pl. -āt, بيع biya‘ (Chr.) church;
synagogue
بيك bē (eg.), bēg, bēk pl. بيكوات bēgawāt (syr.)
bey (title of courtesy); cf. بك
بيكوية bīkawīya rank of bey
بيكار bīkār compass, (pair of) dividers
بيكباشى see بكباشى
بيكه (Fr.) bīkeh plqué (fabric)
بيل 1 (Fr. bille) bīl ball│ كرسى بيل kursī b. ball
bearing
بيلة 2 bīla see بول
بيلسان bailasān black elder (bot.)
بيلھارسيا bilharsiyā bilharziasis, schistosomiasis
(med.)
بيليه (Fr. bille) bīlya pl. -āt little ball, marble
بيمارستان bīmāristān hospltal; lunatic asylum
بين) بان) 1 bāna i ( بيان bayān) to be or become
plain, evident, come out, come to light; to
be clear ( ل to s.o.); ( بين bain, بينونة
bainūna) to part, be separated ( من from) II
to make clear, plain, visible, evident ( ھ
s.th.); to announce ( ھ s.th.); to state ( ھ
s.th.); to show, demonstrate ( ھ s.th.); to
explain, expound, elucidate ( ھ s.th.),
throw light ( ھ on) III to part, go away ( ه
from), leave ( ه s.o.); to differ, be different
ھ، ه) from), be unlike s.th. ( ھ ); to
contradict ( ھ s.th.), be contrary ( ھ to); to
conflict, be at variance, be inconsistent ( ھ
with s.th.) IV to explain, expound,
elucidate ( ل ھ s.th. to s.o.); to separate,
sift, distinguish ( من ھ s.th. from); to be
clear, plain, evident V to be or become
clear, intelligible ( ل to s.o.); to turn out,
prove in the end, appear, become evident;
to follow ( من from), be explained ( من by);
to be clearly distinguished ( من from); to
seek to ascertain ( ھ s.th.), try to get at the
mct ھ) 8 of); to eye or examine critically,
scrutinize ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to look, peer ( ھ
at); to see through s.th. ( ھ ), see clearly,
perceive, notice, discover, find out ( ھ
s.th.); to distinguish ( من ھ s.th. from) VI
to differ, be different, be opposed, be
contrary; to vary greatly, differ widely; to
vary, differ, fluctuate ( بين between two
amounts or limits) X to be or become
clear, plain, evident; to Bee, know,
perceive, notice ( ھ s.th.); pass. ustubīna to
follow clearly, be clearly seen ( من from)
بين bain separation, division; interval;
difference│ ذات البين enmity, disunion,
discord; فى البين meantime, meanwhile
بين baina (prep.) or فيما بين fī-ma b.
between; among, amidst│ بين – و – either --
or, partly -- partly, e.g., كان القوم بين صامت
ومتكلم (ṣāmitin wa-mutakallimin) the crowd
was divided among those who were silent
and those who talked; بين يديه (yadaihi) in
front of him, before him, in his presence;
with him. on him, in his possession, e.g., لا
سلاح بين يديه (silāḥa) he hasn’t got a
weapon on him, he is unarmed; فيما بين ذلك
meanwhile, in the meantime; فيما بينى وبين
نفسى in my heart, at heart, inwardly; بين
ذراعيه in his arms; من بينھم min bainihim
from among them, from their midst; بين بين
something between, a cross, a mixture, a
combination; neither good nor bad,
medium, tolerable; شيء بين بين something
between, a cross, a mixture, a
combination; بين وقت وآخر (waqt, āḳar), بين
فترة وأخرى (fatra, uḳrā) at times, from time
to time
ما بين mā-baina look up alphabetically
بينا bainā, بينما bainamā (conj.) while;
whereas
بين bayyin clear, plain, evident, obvious,
patent; (pl. ابنياء abyinā’2) eloquent
بيان bayān pl. -āt clearness, plainness,
patency, obviousness; statement,
declaration, announcement; manifestation;
explanation, elucidation, illustration;
information, news; (official) report.
(official) statement; enumeration, index,
list; eloquence; البيان the Koran; see also
alphabetically│ بيان الحقيقة correction
(journ.); غني عن البيان (ganīy) selfexplanatory,
self-evident; علم البيان ‘ilm alb.
rhetoric; عطف البيان ‘aṯf al-b. explicative
apposition (gram.)
بيانى bayānī explanatory, illustrative;
rhetorical
بينة bayyina pl. -āt clear proof,
indisputable evidence; evidence (Isl.
Law); a document serving &8 evidence│
بينة ظرفية (ẓarfīya) circumstantial evidence;
على بينة as has been proved; كان على بينة من
to be fully aware of; to he well-informed,
well-posted, up-to-date about
ابين abyan2 clearer, more distinct, more
obvious
تبيان tibyān exposition, demonstration,
explanation, illustration
تبيين tabyīn and ابانة ibāna exposition,
demonstration, explanation, illustration
تباين tabayun difference, unlikeness,
dissimilarity, disparity
تباينى tabāyunī different, differing,
conflicting
بائن bā’in clear, plain, evident, obvious,
patent; final, irrevocable (divorce; Isl.
Law); of great length│ بائن الطول b. aṯ-ṯūl
towering, of unusual height (person)
بائنة bā’ina bride’s dowry
مبيونة mabyūna distance
مبين mubīn clear, plain, evident, obvious,
patent│ الكتاب المبين the Koran
متباين mutabāyin dissimilar, unlike,
differential, differing, varying
بيان، بيانة 2 look up alphabetically
بينباشى see بكباشى
بينتو see بنتو
بيه bēh = بك
بيوريه 1 (Engl.) biyūrē purée
بيوريه 2 (Fr. pyorrhée) biyōrēh pyorrhea (med.)
ت
ت 1 abbreviation of تلفون telephone
ت 2 ta (particle introducing oaths) by, 􀍿 تا tallāhi
by God!
تاء tā’ name of the letter ت
تابوت tābūt pl. توابيت tawābīt2 box, case, chest,
coffer; casket, coffin, sarcophagus│ تابوت
العھد t. al-‘ahd ark of the covenant; تابوت
رفع المياه t. raf‘ al-miyāh Archimedean
screw; تابوت الساقية t. as-āqiya scoop wheel,
Persian wheel
تابيوكا tābiyōkā tapioca
تأتأ ta’ta’a to stammer (with fright)
تاج see توج
تؤدة see وأد
تأر 1 IV اتأر البصر (baṣara) to stare ( ه or الى at
s.o.)
تارة 2 see تور
تازة tāza (= طازة ) fresh, tender, new
تاك taka fem. of the demonstrative pronoun ذاك
dāka (dual nom. تانك tānika, genit., acc.
تينك tainika)
توأم، توءم tau’am, f. ة, pl. توائم tawā’im2 twin
التاميز at-tāmīz the Thames
تاى tay (tun., alg.) tea│ تاى احمر black tea
تايور tāyōr and تايير tāyēr (Fr. tailleur) pl. -āt
ladies’ tailored suit, tailleur
تب tabba i (tabb, تبب tabab, تباب tabāb) to
perish, be destroyed X to stabilize, be
stabilized, be or become stable; to be
settled, established, well-ordered, regular,
normal; to progress well│ استتب له الامر
everything went well with him
تبا له tabban lahū may evil befall him!
may he perish!
استتباب istitbāb normalcy, regularity,
orderliness, order; stability; favorable
course or development
التبت at-tibt Tibet
تبر tabara i (tabr) to destroy, annihilate ( ھ
s.th.)
تبر tibr raw metal; gold dust, gold
nuggets; ore
تبار tabār ruin, destruction
تبرية tibrīya dandruff
تبريز tabrīz2 Tabriz (city in NW Iran, capital of
Azerbaijan province)
تبع tabi‘a a (taba‘, تباعة tabā‘a) to follow,
succeed ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.), come after s.o. or
s.th. ( ھ، ه ); to trail, track ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th) go
after s.o. or s.th. ( ھ، ه ); to walk behind s.o.
ه) ); to pursue ( ھ s.th.); to keep, adhere,
stick ( ھ to s.th.), observe ( ھ s.th; to
follow, take ( ھ a road), enter upon ( ھ a
road or course); to comply ( ھ with s.th.);
to belong, pertain ( ھ to); to be
subordinate, be attached ( ه to s.o.), be
under s.o.’s ( ه) authority or command, be
under s.o. ( تبع الدروس │ ( ه (durūsa) to attend
classes regularly III to follow ( ھ، ه s.o.
s.th.; also = to keep one's mind or eyes on,
e.g., on a development); to agree, concur (
ه with s.o., على in s.th.), be in agreement or
conformity ( ھ، على with); to pursue,
chase, follow up ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to
continue ( ھ s.th.; سيره sairahū on one’s
way), go on ( ھ with or in) IV to cause to
succeed or follow (in time, rank, etc.); to
place ( ه s.o.) under s.o.’s ( ه) authority or
command, subordinate ( ه ه to s.o. s.o., ھ ھ
to s.th. s.th.) V to follow ( ھ s.th., esp. fig.:
a topic, a development, the news, etc., = to
watch, study); to pursue, trail, track ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to trace ( ھ s.th.); to be
subordinate ( ھ، ه to), be attached ( ه to
s.o.) VI to follow in succession, be
successive or consecutive, come or
happen successively; to form an
uninterrupted sequence VIII to follow,
succeed ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.), come after ( ;(ھ، ه
to make ( ھ s.th.) be succeeded or followed
ب) by s.th. else); to prosecute ( ه s.o.), take
legal action ( ه against); to follow, obey,
heed, observe, bear in mind ( ھ s.th.); to
pursue ( ھ s.th.); to examine, investigate,
study ( ھ s.th.); pass. uttubi‘a to have or
find followers, adherents ( على for s.th.,
e.g., for an idea)│ اتبع سياسة (siyāsatan) to
pursue a policy; اتبع يمينه (yamīnahū) to
keep (to the) right X to make ( ه s.o.)
follow, ask ( ه s.o.) to follow; to seduce ( ه
s.o.); to have as its consequence,
engender, entail ( ھ s.th.); to subordinate
to o.s., make subservient to o.s. ( ھ s.th.)
تبع taba‘ succession; subordinateness,
dependency: following. Followers;
subordinate, subservient ( ل to s.th.): بالتبع
successively, consecutively; تبعا ل taba‘an
li according to, in accordance with,
pursuant to, in observance of; due to, in
consequence of, as the result of; (pl. اتباع
atbā‘) follower, companion, adherent,
partisan; subject, national, citizen;
appertaining, appurtenant, pertinent,
incident
تبعى taba‘ī: عقوبة تبعية (‘uqūba) incidental
punishment (jur.)
تبعة tabi‘a pl. -āt consequence;
responsibility, irresponsibleness│ القى التبعة
على (alqā) to make s.o. or s.th. responsible
تبيع tabī‘ pl. تباع tibā‘ following attached,
attending, adjunct; -- (pl. تبائع tabā’i‘2)
follower, adherent, partisan; aide, help,
assistant, attendant, servant
تبعية taba‘īya pl. -āt subordination,
subjection; subordinateness, dependency;
citizenship, nationality; بالتبعية
subsequently, afterwards; consequently,
hence, therefore, accordingly
تباعا tibā‘an in succession, successively,
consecutively, one after the other, one by
one
متابعة mutāba‘a following, pursuing,
pursuit, prosecution; continuation
اتباع itbā‘ (gram.) intensification by
repeating a word with its initial consonant
changed, such as katīr batīr
تتبع tatabu‘ following (esp. fig., of an
argument, of a development, see V
above); pursuit; prosecution; succession,
course│ التتبع التاريخى the course of history;
تتبعات عدلية (‘adlīya) legal action,
prosecution
تتابع tatābu‘ sucession; relay (athlet.);
بالتتابع consecutively, successively, in
succession; serially, in serialized form
اتباع ittibā‘ following; pursuit (e.g., of a
policy); adherence (to), compliance
(with), observance (of); اتباعا ل ittibā‘an li
according to, in accordance or conformity
with, pursuant to, in observance of
O اتباعى ittibā‘ī classical
O اتباعية ittibā‘īya classicism
تابع tābi‘ pl. تبعة taba‘a, تباع tubbā‘
following, succeeding, subsequent;
subsidiary, dependent; minor, secondary;
subordinate ( ل to s.o.), under s.o. ( ;(ل
belonging ( ل to); subject to s.o.’s ( (ل
authority or competence; adherent ( ل to)
following ( ل s.o. or s.th.); -- (pl. اتباع
atbā‘) adherent, follower, partisan;
subject, citizen, national; subordinate,
servant; factotum; (pl. توابع ) appositive
(gram.); appendix, addendum,
supplement; O function (math.)│ الدول
التابعة (duwal) the satellite countries
تابعة tābi‘a pl. توابع tawābi‘2 female
attendant, woman servant; a female
demon who accompanies women;
appurtenance, dependency; consequence,
effect, result; responsibility; pl. توابع
dependencies, dependent territories; O
satellites (pol.), = الدول التوابع (duwal) the
satellite countries
تابعية tābi‘īya nationality, citizenship
متبوع matbū‘ followed, succeeded ( ب
by); one to whom service or obedience is
rendered, a leader, a principal (as
distinguished from تابع subordinate) 90
متتابع mutatābi‘ successive, consecutive
متبع muttaba‘ observed, adhered to,
complied with (e.g. regulation, custom);
followed, traveled (road, course)
تبغ tibg pl. تبوغ tubūg tobaooo
تبل tabala i to consume, waste, make sick ( ه
s.o.; said of love) II, III and توبل taubala to
spice, season ( ھ s.th)
تابل tābal, tābil pl. توابل tawābil2
coriander (bot.); spice, condiment,
seasoning
تبولة tabbūla (syr., leb.) a kind of salad
made of bulgur, parsley, mint, onion,
lemon juice, spices, and oil
متبول matbūl (Iove-)sick, weak, ravaged,
consumed
متبل mutabbal spiced, seasoned,
flavored; (syr., leb.) stuffed with a mixture
of rice, chopped meat and various spices,
e.g., بذنجان متبل stuffed eggplant
تبلوه (Fr. tableau) tablōh pl. -āt a painting
تبن tibn straw
تبنى tibnī straw-colored, flaxen
تبان tabbān straw vendor
درب التابنة darb at-tabbāna the Milky
Way
متبن matban pl. متابن matābin2 strawstack
تبيوكا tabiyōkā tapioca
التتر 1 at-tatar and التتار at-tatar the Tatars
تترى tatarī Tatarian; Tatar
تترى tatra (from وتر ) one after the other,
successively, in succession
تتك titik trigger
تتن tutun tobacco
تتنوس tetanūs tetanus (med.)
تجر tajara u and VIII to trade, do business; to
deal ( فى or ب in s.th.) III do. ( ه with s.o.)
تجارة tijāra commerce; traffic, trade;
merchandise
تجارى tijārī commercial, mercantile,
trade, trading, business, (used
attributively); commercialized│ بيت تجارى
(bait) commercial house, business house;
الحركة التجارية (ḥaraka) trade, traffic; شركة
تجارية (širka) trading company; اتفاق تجارى
(ittifāq) trade agreement
متجر matjar pl. متاجر matājir2 bussiness,
transaction, dealing; merchandise; store,
shop
متجرى matjar commercial, trade, trading,
business (used attributively)
اتجار ittijār trade, business ( ب in s.th)
تاجر tājir pl. تجار tujjār, tijār merchant,
trader, businessman, dealer, tradesman│
تاجر الجملة t. al-jumla wholesale dealer; تاجر
التجزئة t. at-tajzi’a and تاجر القطاعى t. alqiṯā‘
ī retailer
بضاعة تاجرة biḍā‘a tājira salable,
marketable merchandise
تجاه tujāha (prep.) in front of, opposite, face to
face with, facing
تحت taḥta (prep.) under; below, beneath,
underneath│ تحت (tajriba) on probation;
in an experimental state; تحت التحضير in
preparation; تحت الحفظ (ḥifẓ) in custody,
under guard; تحت السداد (sadād), تحت التسديد
due, outstanding, unsettled, unpaid (com.);
تحت السلاح under arms; تحت سمعھم
(sam‘ihim) in their hearing, for them to
hear; تحت التسوية (taswiya) outstanding,
unpaid, unsettled (com.); تحت اشراف
(išrāfi) under the patronage or
superintendence of; تحت الشعور
subconscious; تحت تصرفه (taṣarrufihī) at
his disposal; تحت الطبع (ṯab‘) in press; تحت
عنوان (‘unwāni) under the title of; تحت اعيننا
(a‘yuninā) before our eyes; تحت التمرين in
training; تحت اليد (yad) in hand, at hand,
available, handy; تحت يده in his power; من
تحت min taḥt from under, from beneath;
under
تحت taḥtu (adv.) below, beneath,
underneath
تحتانى taḥtānī lower, under- (in
compounds)│ ملابس تحتانية underwear
تحف IV to present ( ب ه or ھ ه s.o. with s.th)
تحفة tuḥfa pl. تحف tuḥaf gift, present;
gem (fig.), curiosity, rarity, article of
virtu, objet d'art; work of art│ تحفة فنية
(fannīya) unique work of art
متحف matḥaf pl. متاحف matāḥif2
museum│ متحف الشمع m. aš-šam‘
waxworks
تخ taḳḳa u to become sour, ferment (dough)
تخت 1 pl. tuḳūt bed, couch; bench; seat; sofa;
chest, case, box, coffer, cabinet;
wardrobe; platform, dais; band,
orchestra│ تخت الملك t. al-mulk throne;
royal residence, capital; تخت المملكة t. almamlaka
capital (of a country)
تخت روان، تختروان taḳtaruwān,
taḳtarawān mule-borne litter
تختة 2 taḳta board; desk; blackboard
تختخ taḳtaḳa to rot, decay
تخم 1 taḳima a to suffer from indigestion, feel
sick from overeating IV to surfeit, satiate (
ه s.o.) to give ( ه s.o.) indigestion, make
sick ( ه s.o.); to overstuff, cloy ( ه the
stomach) VIII = I
تخمة tuḳama, tuḳma pl. تخم , -āt
indigestion, dyspeptic
متخوم matḳūm suffering from
indigestion, dyspeptic
تخم 2 taḳama i to fix the limits of ( ھ ), delimit,
limit, confine, bound ( ھ s.th.) III to border
ھ) on), be adjacent ( ھ to s.th.)
تخم taḳm pl. تخوم tuḳūm boundary,
border, borderline, limit
متاخم mutāḳm neighboring, adjacent
تدمر tadmur2, usually pronounced tudmur2
Palmyra (ancient city of Syria, now a
small village)
تدمرى tadmurī, usually pronounced tudmurī
anyone│ لا تدمرى nobody, not a living soul
ترابيزة (eg.; tarābēza) pl. -āt table
تراخوما trāḳōmā trachoma (med.)
تراس (Fr. terrasse) terās terrace
ترام، ترامواى trām, tramwāy tramway
ترب tariba a to be or become dusty, covered
with dust II and IV to cover with dust or
earth ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.) III to be s.o.’s ( (ه
mate or comrade, be of the same age ( ه as
s.o.) V to be dusty, be covered with dust
ترب tirb pl. اتراب atrāb person of the
same age, contemporary, mate,
companion, comrade
ترب tarib dusty, dust-covered
تربة turba pl. ترب turab dust; earth, dirt;
ground (also fig.); soil; grave, tomb;
graveyard, cemetery, burial ground
تربى turabī pl. -īya (eg.) gravedigger
تراب turāb pl. اتربة atriba, تربان tirbān
dust, earth, dirt; ground, soil
ترابى turābī dusty; dustlike, powdery;
earthlike, earthy; dust-colored, gray
O ترابة turāba cement
تريبة tarība pl. ترائب tarā’ib2 chest,
thorax
متربة matraba poverty, misery,
destitution; (pl. متارب matārib2) dirt quarry
مترب mutrib dusty, dust-covered
تربس tarbasa (= دربس ) to bolt ( ھ a door)
ترباس tirbās pl. ترابيس tarābis ترابس , 2
tarābis2 bolt, l&tch (of a door or window)
تربنتين tarbantīn turpentine
تربيزة (eg.) tarabēza table
تربين trbīn pl. -āt turbine
تراث see وترث
ترتر tirtir gold and silver spangles (eg.)
ترجم tarjama to translate ( ھ s.th. عن from one
language الى to another); to interpret ( ھ
s.th.); to treat ( ھ of s.th.) by way of
explanation, expound ( ھ s.th.); to write a
biography ( ل of s.o., also (ه
ترجم tarjama pl. تراجم tarājim2
translation; interpretation; biography (also
ترجمة الحياة ); introduction, preface,
foreword (of a book)│ الترجمة السبعينية
(sab‘īnīya) the Septuagint
ترجمان turjumān pl. تراجمة tarājima,
تراجيم tarājim2 transla.tor, interpreter
,-:;" mutarjim translator, interpreter;
biographer
مترجم mutarjam translated│ مترجم على الفلم
(film) synchronized (film)
ترح tariḥa a (taraḥ) and V to grieve, be sad II
and IV to grieve, distress ( ه s.o.)
ترح taraḥ pl. اتراح atrāḥ grief, distress,
sadness
ترزى tarzī pl. ترزية tarzīya (eg.) tailor
ترزية tarziya tailoring
تراس 1 look up alphabetically
ترس 2 II to provide with a shield or armor
ترس turs pl. اترس atrās, تروس turūs
shield; disk of the sun; -- tirs pl. turūs
cogwheel, gear│ صندوق التروس ṣundūq alt.
gearbox, transmission; سمك الترس samak
at-turs turbot (zool.)
مترس matras, mitras pl. متارس matāris2 and
متراس mitrās, pl. متاريس matārīs2 bolt, door
latch; rampart, bulwark, barricade; esp. pl.
متاريس barricades
ترسانة tarsāna, ترسحانة tarsḳāna arsenal;
shipyard, dockyard
ترسكل (Fr. tricycle) tricycle
ترسينة (It. terrazzino) tarasīna balcony
ترع tari‘a a to be or become full (vessel) IV to
fill ( ھ s.th., esp. a vessel)
ترعة tur‘a pl. ترع tura‘, -āt canal;
artificial waterway│ ترعة الايراد t. al-īrād
feeder, irrigation canal; ترعة التصريف
drainage canal (Eg.); الترعة الشريفة the
Residence of the Sultan of Morocco
ترغل، ترغلة turgul, turgulla turtledove
ترف tarija a to live in opulence, in luxury IV
to effeminate ( ه s.o.); to provide with
opulent means, surround with luxury ( ه
s.o.) V = I
ترف taraf and ترفة turfa luxury,
opulence, affluence; effemination
ترف tarif opulent, sumptuous, luxurious
مترف mutraf living in ease and luxury;
sumptuous, luxurious; luxuriously
adorned, ornate, overdecorated ( ب with)
ترفاس tirfās (magr.) truffle (bot.)
ترفل tarfala to strut
ترقوة tarquwa pl. تراق tarāqin collarbone,
clavicle (anat.)
ترك 1 taraka u (tark) to let be, leave, relinquish,
renounce, give up, forswear ( ھ s.th.); to
desist, refrain, abstain ( ھ from s.th.); to
leave, quit ( ه s.o., ھ a place); to leave out,
omit, drop, neglect, pass over, skip ( ھ
s.th.); to leave ( ل or الى ھ s.th. to); to leave
behind, leave, bequeath, make over ( ھ
s.th., ل to s.o.; as a legacy)│ تركه يفعل 93 to
let s.o. do s.th.; ترك مكانا الى to leave one
place for (another); تركه في ذمته (fī
dimmatihī) to leave s.th. in s.o.’s care,
leave s.th. to s.o.; تركه على حاله to leave
s.th. or s.o. unchanged, leave s.th. or s.o.
alone; تركه وشأنه (wa-ša’nahū) to leave s.o.
alone, leave s.o. to his own devices III to
leave ( ه s.o.); to leave alone ( ه s.o.); to
leave off hostilities ( ه against s.o.)
ترك tark omission, neglect;
relinquishment, abandonment; leaving,
leaving behind
تركة tarika pl. -āt (also tirka) heritage,
legacy, bequest
تريكة tarīka pl. ترائك tarā’ik2 old maid,
spinster
متارك mutāraka truce
متروك matrūk pl. -āt heritage, legacy
ترك 2 II to Turkify, Turkicize ( ه s.o.) X to
become a Turk, become Turkified, adopt
Turkish manners and customs
الترك at-turk and الاتراك al-atrāk the
Turks
تركى turkī Turkish; Turk; التركية atturkīya
theTurkish language
تركيا turkiya Turkey
تتريك tatrīk Turkification
تركستان turkistān2 Turkstan
التركمان at-turkumān the Turkmen
ترمبيط turumbēt (syr.) pl. -āt (Western) drum;
ترمبيطة turumbīṯa (eg.) pl. -āt do.; specif.,
bass drum
ترمبطجى turumbaṯgi (eg.) drummer; bandsman
(mil.)
ترمس turmus, ترموس turmūs lupine (bot.)
ترمومتر termūmitr thermometer
ترنج turunj see اترج، اترنج
تره tariha a to concern o.s. with trifles
ترھة turraha pl. -āt sham, mockery,
farce; lie, humbug, hoax
ترواده (Fr. Troade) tirwāda Troy
تروب (Engl. troop) squad, platoon; squadron│
تروب سوارى (sawārī) cavalry squadron
(Eg.)
ترمبيتجى = ترمبطجى see under ترمبيط above
ترياق tiryāq theriaca; antidote
تريكو (Fr.) tricot
تسعة tis‘a (f. تسع tis‘) nine
تسعة عشر tis‘ata ‘ašara, f. تسع عشرة tis‘a
‘ašrata nineteen
تسع tus‘ pl. اتساع atsā‘ one ninth, the
ninth part
تسعون tis‘ūn ninety
التاسع at-tāsi‘ the ninth
تشرين الاول tišrīn2 al-wwal October, تشرين الثانى
t. at-tānī November (Syr., Ir., Leb., Jord.)
تشيكوسلوفاكيا tšekoslovākiyā Czechoslovakia
تشيلى tšīlī Chile
تطوان tiṯwān 2 Tetuēn (city in N Morocco)
تع abbreviation of تعالى , see علو
تعب ta‘iba a (ta‘ab) to work hard, toil, slave,
drudge, wear o.s. out; to be or become
tired, weary ( من of s.th.) IV to trouble,
inconvenience ( ه s.o.); to irk, bother,
weary, tire, fatigue ( ه s.o.)
تعب ta‘ab pl. اتعاب at‘āb trouble,
exertion, labor, toil, drudgery; burden,
nuisance, inconvenience, discomfort,
difficulty, hardship; tiredness, weariness,
fatigue; pl. اتعاب fees, honorarium
تعب ta‘ib and تعبان ta‘bān tired, weary,
exhausted 94
متاعب matā‘ib2 troubles, pains, efforts;
discomforts, inconveniences, difficulties,
troubles; complaints, ailments, ills
(attending disease); hardships, strains
متعب mut‘ib troublesome, inconvenient,
toilsome, laborious; burdensome, irksome,
annoying; wearisome, tiresome, tiring;
tedious, dull, boring
متعب mut‘ab tired, weary
تعتع ta‘ta‘a to stammer; to shake ( ه s.o.); اتعتع
itta‘ta‘a to move, stir
تعز ta‘izz2 Taizz (city in S Yemen, seat of
government)
تعس ta‘asa a, ta‘isa a to fall, perish; to
become wretched, miserable; ta‘asa and
IV to make unhappy or miserable, ruin
(s.o.)
تعس ta‘s and تعاسة ta‘āsa wretchedness,
misery
تعس ta‘is and تعيس ta‘īs pl. تعساء tu‘asā’
wretched, miserable, unfortunate, unhappy
متعوس mat‘ūs pl. متاعيس matā‘is
wretched, miserable, unfortunate, unhappy
تف taffa to spit II to say "phew"
تف tuff dirt under the fingernails; تفا لك
tuffan laka phew! fie on you!
O تفافة taffāfa spittoon, cuspidor
تفتا tafettā, تفتاه taffeta
تفاح tuffaḥ (call.; n. un. ة) apple(s)
تفكة tufka pl. تفك tufak (ir.) gun, rifle
تفل tafala u i (tafl) to spit
تفل tufl and تفال tufāl spit, spittle, saliva
تافل tāfil ill-smelling, malodorous
متفلة mitfala spittoon, cuspidor
تفه tafiha a (tafah, تفاھة tafāha, تفوه tufūh) to be
little, paltry, insignificant; to be flat,
tasteless, vapid, insipid
تفه tafah and تفه tufūh paltriness,
triviality, insignificance
تفاھة tafāha paltrineBB, triviality,
insignificance flatness, vapidity,
insipidity, tastelessness; inanity, stupidity,
silliness
تفه tafih and تافه tāfih little, paltry,
trivial, trifling, insignificant; worthless;
commonplace, common, mediocre; flat,
tasteless, vapid, insipid; trite, banal
تافھة tāfiha pl. توافه tawāfih2 worthless
thing; triviality, trifle
تقاوى see قوى
تقلية see قلى
تقن IV to perfect, bring to perfection ( ھ s.th; to
master, know well ( ھ s.th., e.g., a
language), be proficient, skillful, wellversed
( ھ in s.th.)
تقن tiqn skillful, adroit
تقانة taqāna firmness, solidity; perfection
اتقن atqan2 more perfect, more thorough
اتقان itqān perfection; thoroughness,
exactitude, precision; thorough skill,
proficiency; mastery, command (e.g., of a
special field, of a language)│ فى غاية الاتقان
to greatest perfection; of excellent
workmanship
متقن mutqan perfect; exact, precise
تقى taqā i to fear (esp. God) VIII see وقى
تقى taqīy pl. اتقياء atqiyā’2 God-fearing,
godly, devout, pious
اتقى atqā more pious
تقى tuqan and تقوى taqwā godliness,
devoutness, piety
تك 1 takka u to trample down, trample
underfoot, crush ( ھ s.th.); to intoxicate ( ه
s.o.; wine)
تك 2 tikka pl. تكك tikak waistband (in the upper
seam of the trousers) 95
تك 3 takka to tick (clock)
تكة tikka pl. -āt ticking, ticktock (of a
clock), ticking noise
تكية 3 look up alphabetically
تكوت tukūt pl. of Engl. ticket
تكتك 1 taktaka to trample down, trample
underfoot ( ھ s.th)
تكتك 2 taktaka to bubble, simmer (boiling mass)
تكتك 3 taktaka to tick (clock)
تكتكة taktaka ticking, ticktock (of a
clock), ticking noise
تكتيك 4 taktīk tactics
تكية takīya pl. تكايا takāyā monastery (of a
Muslim order); hospice; home, asylum
(for the invalided or needy)
تل 1 tall pl. تلال tilāl, اتلال atlāl, تلول tulūl hill,
elevation│ تل ابيب t. abīb Tel Aviv (city in
W Israel)
تل 2 tull tulle
تلاتل talātil2 hardships, troubles, adversities
تليد talīd, تالد tālid, تلاد tilād inherited, timehonored,
old (possession, property)
تلسكوب tiliskūb telescope
تلع IV to stretch one's neck; to crane ( ھ the
neck)
تلعة tal‘a pl. تلاع tilā‘ hill, hillside,
mountainside; (torrential) stream
تليع talī‘ long, outstretched, extended;
high, tall
تلغراف tiligrāf, taligrāf pl. -āt telegraph;
telegram, wire, cable│ ارسل تلغرافا الى to
send a wire to
تلغرافى tiligrāfī, taligrāfī telegraphic
تلف talafa a (talaf) to be annihilated, be
destroyed; to be or become damaged or
spoiled, be ruined, break, get broken, go
to pieces II to ruin ( ھ s.th.); to wear out,
“finish” ( ه s.o.) IV to destroy, annihilate (
ھ s.th.); to ruin, damage, spoil, break ( ھ
s.th.); to waste ( ھ s.th.)
تلف talaf ruin, destruction; ruination,
damage, injury, harm.; loss; waste
تلفان talfān spoiled; useless, worthless,
good-for-nothing
متلف matlaf, متلفة matlafa pl. متالف
matālif2 desert
متلاف mitlāl wastrel; ruinous, harmful,
injurious
اتلاف itlāf pl. -āt annihilation,
destruction; damage, injury, harm
تالف tālif ruined, damaged, broken;
spoiled, bad
متلوف matlūf and متلف mutlaf ruined,
damaged, broken; spoiled, bad
متلف mutlif annihilator, destroyer;
injurer; damaging, ruinous, harmful,
injurious, noxious
تلفز talfaza to televise, transmit by television
تلفزة talfaza television
اذاعة تلفازية iḍāfa talfāẓīya television
broadcast, telecast
O تلفاز tilfāz television set
تلفزيون (Fr. télévision) tilivisyōn television
تلفن talfana to telephone
تلفون tilifūn and تليفون talīfūn pl. –āt telephone
تلقاء see لقى
تلك tilka fem. of the demonstrative pronoun ذلك
تلم talam pl. اتلام atlām (plow) furrow
تلمذ talmada to take on as, or have for, a pupil
or apprentice ( ه s.o.); to be or become a
pupil or apprentice ( ل of s.o., 96 also ,(على
receive one’s schooling or training ( على
from) II tatalmada to be or become a
pupil or apprentice ( ل or على يده of s.o.),
work as an apprentice ( ل or على يده under
s.o.)
تلمذة talmada school days, college years;
apprenticeship; (time of) probation
تلماذ tilmād learning, erudition
تلميذ tilmīd pl. تلاميذ talāmīd تلامذة , 2
talamida pupil, student, apprentice;
probationer; trainee; disciple│ تلميذ بحرى
(baḥrī) approx.: chief warrant W-3 (naval
rank; Eg.); تلميذ سفرى (safarī) approx.:
chief warrant W-4 (naval rank; Eg.)
تلميذة tilmīda pl. –āt girl student
تلمسان tilimsān2 Tlemcen (city in NW Algeria)
تلمود talmūd Talmud
تله taliha a (talah) to be astonished, amazed,
perplexed, at a loss
تاله tālih and متله mutallah at a loss,
bewildered, perplexed│ تاله العقل t. al-‘aql
absent-minded, distracted
تلا (تلو) ) talā u ( تلو tulūw) to follow, succeed; to
ensue; -- ( تلاوة tilāwa) to read, read out
loud ( ھ s.th., على to s.o..); to recite ( ھ
s.th.) VI to follow one another, be
successive
تلو tilwa (prep.) after, upon│ ارسل كتابا تلو
كتاب to send letter after letter
تلاوة tilāwa reading; public reading;
recital, recitation
تال tālin following, succeeding,
subsequent, next; بالتالى bi-t-tālī then, later,
subsequently; consequently, hence,
therefore, accordingly
متتال mutatālin successive, consecutive
تلى tallī (tun.) tulle
تليباثى tilībātī telepathy; telepathic
تليس tallīs, tillis pl. تلاليس talālīs2 sack
تليفزيون (Fr. télévision) tilīvisyōn television
تليفون pl. –āt talīfūn telephone
تليفونى talifūnī telephonic, telephone- in
compounds)
تم tamma i to be or beoome complete,
completed, finished, done; to be
performed, be accomplished ( ل by s.o..);
to come to an end, be or become
terminated; to come about, be brought
about, be effected, be achieved, come to
pass, come off, happen, take place, be or
become a fact; to be on hand, be there,
present itself; to persist ( على in); to
continue ( على s.th. or to do s.th.) II and IV
to complete, finish, wind up, conclude,
terminate ( ھ s.th.); to make complete,
supplement, round out, fill up ( ھ s.th.); to
carry out, execute, perform, accomplish,
achieve ( ھ s.th.) X to be complete,
completed, finished
تمام tamām completeness, wholeness,
entirety, perfection; full, whole, entire,
complete, perfect; separate, independent;
تماما tamāman completely, entirely,
wholly, perfectly, fully, quite; precisely,
exactly│ بدر تمام (badr) and قمر تمام (qamar)
full moon; فى تمام الساعة السادسة at 6 o'clock
sharp; بتمام معنى الكلمة (ma‘nā l-kalima) in
the full sense of the word; بالتمام entirely,
completely
تميمة tamīma pl. تمائم tamā’im2 amulet
اتم atamm2 more complete, more perfect
تتمة tatimma completion;
supplementation; supplement
تتميم tatmīm completion; perfection;
consummation, execution, fulfillment,
realization, effectuation, accomplishment
اتمام itmām completion; perfection;
termination, conclusion; consummation,
execution, fulfillment, realization,
effectuation, accomplishment 97
استتمام istitmām termination, conclusion
تام tāmm complete, perfect, entire,
consummate; of full value, sterling,
genuine
تمباك tumbāk Persian tobacco (esp. for the
narghile)
تمتم tamtama to stammer, mumble, mutter; to
recite under one's breath ( ب s.th)
تمر tamr (coll.; n. un. ة, pl. tamarat, تمور
tumūr) dates, esp. dried ones│ تمر ھندى
(hindī) tamarind (bot.)
تمرجى (eg. tamargī), تمورجى، تومرجى pl. -ya
male nurse, hospital attendant; تمرجية pl.
-āt female nurse
تموز look up alphabetically
تمساح timsāḥ pl. تماسيح tamāsīḥ2 crocodile
تمغة tamga stamp; stamp mark│ ورق تمغة
waraq t. stamped paper
تمن tumman rice
تموز tammūz2 July (Syr., Ir., Leb., Jord.)
تن 1 tunn tuna (zool.)
تينن 2 tinnīn pl. تنانين tanānīn2 sea monster;
Draco (astro.); waterspout (meteor.), see
also alphabetically
تانئ tāni’ pl. تناء tunnā’ resident
تنباك tunbāk (pronounced tumbāk) and تنبك
tumbak Persian tobacco (esp. for the
narghile)
تنبال tinbāl pl. تنابيل tanābīl2 short, of small
Stature
تنبر (Fr. timbre) tambar pl. تنابر tanābir2 stamp
(magr.)
متنبر mutambar stamped (magr.)
تنبل (Turk. tembel) tambal pl. تنابلة tanābila
lazy
تنجستين (Fr. tungstène) tongəstēn tungsten
تندة (It. tenda) tanda awning, roofing, sun roof
تنور tannūr pl. تنانير tanānīr2 a kind of baking
oven, a pit, usually clay-lined, for baking
bread
تنورة tannūra (syr., leb.) (lady's) skirt
تنس tennis
تنك 1 tanak tin plate
تنكجى tanakjī tinsmith, whitesmith
تنكة tanaka pl. -āt tin container, can, pot,
jerry can
تانك 2 tānika see تاك alphabetically
تنيس tennis
تنين tannīn tannin, tannic acid
تھته tahtaha to stammer, stutter
تھمة 1 tuhma pl. تھم tuham accusation, charge;
suspicion; insinuation
تھامة 2 tihāma2 Tihama, coastal plain along the
southwestern and southern shores of the
Arabian Peninsula
توا tawwan right away, at once, immediately;
just (now), this very minute│ للتو li-t-tawwi
at once, right away, also with pers. suffix.:
لتوى li-tawwī, لتوھا li-tawwihā (I have, she
has) just ... ; at once, presently,
immediately
تواليت (Fr. toilette) tuwālēt toilette
توأم see تأم
توب) تاب) tāba u ( توب taub, توبة tauba, متاب
matāb) to repent, be penitent, do penance,
with عن : to turn from (sin), be converted
from, renounce, forswear s.th.; (said of
God) to restore to His grace, forgive ( على
s.o.)│ تاب الى لله to turn to God in
repentance II to induce to repentance or
penitence, make repent ( ه s.o.) X to call on
s.o. ( ه) to repent
توبة tauba repentance, penitence,
contrition; penance 98
تواب tawwāb doing penance; repentant,
penitent, contrite; forgiving, merciful
(God)
تائب tā’ib repentant, penitent, contrite
توبل see تبل
توبوغرافيا tobogrāfiyā topography
توت 1 tūt mulberry tree; mulberry│ توت ارضى
(ardī) and توت افرنجى (ifranjī) strawberry;
توت شوكى (šaukī) and توت العليق t. al-‘ullaiq
raspberry
توت 2 tūt the first month of the Coptic calendar
توتيا tūtiyā, توتياء tūtiyā’, توتية zinc
توج II to crown ( ه s.o.; also fig. ب ھ s.th. with)
V to be crowned
تاج pl. تيجان tījān crown; miter (of a
bishop)│ تاج العمود t. al-‘amūd capital of a
column or pilaster); تاج الكرة t. al-kura
calotte
تويج tuwaij little crown, coronet
تتويج tatwīj crowning, coronation
توجو tōgo and توجولند tōgōland (Eg. spelling)
Togo (region in W Africa)
توح) تاح) see تيح
تارة tāratan once; sometimes, at times│– تارة
تارة، تارة – طورا (ṯauran), تارة – اخرى (uḳrā)
sometimes – sometimes, at times – at
other times
توراة taurāh Torah, Pentateuch; Old Testament
تور پيد، توربيد turpīd, turbīd torpedo (sub-marine
missile)
توربين turbīn pl. -āt turbine
تورتة torta pl. -āt pie, tart
توق) تاق) tāqa u (tauq, توقان tawaqān) to long.,
yearn, wish ( الى for), hanker ( الى after),
desire, crave, covet ( الى s.th.), strive ( الى
for), aspire ( الى to)
توق tauq, توقان tawaqān longing,
yearning, craving, desire
تواق tawwāq longing, yearning, eager (
الى for), craving ( الى s.th)
تائق tā’iq longing, yearning, eager ( الى
for), craving ( الى s.th)
توكة امامية (tōka amāmīya; eg.) belt buckle
(mil.)
تول tūl tulle
تومرجى see تمرجى
تون tūn and تونة tūna (zool.)
تونج (Turk. tunç) tunj bronze
تونس tūnus2 Tunis
تونسى tūnisīy pl. توانسة tawānisa Tunisian
(adj. and n.)
تونية tūniya pl. توانى alb of priests and deacons
(Chr.)
توه) تاه) tāha u and II = ( تيه) تاه tāha i and II
توھة tūha daughter
تياترو (It. teatro) tiyātrō theater
□ تيتل taital pl. تياتل see ثيتل
تيتنوس tītānūs tetanus (med.)
تيح) تاح) tāḥa i to be destined, be foreordained
(by fate, by God; ل to s.o.); to be granted,
be given ( ل to s.o.) IV to destine,
foreordain ( ھ ل to s.o. s.th.); to grant,
afford, offer ( ھ ل s.o. s.th.); pass. utīḥa to
be destined, be foreordained, be granted,
be given ( ل to s.o.)│ اتيح له التوفيق (utīḥa) he
met with success, he was successful; اتيح له
الفرصة (furṣa) he was given the
opportunity, he had the chance .
تيار tayyār pl. -āt flow, stream, course, current,
flood; fall (of a stream); movement,
tendency, trend; draft (of air); (el.)
current│O تيار مباشر (mubāšir) and تيار
مستمر mustamirr) direct current; O تيار
متناوب (mutanāwib) and O تيار متغير
(mutagayyir) alternating current; O تيار
متذبذب mutadabdib) oscillating current
(el.); O يار نابض (nābiḍ) pulaoting current;
99 O يار سريع التردد (sarī‘ at-taraddud)
high-frequency current; O تياربطيء التردد
(baṯī’ at-taraddud) low-frequency current;
O تيار عالى الجھد (‘ālī l-jahd) heigh-tension
current; O تيار واطئ الجھد (wāṯI’ al-jahd)
low-tension current; O تيار ذاتى (dātī) selfinduced
current
O متار matār (Byr.) dynamo, generator
تيزة (Turk. teyze) tēza maternal aunt
تيس tais pl. اتياس atyās, تيوس tuyūs billy goat
اتيس atyās2 foolish, crazy
الحمى التيفودية al-hummā t-tīfūdīya typhoid
fever
تيفوس tīfūs typhus
تيك tīka fem. of the demonstrative pronoun ذاك
dāka
تيل 1 II (from Turk. tel) to cable, wire, telegraph
(syr.)
تيل 2 tīl hemp; linen
تيلة 3 tīla fiber, staple
تيم) تام) 1 tāma I (taim) to become enslaved,
enthralled by love; to enslave, make
blindly subservient ( ه s.o.; through love) II
to enslave, enthrall (love; ه s.o.); to make
blindly subservient, drive out of his mind,
infatuate ( ه s.o.; love)
متيم mutayyam enslaved, enthralled (by
love), infatuated
تيماء 2 taimā’ Taima (oasis in NW Arabia)
تيمارجى see تمرجى
تين tīn (coll.; n. un. ة) fig │ تين شوكي (šaukī)
fruit of the Indian fig (Opuntia ficusindica
Haw.)
تينك tainika see تاك alphabetically
تيه) تاه) tāha i to get lost, wander about, 1ose
one's way, go astray; to stray, wander
(thoughts); to escape ( من s.o.), slip ( من
s.o.’s memory); to perish, be destroyed, be
lost; to be perplexed, startled, astonished;
to be haughty; to swagger, boast, brag ( على
to s.o.)│ تتيه على وجھه ابتسامة asmile flits
over his face II to mislead, lead astray ( ه
s.o.); to distract, divert ( ه s.o.); to confuse,
confound, bewilder ( ه s.o.) IV = II
تيه tīh desert, trackless wilderness; maze,
labyrinth; haughtiness, pride
تياه tayyāh straying, stray, wandering;
haughty
تيھان taihān2 straying, stray, wandering;
perplexed, at a loss, bewildered; proud,
hughty
تيھاء taihā’2 and matāha a trackless,
desolate region; متاھة maze, labyrinth
تائه tā’ih straying, stray, wandering,
roving, errant; lost in thought, distracted,
absent-minded; lost, forlorn; infinite;
haughty
تيوليب (Engl.) tulip
ث
ث abbreviation of ثانية second (time unit)
ثاء tā’ name of the letter ث
ثئب ta’iba a ( ثأب ta’b) and VI to yawn
ثؤباء tu’abā’ yawning, yawn; fatigue,
weariness
ثأر ta’ara a (ta’r) to avenge the blood of ( ه or
ب), take blood revenge ( ه for 100 s.o.
killed), take vengeance, avenge o.s. ( ب ه
on s.o. for, also من or ل for) IV and VIII
اثأر itta’ara to get one’s revenge, be
avenged
ثأر ta’r pl. -āt أثآر at’ār, آثار ātār revenge,
vengeance, blood revenge; retaliation,
reprisal│ أخذ ثأره or أخذ بالثأر to take
revenge, avenge o.s.; مباراة الثأر mubārāt
at-t. return match (sports)
ثائر tā’ir avenger
ثؤلول tu’lūl and ثؤلولة tu’lūla pl. ثآليل ta’ālīl2
wart
ثأى ta’ā scars
ثبت tabata u ( ثبات tabāt, ثبوت tubūt) to stand
firm, be fixed, stationary, immovable,
unshakable, firm, strong, stable; to hold
out, hold one's ground ( ل against s.o. or
s.th.), be firm, remain firm ( ل toward s.o.
or s.th.), withstand, resist, defy ( ل s.o. or
s.th.); to be established, be proven (fact);
to remain, stay ( ب at a place); to maintain
على) s.th.), keep, stick, adhere ( على to
s.th.), abide or stand by s.th. ( على ; e.g., by
an agreement); to insist ( على on)│ ثبت فى
وجھه (fī wajhihī) to hold one’s own against
s.o., assert o.s. against s.o. II to fasten,
make fast, fix ( ھ s.th.); to consolidate,
strengthen ( ھ s.th.); to stabilize ( ھ s.th.);
to confirm, corroborate, substantiate ( ھ
s.th.); to appoint permanently (. s.o.; to an
office); to prove, establish ( ھ s.th.),
demonstrate, show ( بان that); to prove
guilty, convict ( على a defendant); to
confirm (Chr.)│ ثبت بصره به (baṣarahu) to
fix one’s eyes on, gaze at; ثبت قدميه
(qadamaihi) to gain a foothold IV to
establish, determine ( ھ s.th.); to assert as
valid or authentic, affirm ( ھ s.th.); to
confirm, corroborate, substantiate ( ھ
s.th.); to prove ( على ھ s.th. to s.o.; ل to
s.o., ان that); to demonstrate, show ( ھ
s.th.); to furnish competent evidence ( ھ
for); to bear witness, attest ( ھ to); to
acknowledge ( ھ s.th., e.g., a qualification,
a quality, ل in s.o.), concede ( ل ھ s.th. to
s.o.); to prove guilty, convict ( على a
defendant); to enter, record, register, list (
فى ھ s.th. in a book, in a rooter, etc.)│ اثبته
فى الورق (waraq) to put s.th. down in
writing, get s.th. on paper; اثبت الشخص
(šaḳṣa) to determine s.o.’s identity,
identify s.o.; اثبت شخصيته (šaḳṣīyatahū) to
identify o.s., prove one’s identity V to
ascertain, verify ( فى s.th., ھل if), make sure
فى) of s.th., ھل if); to consider carefully ( فى
s.th.), proceed with caution ( فى in) X to
show o.s. stead-fast, persevering; to seek
to verify ( ھ s.th.), try to make sure ( ھ of),
seek confirmation of or reassurance with
regard to ( ھ ); to ascertain, verify ( ھ s.th.),
make sure ( ھ of s.th.); to find right,
proven or true, see confirmed ( ھ s.th.); to
regard as authentic ( ھ s.th.)
ثبت tabt firm, fixed, established;
steadfast, unflinching; brave
ثبت tabat reliable, trustworthy, credible
ثبت tabat pl. اثبات atbāt list, index, roster
ثبات tabāt firmness; steadiness,
constancy, permanence, stability;
certainty, sureness; perseverance,
persistence, endurance; continuance,
maintenance, retention ( على of s.th.),
adherence ( على to)
ثبوت tubūt constancy, immutability,
steadiness; permanence, durability;
certainty, sureness│ ثبوت الشھر t. aš-šahr
the official determination of the beginning
of a lunar month
اثبت atbat more reliable, firmer, steadier,
etc.
تثبيت tatbīt consolidation, strengthening;
stabilization; confirmation; corroboration,
substantiation│ سر التثبيت sirr at-t. the
Sacrament of Confirmation (Chr.)
اثبات itbāt establishment; assertion;
confirmation; affirmation, attestation;
demonstration; proof, evidence; 101
registration, entering, listing, recording;
documentation, authentication,
verification│ شاھد اثبات witness for the
prosecution; عبء الاثبات ‘ib’ al-i. burden of
proof (jur.)
اثباتى itbātī affirmative, confirmatory,
corroborative, positive
تثبت tatabbut ascertainment; verification,
examination, check; careful, cautious
procedure, circumspection; interment (of
the remains of a saint; Chr.)
ثابت tābit firm, fixed, established;
stationary, immovable; steady, invariable,
constant, stable; permanent, lasting,
durable, enduring; confirmed, proven; a
constant│ ثابت الجأش t. al-ja’š undismayed,
fearless, staunch, steadfast; ثابت العزم t.
al-‘azm firmly resolved, determined; املاك
ثابتة and أموال ثابتة immovable property, real
estate, realty; O ثابت الاتجاه t. al-ittijāh
unidirectional, rectified (el.)
ثابتة tābita pl. ثوابت tawābit2 fixed star
مثبوت matbūt established, confirmed;
certain, sure, positive, assured; proven
ثبر tabara u to destroy, ruin ( ه s.o.); ( ثبور
tubūr) to perish III to apply o.s. with zeal
and perseverance ( على to s.th.), persevere,
persist ( على in)
ثبور tubūr ruin, destruction│ نادى بالويل
والثبور (دعا or) nādā (da‘ā) bi-l-wail wa-t-t.
to wail, burst into loud laments
مثابرة mutābara persistence,
perseverance, endurance; diligence,
assiduity
ثبط tabaṯa u and II to hold back, keep, prevent
عن ه) s.o. from doing s.th.); to hinder,
handicap, impede, slow down, set back (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to bring about the failure (
ھ of s.th.), frustrate ( ھ s.th.)
ثبنة tubna pl. ثبن tuban lap, fold of a garment
(used as a receptacle)
ثبان tibān = ثبنة tubna
ثيتل look up alphabetically
ثج tajja u to flow coplously
ثجاج tajjāj coplously flowing, streaming
ثخن taḳuna u to be or become thick, thicken; to
be firm, solid, compact IV to wear out,
exhaust, weaken ( ه s.o.)│ اثخنه ضربا
(ḍarban) to wallop s.o., give s.o. a sound
thrashing; اثخن فى العدو (‘aduw) to massacre
the enemy; اثخنه بالجراح to weaken s.o. by
inflicting wounds
ثخن tiḳan, ثخانة taḳāna, ثخونة tuḳūna
thickness, density; consistency;
compactness
ثخين taḳīn pl. ثخناء tuḳanā’2 thick; dense
ثدى tady and tadyan m. and f., pl. اثداء atdā’
female breast; udder
ثر tarr abounding in water│ ثرة من الدمع (dam‘)
tear-wet, tear-blurred (eye)
ثرب taraba i (tarb) and II to blame, censure ( ه
and على s.o.)
تثريب tatrīb blame, censure, reproof
ثرثر tartara ( ثرثرة tartara) to chatter, prattle
ثرثار tartār prattler, chatterbox; ثرثارة
tartāra do. (fem.)
ثرثرة tartara chatter, prattle
ثرد tarada u to crumble and sop ( ھ bread)
ثريد jarid a dish of sopped bread, meat
and broth
مثرد mitrad bowl
ثرم tarama i (tarm) to knock s.o.’o ( ه) tooth
out; -- tarima a (taram) to have a gap
between two teeth
ثرو) and ثرى) ثرى tariya a to become wealthy
IV to become or be rich, wealthy ( ب or من
through s.th.); to make rich, enrich ( ه s.o.)
102
ثرى taran moist earth; ground, soil│ اين
الثرى من الثريا aina t-t. min t-turayyā
(proverbially of things of disproportionate
value) what has the ground to do with the
Pleiades? طيب لله ثراه (ṯayyaba) approx.:
may God rest him in peace!
ثرى tarīy pl. اثرياء atriyā’2 wealthy,
rich│ ثرى الحرب t. al-ilarb war profiteer,
nouveau riche
ثري tarīyāt plantations
ثروة tarwa and ثروة tarā’ fortune, wealth,
riches│ اھل الثروة ahl at-t. the rich, the
wealthy; ثروة قومية (qaumīya) national
wealth; ثروة مائية (mā’īya) abundance of
water, abundant supply of water (of a
region)
ثريا turayyā Pleiades; (also ثرية ) pl. ثريات
turayyāt chandelier
مثر mutr wealthy, rich
ثعبان tu‘bān pl. ثعابين ta‘ābīn snake│ ثعبان الماء t.
al-mā’ eel
ثعبانى tu‘bānī snaky, snakelike,
serpentine; eely
مثعب mat‘ab pl. مثاعب matā‘ib2 drain
ثعالة tu‘āla fox
ثعلب ta‘lab pl. ثعالب ta‘ālib2 fox│ داء الثعلب
alopecia (med.), loss of hair
ثعلبى ta‘labī foxy, foxlike
ثعلبة ta‘laba vixen; O tetter (med)
ثغر tagir pl. ثغور tugūr front tooth; mouth;
port, harbor, inlet, bay; seaport
ثغرة tagra pl. ثغر tugar breach, crevasse,
crack, rift, crevice; opening, gap; cavity,
hollow; narrow mountain trail
ثغم tagam white, whiteness
ثاغم tāgim white (adj.)
ثغا (ثغو ) tagā u ( ثغاء tugā’) to bleat (sheep)
ثغاء tugā’ bleating, bleat
ثاغ tāgin bleating│ ما له ثاغية ولا راغية
(tagiya) he has absolutely nothing, he is
deprived of all resources, prop.: he has
neither a bleating (sheep) nor a braying
(camel)
ثفر tafar pl. اثفار atfār crupper (of the saddle)
ثفل tufl dregs, lees, sediment; residues
ثفن III to associate ( ه with s.o.), frequent s.o.’s
ھ) ) company; to pursue, practice ( ه s.th.)
ثفنة taftna pl. -āt, ثفن tifan callus,
callosity
اثفية look up alphabetically
ثقة see وثق
ثقب taqaba u (taqb) to bore, or drill, a hole ( ھ
in s.th.), pierce, puncture, perforate ( ھ
s.th.) II do. II and IV to light, kindle ( ھ
s.th.) V and VII to be pierced, be
punctured, be perforated
ثقب taqb piercing, boring, puncture,
perforation; (also tuqb pl. ثقوب tuqūb, اثقاب
atqāb) hole, puncture, borehole, drill hole
ثقبة tuqba pl. ثقب tuqab hole
ثقاب and عود الثقاب ‘ūd al-tiqāb matchstick;
matches
ثقوب tuqūb keenness, acuteness (of the
mind)
مثقب mitqab pl. مثاقب matāqib2 borer,
drill, gimlet, auger, brace and bit, wimble,
perforator; drilling machine
اثقاب itqāb kindling, lighting
ثاقب dqib penetrating, plercing, sharp
(mind, eyes)│ ثاقب النظر t. an-naẓar
perspicacity; sharp-eyed; ثاقب الفكر t. alfikr
sagacity, acumen, mental acuteness;
shrewd, sagacious, sharp-witted
ثاقبات tāqibāt borers (zool.) 103
ثقف taqifa a (taqf) to find, meet ( ه s.o.); --
taqifa a and taqufa u to be skillful, smart,
clever II to make straight, straighten ( ھ
s.th.); to correct, set right, straighten out (
ھ s.th.); to train, form, teach, educate ( ھ
s.o.); to arrest ( ھ s.o.); to seize, confiscate
ه) s.th.) III to fence ( ه with s.o.) V to be
trained, be educated
ثقافة taqāfa culture, refinement;
education; (pl. -āt) culture, civilization
ثقافى taqāfī educational; intellectual;
cultural│ ملحق ثقافى (mulḥaq) cultural
attaché
ثقيف tatqīf cultivation of the mind;
training, education; instruction
مثاقفة mutāqafa fencing, art or sport of
fencing, swordplay, swordsmanship
تثقف tataqquf culturedness, culture,
refinement, education
مثقف mutaqqaf educated; trained;
cultured
ثقل taqula u (tiql, ثقالة taqāla) to be heavy; with
ب to load or burden s.th., make s.th.
heavy; to be hard to bear ( على for s.o.),
weigh heavily ( على on), be burdensome,
cumbersome, oppressive ( على to s.o.); to
be heavy-handed. sluggish, doltish, dullwitted;
to be too dull, too sluggish ( عن for
s.th. to do s.th.), not to bother (or about) II
to make heavy, weight ( ھ s.th.); to
burden, encumber ( على s.o., ھ with s.th.),
overburden ( على s.o.), overtax s.o.’s ( (على
strength, ask too much ( على of s.o.); to
trouble, inconvenience, bother ( على s.o. ب
with s.th.), pester, molest ( على s.o.)│ ثقل
كاھله and اثقل كاھله (kāhilahū) to burden s.o.
or s.th; اثقل كاھل الميزان to burden the budget
IV to burden ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.); to oppress,
distress ( ه s.o.). weigh heavily ( ه on); to be
hard to bear ( ه for s.o.)│ اثقل كاھله
(kāhilahū) see II; VI to become or be
heavy; to be troublesome, burdensome (
على to s.o.), trouble. oppress ( على s.o.); to
be sluggish. doltish. slow; to be in a bad
mood, be sullen, grumpy; to find
burdensome and turn away ( عن from
s.th.); not to bother ( عن about); to be too
dull, too sluggish ( عن for s.th., to do s.th.)
X to find heavy, hard. burdensome,
troublesome ( ھ s.th.), find annoying ( ھ، ه
s.o.. s.th.)│ استثقل ظله (ẓillahū) to find s.o.
unbearable, dislike s.o.
ثقل tiql pl. اثقال atqāl weight; burden
load; gravity; heaviness│ رفع الاثقال raf‘ ala.
weight lifting (athlet.); الثقل النوعى
(nau‘ī) specific gravity
ثقل tiqal heaviness; sluggishness,
dullness
ثقل taqal pl. اثقال atqāl load, baggage
الثقلان at-taqalān the humans and the jinn
ثقل taqla trouble, inconvenience,
discomfort
ثقل taqala heaviness; sluggishness,
doltishness; dullness
ثقيل taqīl pl. ثقلاء tuqalā’ ثقال , 2 tiqāl
heavy; weighty, momentous, grave,
serious, important; burdensome,
troublesome, cumbersome, oppressive;
unpleasant, disagreeable, distasteful
(person)│ ثقيل الدم t. ad-dam insufferable,
unpleasant, disagreeable (person); ثقيل
الروح t. ar-rūḥ doltish, dull (person); a
bore; ثقيل الظل t. aẓ-ẓill disagreeable,
insufferable (person); ثقيل الفھم t. al-fahm
slow of understanding, slow-witted; ثقيل
السمع t. as-sam‘ hard of hearing; صناعة ثقيلة
(ṣinā‘a) heavy industry; ماء ثقيل heavy
water (phys.)
اثقل atqal2 heavier; more oppressive
مثقال mitqāl pl. مثاقيل matāqīl2 weight
(also s.th. placed as an equipoise on the
scales of a balance); miskal, a weight (in
Egypt = 24 قراط = ٤.٦٨ g)│ مثقال ذرة m.
104 darra the weight of a dust speck, i.e.,
a tiny amount; a little bit; مثقال من a little
of, a little bit of
تثقيل tatqīl weighting, burdening;
molestation
تثاقل tatāqul sluggishness, dullness
مثقل mutaqqal and mutqal burdened,
encumbered; overloaded; weighted ( ب
with s.th.); oppressed ( ب by); heavy
متثاقل mutatāqil sluggish, dull; sullen,
grumpy
ثكل takila a (takal) to lose a child ( ه), also: to
be bereaved of a loved one ( ه) by death IV
اثكل الأم ولدھا atkala l-umma waladuhā to
bereave a mother of her son
ثكل takal state of one who has lost a
friend or relative; mourning over the loss
of a loved one
ثكلان taklān (2) bereaved of a child
ثكلى taklā bereaved of a child (mother)
ثاكلة tākila pl. ثواكل tawākil2 bereaved of
a child (mother)
ثكنة tuknā pl. ثكن tukan, -āt barracks (mil.)
ثل talla u ( ثلل talal) to tear down, destroy,
overthrow, subvert ( ھ s.th., esp. عرشا
‘aršan to topple a throne) VII to be
subverted, overthrown (throne)
ثلة tulla pl. ثلل tulal troop, band, party, group
(of people); military detachment
ثلب talaba i (talb) to criticize, run down ( ه
s.o.); to slander, defame ( ه s.o.)
ثلب talb slander, defamation
مثلبة matlaba pl. مثالب matālib2
shortcoming, defect, blemish, stain,
disgrace
ثالب tālib slanderous, defamatory;
slanderer
ثلث II to triple, make threefold ( ھ s.th.); to do
three times ( ھ s.th.)
ثلث tult pl. اثلاث atlāt one third; tulut a
sprawling, decorative calligraphic style
ثلاثة talāta (f. ثلاث talāt) three; ثلثا
talātan three times, thrice
ثلاثى talātī tertiary; Tertiary (geol.)│ ما
قبل الثلاثى pre-Tertiary
ثلاثة عشر talātata ‘ašara, f. ثلاث عشرة
talāta ‘ašrata thirteen
الثالث at-tālit the third; ثالثا tālitan thirdly;
١/ ثالثة ٦٠ of a second
ثلاثون talātūn thirty
الثلثاء at-talatā’ and يوم الثلثاء yaum at-t.
Tuesday
ثلاث tulāt2 and مثلث mutallat three at a
time
ثلاثى tulātī tripartite, consisting of three,
(gram.) triliteral, consisting of three
radicals; tri-; trio (mus. )│ ثلاثى الزوايا t. zzawāyā
triangular; ثلاثى الورقات t. lwaraqāt
trifoliate
ثالوث tālūt Trinity (CM.); trinity, triad;
triplet│ زھرة الثالوث zahrat at-t. pansy
(bot.)
تثليث tatlīt doctrine of the Trinity; Trinity
(Chr.)
تثليثى tatlītī trigonometric(al)
مثلث mutallat tripled, triple, threefold;
having three diacritical dots (letter);
triangular; (pl. -āt) triangle (geom.)│ الراية
المثلثة الألوان (rāya), العلم المثلث (‘alam) and
المثلث the tricolor; المثلث الحاد (ḥadd) acuteangled
triangle; مثلث الزوايا m. az-zawāyā
triangular; المثلث المتساوى الساقين (mutasāwā
s-sāqain) isosceles triangle; المثلث المتساوى
الأضلاع equilateral triangle; المثلث القائم
right-angled triangle
المثلثات al-mutallatāt and حساب المثلثات
ḥisāb al-m. trigonometry
ثلج talaja u: ثلجت السماء (samā’u) it snowed,
was snowing; -- talija a to be delighted,
105 be gladdened (soul, heart; ب by) II to
cool with ice ( ھ s.th.); to freeze, turn into
ice ( ھ s.th.) IV اثلجت السماء it snowed, was
snowing; to cool, moisten ( ھ s.th.)│ اثلج
صدره (ṣadrahū) to delight, please, gratify
s.o. V to become icy, turn into ice,
congeal; to freeze
ثلج talj pl. ثلوج tulūj snow; ice; artificial
ice│ ندفة الثلج nadfat at-t. snowflake
ثلجى taljī snowy, snow- (in compounds);
icy, glacial, ice- (in compounds)
ثليج talīj icy
ثلاج tallāj pl. -ūn ice vendor
ثلاجة tallāja pl. -āt iceberg, ice floe;
refrigerator, icebox
مثلجة matlaja pl. مثالج matālij2 icebox,
refrigerator; cold-storage plant
مثلوج matlūj snow-covered; iced, icy;
مثلوجات frozen food; iced beverages
مثلج mutallaj iced; icy, ice-cold
ثلم talama i (talm) to blunt, make jagged ( ھ
s.th.), break the edge of ( ھ ); to make a
breach, gap or opening ( ھ in a wall); to
defile, sully ( ھ reputation, honor);
--talima a to be or become jagged, dull,
blunt II to blunt ( ھ s.th.) V to become
blunt VII to be defiled, be discredited
(reputation)
ثلم talm nick, notch; breach, opening,
gap; crock, fissure, rift│ ثلم الصيت t. aṣ-ṣīt
defamation
ثلمة tulma pl. ثلم tulam = talm│ سد ثلمة
sadda talmatan to fill a gap; ثلمة لا تسد
(tusaddu) a gap that cannot be closed, an
irreparable loss
ثالم talim dull, blunt
مثلوم matlūm defiled, sullied (reputation,
honor)
مثلم mutatallim blunted, blunt; cracking
(voice)
منثلم الصيت muntalim aṣ-ṣīt of ill repute,
of dubious reputation
ثم tamma there ثم min tamma hence, therefore,
for that reason
ثم tumma then, thereupon; furthermore,
moreover; and again, and once more
(emphatically in repetition)│ كلا ثم كلا
(kallā) no and a hundred times no! من ثم
min tamma then, thereupon
ثمة tammata ( ثمت ) there; there is│ ليس ثمة
there isn't
ثمام tumām a grass│ على طرف الثمام (ṯarafi
t-t.) within easy reach, handy; جعله على
طرف الثمام he made it readily
understandable, he presented it plsusibly
for all
اثمد look up alphabetically
ثمر tamara u to bear fruit IV do. X to profit,
benefit ( ھ from); to exploit, utilize ( ھ
s.th.); to invest profitably ( ھ money)
ثمر tamar pl. ثمار timār, اثمار atmār
fruits, fruit (coll.); result, effect, fruit,
fruitage; yield, profit, benefit, gain
ثمرة tamara (n. un. of tamar) pl. -āt
fruit; result, effect; yield, profit, benefit,
gain
استثمار istitmār exploitation (also pol.-
econ.), utilization, profitable use
مثمر mutmir fruitful, productive,
profitable, lucrative
مستثمر mustatmir pl. -ūn exploiter (pol.-
econ.); beneficiary
ثمل tamila a (tamal) to become drunk IV to
make drunk, intoxicate ( ه s.o.)
ثمل tamal intoxication, drunkenness
ثملة tamala drunken fit, drunkenness
ثمل tamil intoxicated, drunk(en)
ثمالة tumāla residue, remnant, dregs (of a
liquid), heeltap (of wine); .cum, foam,
froth 106
ثمن 1 II to appraise, asses, estimate ( ھ s.th.),
determine the price or value ( ھ of s.th.); to
price ( ھ s.th.)│ لا ثمل lā yutammanu
invaluable, inestimable, priceless
ثمن pl. اثمن atmān, اثمنة atmina price,
cost; value│ الثمن الأصلى (aṣlī) cost price;
الثمن الأساسى (asāsī) par, nominal value
ثمين tamīn costly, precious, valuable
اثمن atman2 costlier, more precious,
more valuable
تثمين tatmīn estimated, appraisal,
assessment, valuation, rating
مثمون matmūn object of value
مثمن mutammin estimator, appraiser│
خبير مثمن assessor
مثمن mutamman prized, valued,
valuable, precious
مثمن mutmin costly, precious, valuable
مثمن mutman object of value
ثمانية 2 tamāniya (f. ثمان tamānin) eight
ثمانية عشر tamāniyata ‘ašara, f. ثماني عشرة
tamāniya ‘ašrata eighteen
ثمن pl. اثمان atmān one-eighth
ثمنة tumna pl. -āt a dry measure (Eg. =
1/3 قدح = . ٢٥٨ l; Pal. = ca. 2.25 l)
ثمانون tamānūn eighty
الثامن at-tāmin the eighth
مثمن mutamman eightfold; octagonal
ثنة tunna pl. ثنن tunan fetlock
ثندوة tunduwa pl. ثناد tanādin breast (of the
male)
ثنى tanā i (tany) to double, double up, fold,
fold up, fold under ( ھ s.th.); to bond, flex
ھ) s.th.); to turn away, dissuade, keep,
prevent, divert ( عن ه s.o. from)│ ثنى عنان
فرسه (‘ināna farasihī) he galloped off II to
double, make double ( ھ s.th.); to do twice,
repeat ( ھ s.th.); to pleat, plait ( ھ s.th.); to
form the dual ( ھ of a word); to provide
with two diacritical dots ( ھ a letter) IV to
commend, praise, laud, extol ( على s.th.,
s.o.), speak appreciatively ( على of)│ اثنى
عليه عاطر الثناء (‘āṯira tanā’) to speak in the
most laudatory terms of s.o. V to double,
become double; to be doubled; to be
repeated; to bond, fold; to be bent, be
folded. be folded up or under; to walk
with a swinging gait VII to bend, bend up,
down or over, lean, incline, bow; to fold,
be foldable, be folded back; to turn away (
عن from), give up, renounce ( عن s.th.); to
turn, face ( لI toward); to apply o.s., turn (
الى to s.th.); (with foll. imperf.) to set out,
prepare (to do s.th.) X to except, exclude (
من ه or ھ s.th. or s.o. from), make an
exception ( ھ of s.th.)
ثنى tany bonding; folding; turning away,
dissuasion, keeping, prevention
ثنى tiny pl. اثناء atnā’ fold, pleat, plait,
crease (in cloth); bond, twist│ ثنيا بعد ثنى
tinyan ba‘da tinyin from time to time
اثناء atnā’ (prep.) during; in the course
of│ فى اثناء fī atnā’i do.; فى اثناء ذلك, فى تلك
الاثناء، اثناء ذلك in the meantime, during all
this time, meanwhile
ثنية tanya pl. tanyāt fold, pleat, plait,
crease (in cloth)
ثنية tanya pl. ثنايا tanāyā middle incisor;
narrow pass; mountain trail│ فى ثنايا in,
inside, among, between, frequently only a
fuller, rhetorically more elegant
expression for "in". e.g., فى ثنايا نفسه in his
heart, inwardly, فى ثنايا الكتاب in the book;
بين ثنايا in, inside, among, between; طلاع
الثنايا ṯallā‘ at-t. one with high-flung
aspirations 107
ثناء tanā’ commendation, praise, eulogy;
appreciation
ثناء tunā’2 and مثنى matnā two at a time
ثنوى tanawī dualist
ثنوية tanawīya dualism
ثنائى tanā’ī laudatory, eulogistic
ثنائى tunā’ī twofold, double, dual,
binary, bi-; biradical (gram.); duet, duo
(mus.)│ محرك ثنائى المشوار (muḥarrik t. lmišwār)
two-cycle engine
O ثنائية tunā’īya dualism; duet, duo
(mus.)
اثنان itnāni, f. اثنتان itnatāni two
اثنا عشر itnā ‘ašara, f. اثنتا عشرة itnatā
‘ašrata twelve
يوم الاثنين yaum al-itnaini and الاثنين
Monday
الثانى at-tānī the second; the next; ثانيا
tāniyan and ثانية tāniyatan secondly; for
the second time, once more, again│ ثانى
اثنين t. itnain the second of a pair, pendant,
companion piece, match
ثانية tāniya pl. ثوان tawānin second (time
unit)
ثانوى tānawī secondary; minor│ امور ثانوية
matters of secondary importance, minor
matters; مدرسة ثانوية secondary school;
تسويغ ثانوي subletting
تثنية tatniya repetition; plaiting, pleating;
doubling, gemination; (gram.) dual;
second sequel (e.g., of a collection of
short stories); commendation, praise,
eulogy│ تثنية الاشتراع Deuteronomy
انثناء intinā’ bending, flection; flexibility,
foldability│ قابل للاانثناء foldable, folding
انثناءة intinā’a pl. -āt (n. vic.) bend,
flexure, curve
استثناء istitnā’ exception, exclusion│
باستثناء with the exception of, except; بدون
استثناء without exception
استثنائى istitnā’ī exoeptional; استثنائيا
istitnā’īyan as an exception│ احوال استثنائية
emergencies; جلسة استثنائية (jalsa)
emergency session
مثنى matnīy folded; plaited, pleated;
doubled
مثنى mutannan ouble, twofold; in the
dual (gram.)
مستثنى mustatnan excepted, excluded ( من
from)
ثوة see ثوى
ثاب (ثوب 1 ) tāba u to return, come back (also,
e.g., a state or condition, الى or ل to s.o.);
with ب: to return s.th. ( الى to s.o.)│ ثاب الى
نفسه to regain consciousness, come to; ثاب
اليه رشده (rušduhū) to recover one’s senses
II to reward ( ه s.o.; said of God) IV to
repay, requite ( ھ ھ s.th. with); to reward (
على ه s.o. for) X to seek reward
ثوب taub pl. ثياب tiyāb, اثواب atwāb
garment, dress; cloth, material; (fig.) garb,
outward appearance, guise, cloak, mask;
pl. ثياب clothes, clothing, apparel│ ثياب
السھرة t. as-suhra formal dress, evening
clothes; فى ثوب بسيط in plain, homely form;
طاھر الثياب of flawless character,
irreproachable
ثواب tawāb requital, recompense, reward
(for good deeds); (Isl. Law) merit, credit
(arising from a pious deed)
مثوبة matūba requital, recompense,
reward (bestowed by God for good deeds)
مثاب matāb and مثابة matāba place to
which one returns; meeting place;
rendezvous; resort, refuge
مثابة matāba (with foll. genit.) place or
time at which s.th. appears or recurs; 108
manner, mode, fashion; see also preceding
entry│ بمثابة (with foll. genit.) like, as;
tantamount to, equivalent to, having the
same function as
تثاوب = تثاءب ( ثئب 2 VI) to yawn
ثار (ثور ) tāra u to stir, be stirred up, be
aroused, be excited; to swirl up, rise
(dust); to arise (question, problem; a
difficulty, فى وجھه fī wajhihī before s.o.);
to be triggered, be unleashed, break out; to
revolt, rebel, rise ( على against); to rage,
storm│ ثار ثائره (tā’irohū) to fly into a
rage, become furious, flare up IV to
agitate, excite ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to stimulate
ه) s.o., ھ s.th.); to irritate ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to
arouse, stir up, kindle, excite ( ھ s.th., e.g.,
feelings), cause, provoke, awaken ( ھ
s.th.); to raise, pose, bring up ( مسألة
mas’alatan a question, a problem)│ اثار
ثائرته (tā’iratahū) to infuriate s.o., excite
s.o. X to excite, stir up, kindle ( ھ s.th.,
esp. passions); to rouse ( ھ s.th.); to
arouse, awaken ( ھ s.th., esp. feelings); to
elicit, evoke ( ھ wails, outcries, من from
s.o.); to incite, set ( على ه s.o. against)│
استثار غضبه (gaḍabahū) to infuriate s.o.,
make s.o. angry
ثور taur pl. ثيران tīrān bull, steer; ox;
Taurus (astron.)│ شوربة ذيل الثور šōrabat
dail at-t. oxtail soup
ثورة taura excitement, agitation;
outbreak, outburst, fit (of fury, of despair,
etc.); eruption (of a volcano); (pl. -āt)
upheaval, uprising, insurrection, riot,
rebellion, revolt, revolution│ ثورة اھلية
(ahlīya) internal strife, civil war
ثورى taurī revolutionary (adj. and n.)
ثوروى taurawī revolutionary (adj. and
n.)
ثوران tawarān agitation, excitation,
flare-up, emption, outbreak, outburst, dust
whirl
مثار matār incentive, stimulus, motive,
spur, occasion, cause│ مثار الجدل m. aljadal
and مثار النزاع object of controversy,
point of contention
اثارة itāra excitation, stirring up,
kindling; agitation, incitement;
provocation, (a)rousing, awakening;
irritation, stimulation
ثائر tā’ir excited, agitated, raving,
furious, mad; rebellious; fury, rage (in the
idiomatic phrase ثار ثائرة see above); (pl.
ثوار tuwwār) insurgent, rebel,
revolutionary
ثائرة tā’ira pl. ثوائر tawā’ir2 tumult;
excitement, agitation; fury, rage
مثير mutīr exciting; provocative;
stimulative, irritative; excitant, irritant,
stimulant; instigator; germ, agent; pl.
مثيرات stimulants
ثوريوم tōriyūm thorium (chem.)
ثول VII to swarm, crowd, throng ( على around
s.o.); to come over s.o. ( (على
ثول law and ثول النحل t. an-nḥl swarm of
bees
ثوم tūm (coll.; n. un. ة) garlic
ثوى tawā i ( ثواء tawā’, ثوى tuwīy, مثوى matwan)
to stay, live ( ب at a place); to settle down (
ب at a place); pass. tuwiya to be buried IV
to stay, live; to lodge, put up as a guest ( ه
s.o.)
ثوى tawīy guestroom
ثوة tūwa pl. ثوى tuwan signpost, roadsign
مثوى matwan pl. مثاو matāwin abode,
habitation, dwelling; place of rest
ثيب tayyib pl. -āt a deflowered but unmarried
woman, widow, divorcée
ثيتل taital pl. ثياتل tayātil2 a variety of wild goat
(Capra jaela) 109
ج
جاثليق jātalīq = جثليق
جؤجؤ ju’ju’ pl. جآجئ ja’āji2 breast; prow, bow
(of a ship)
جأر ja’ara a (ja’r, جؤار ju’ār) to low, moo; to
supplicate, pray fervently ( الى to God)
جأر ja’r, and جؤار ju’ār, lowing, mooing
(of cattle)
جاز 1 giiz pl. -āt (Eg. spelling) gas
جاز 2 jāz jazz
جازون (Fr. gazon, Eg. spelling) gāzōn lawn
جأش ja’aša a (ja’š) to be agitated, be
convulsed (with pain or fright)
جأش ja’š emotional agitation; heart,
soul│ ربط جأشه rabaṯa ja’šahū to remain
calm, composed, self-possesed; رابط الجأش
or ثابت الجأش calm, composed, cool, selfpossessed,
undismayed; بجأش رابط with
unswerving courage, unflinchingly
جاكته، جاكتة and جاكيته žakēta jacket, coat
جالون galōn gallon
جاليرى (Eg. spelling) galērī gallery (theat.)
جام jām pl. –āt cup; drinking vessel; bowl
جامكية jāmakīya pl. -āt, جوامك jawāmik2 pay
جاموس jāmūs pl. جواميس jawāmīs2 buffalo
جاموسة jāmūsa buffalo cow
جانرك (pronounced žānəreg, from Turk.
caneriği; coll.; n. un. žānərgēye) a variety
of small green plum with several stones
(syr.)
جاه jāh rank, standing, dignity, honor, glory,
fame
جاوه jāwa Java
جاوى jāwī Javanese; benzoin; (pl. -ūn) a
Javanese
جاودار jāwadār rye
جاويش čāwīš sergeant = شاوش، شاويش
جب 1 jubb pl. اجباب ajbāb, جباب jibāb well,
cistern; pit
جبة 2 jubba pl. جبب jubab, جباب , jibāb, جبائب
jabā’ib2 jubbah, a long outer garment,
open in front, with wide sleeves
جبح jabḥ pl. اجبح ajbuḥ, جباح jibāḥ, اجباح ajbāḥ
beehive
جبخانة jabḳāna, jabaḳāna powder magazine;
ammunition; artillery depot
جبر jabara u (jabr, جبور jubūr) to set ( ھ
broken bones); to restore, bring back to
normal ( ھ s.th.); to help back on his feet,
help up ( ه s.o.; e.g., on. fallen into
poverty); to force, compel ( على ه s.o. to do
s.th.)│ جبر خاطره (ḳāoṯirahū) to console,
comfort, gratify, oblige s.o.; to treat (s.o.)
in a conciliatory or kindly manner II to set
ھ) broken bones) III to treat with kindness
with friendliness ( ه s.o.), be nice ( ه to s.o.)
IV to force, compel ( على ه s.o. to do s.th.);
to hold sway ( على over) V to show o.s.
proud, haughty; to act strong, throw one’s
weight around; to show o.s. strong or
powerful, demonstrate one’s strength or
power; to be set (broken bones)│ تجبر لله
بابنك (bi-bnika) God has demonstrated His
power on your son, i.e., He has taken him
unto Himself VII to be mended. repaired,
restored
جبر jabr setting (of broken bones); force,
compulsion; coercion, duress; power, 110
might; (predestined, inescapable) decree
of fate; جبرا jab,an forcibly, by force│ علم
الجبر ‘ilm al-j. algebra; يوم جبر البحر yaum j.
al-baḥr a local holiday of Cairo (the day
on which, in former times, the water of the
Nile was channeled into the nowabandoned
ḳalīg, or City Canal, thus mar
فى ng the beginning of the irrigation
season)
جبرى jabrī algebraic; compulsory,
forced; -- jabarī an adherent of the
doctrine of predestination and the
inescapability of fate; fatalist
جبرية jabarīya an Islamic school of
thought teaching the inescapability of fate;
fatalism
جبار jabbār, pl. -ūn, جبابر jabābir جبابرة , 2
jabābira giant; colossus; tyrant,
oppressor; almighty, omnipotent (God);
gigantic, giant, colossal, huge; Orion
(astron.)│ جبار الخطوة j. al-ḳuṯ.wa striding
powerfully, ta فى ng buge strides
جبارة jibāra (art of) bonesetting
جبيرة jabīra and جبارة jībāra pl. جبائر
jabā’ir2 splint (surg.)
جبروت jabarūt omnipotence; power,
might; tyranny
جبرياء jibriyā’2 pride, haughtiness
O تجبير tajbīr, تجبير العظام orthopedics
اجبار ijbār compulsion, coercion
اجبارى ijbārī forced, forcible,
compulsory, obligatory│ التجنيد الاجبارى
compulsory recruitment; military
conscription
جابر jābir and مجبر mujabbir, bonesetter
مجبور majbūr and مجبر mujbar forced,
compelled
جبرئيل jabra’īl جبريل 2 jibrīl2 Gabriel
جبس 2 II to plaster, coat, patch, or fix with
plaster ( ھ s.th.); to put in a cast, set in
plaster ( ھ s.th.)
جبس jibs gypsum; plaster of Paris
جباسة jabbāsa gypsum quarry; plaster
kiln
جبس 2 jabas (coll.; n. un. ة; syr.) watermelon(s)
جبل 1 jabala u i (jabl) to mold, form, shape,
fashion ( ھ s.th.); to knead ( ھ s.th.); to
create ( على ه s.o. with a natural disposition
or propensity for); pass. جبل على (jubila) to
be born for, be naturally diaposed to, bave
a propensity for
جبلة jibla, jibilla pl. -āt natural
disposition, nature, temper
جبل 2 jabal pl. جبل jibāl, اجبال ajbāl mountain;
mountains, mountain range│ جبال الالب j.
al-alb the Alpes; جبال الاوراس the Aurès
Mountains (in E Algeria); جبل جليد iceberg;
جبل سينا j. sīnā Mount Sinai; جبل طارق
Gibraltar; جبل نار volcano
جبلى jabalī mountainous, hilly; mountain
(adj.); montane; (pl. -ūn) highlander,
mountaineer
جبلاوى gabalāwī (eg.) highlander,
mountaineer
جبلاية gabalāya pl. -āt (eg.) grotto, cave
جبن jabuna u (jubn, جبانة jabāna) to be a
coward, be fearful; to be too much of a
coward ( عن to do s.th.), shrink ( عن from
s.th.) II to cause to curdle ( ھ milk); to
make into cheese ( ھ s.th.); to curdle; to
accuse of cowardice, call a coward ( ه s.o.)
V to curdle (milk), turn into cheese
جبن jubn and جبانة jabāna cowardice
جبن jubn and جبنة jubna cheese
جبان jabān pl. جبناء jubanā’2 coward;
cowardly
جبان jabbān cheese merchant
جبين jabīn pl. جبن jubun, اجبنة ajbina, اجبن
ajbun forehead, brow; façade, front; face
من جبينى min jabīnī I alone; على جبين السماء
in the sky 111
جبينى jabīnī frontal
اجبن ajban2 more cowardly
جبانة jabbāna pl. -āt cemetery
تجبين tajbīn cheese making, processing
into cheese
جبه 1 jabaha a to moot, face, confront ( ه s.o.) III
to face, confront, oppose, defy ( ه s.o., ھ
s.th.), show a hold front ( ه to); to face ( ھ a
problem, a difficulty)
جبھة jabha pl. جباه jibāh, جبھات jabahāt
forehead, brow; front, face, façade;
frontline, battle front
مجابھة mujābaha facing, confrontation,
opposition
جبه خانة 2 see جبخانة
جبى jabā i ( جباية jibāya) to collect, raise, levy (
ھ taxes, duties) II to prostrate o.s. (in
prayer) VIII to pick, choose, elect ( ھ s.th.,
ه s.o.)
جباية jibāya raising, levying (of taxes);
(pl. oat) tax, duty, impost
جبائي jibā’ī tax- (in compounds); fiscal
مجبى majban pl. مجاب majābin tax,
impost
جاب jābin pl. جباة jubāh tax collector,
revenue officer, collector; (bus, etc.)
conductor (ir.)
جابية jābiya pl. جواب jawābin pool, basin
جتا jatā (abbreviation of جيب التمام ) cosine
(math.)
جث jatta (jatt) and VIII to tear out, uproot ( ھ a
tree, also fig.)
جثة jutta pl. جثث jutat, اجثاث ajtāt body;
corpse, cadaver; carcass
مجتث muitat uprooted (also fig.)
جثل jatl thick, dense (esp. hair)
جثليق jitlīq pl. جثالقة jatāliqa catholicos, primate
of the Armenian Church
جثم jatama u i (jatm, جثوم jutūm) to alight, sit,
perch (bird); to crouch, cower; to fall or
lie prone, lie face down; to beset, oppress
على) s.th.)
جثمة jatma (n. vic.) motionless sitting or
lying
جثام jutām and جاثوم jātūm nightmare,
incubus
جثمان jutmān pl. -āt hody, mortal frame
جثمانى jutmānī hodily, physical,
corporeal
جاثم jātim pl. جثم juttam squatting,
crouching; perching; prostrate, prone
جثو) جثا) jatā u (jutuw) to kneel, root on the
knees; to bend the knee, genullect; to fall
on one’s knees
جثو jutūw kneeling pooition
جثوة jutwa rock pile, mound; sepulchral
mound, tumulus
مجثى majtan hassock
جاث jātin kneeling; الجاثى Hercules
(astron.)
جحد jaḥda a (jaiḥd, جحود juḥūd) to negate ( ھ
s.th.); to disclaim, disavow, disown, deny
ھ) s.th.); to refuse, reject, repudiate ( ھ
s.th.); to renounce, forswear, adjure ( ھ a
belief); to deny ( ھ ه s.o. his right)│ جحد
جميله (jamīlahū) to he ungrateful to s.o.
جحد jaḥd denial; repudiation, disavowal,
rejection, disclaimer; unbelief (rel.)
جحود juḥūd denial; evasion, dodging,
shirking (of a moral obligation);
ingratitude; repudiation, disavowal,
rejection, disclaimer; unbelief (rel.)
جاحد jāḥid denier; infidel, unbeliever
جحر VII to hide in ito hole or den (animal)
جحر juḥr pl. اجحار ajḥār, جحور juḥūr
hole, den, lair, burrow (of animals) 112
جحش jaḥš pl. جحاش jiḥāš, جحشان jiḥšān, اجحاش
ajḥāš young donkey; (pl. جحوش juḥūš)
trestle, horse
جحشة ja􀀀ša young female donkey
جحظ jaḥaẓa a ( جحوظ juḥūẓ) to bulge, protrude
(eyeball)
جحوظ العين juḥūz al-‘ain exophthalmic goiter,
abnormal protrusion of the eyeball
جحف jaḥafa a (jaḥf) to peel off, scrape off ( ھ
s.th.); to sweep away ( ھ s.th.); to have a
bias ( مع for), side ( مع with s.o.) IV to
harm, hurt, injure, prejudice ( ب s.o., s.th.);
to ruin. destroy ( ب s.o., s.th.); to wrong ( ب
s.o.)
اجحاف ijḥāf injustice, wrong; bias,
prejudice
مجحف mujḥif unjust, unfair; biased,
prejudiced
جحفل jaḥfala pl. جحافل jaḥāfil2 multitude,
legion, host, large army; army corps
(Syr.); eminent man
جحيم jaḥīm f. (also m.) fire, hellfire, hell
جحيمى jaḥīmī hellish, infernal
جخ jaḳḳa (eg.) to lord it, give o.s. airs; to boast,
brag; (syr.) to dress up (slightly ironical)
جخاخ jaḳḳāḳ boaster, braggart
جد 1 jadd pl. جدود judūd, اجاد ajdād grand-father;
ancestor, forefather│ الجد الاعلى (a‘lā)
ancestor
جدة jadda pl. -āt grandmother
جد 2 jadda i to be new; to be a recent
development, have happened lately, have
recently become a fact; to be added, crop
up or enter as a new factor (circumstances,
costs); to appear for the first time (also,
e.g., on the stage); to be or become
serious, grave; to be weighty, significant,
important; to take فى s.th.) seriously; to
strive earnestly فى for), go out of one’s
way ( فى to do s.th.), make every effort ( فى
in); to be serious, be in earnest ( فى about),
mean business; to hurry ( فى one’s step) II
to renew ( ھ s.th.); to make anew, remake (
ھ s.th.); to modernize ( ھ s.th.); to restore,
renovate, remodel, refit, recondition,
refurbish ( ھ s.th.); to be an innovator, a
reformer; to feature s.th. new or novel,
produce s.th. new; to rejuvenate,
regenerate, revive, freshen up ( ھ s.th.); to
renew, extend ( ھ a permit); to begin anew,
repeat ( ھ s.th.), make a new start ( ھ in
s.th.); to try again ( حظه ḥaẓẓahū one’s
luck) IV to strive, endeavor, take pains; to
apply o.s. earnestly and assiduously ( فى
to), be bent, be intent ( فى on s.th.); to
hurry ( فى one's step); to renew, make new
ھ) s.th.) V to become new, be renewed; to
revive X to be new, be added or enter as a
new factor, come newly into existence; to
make new, renew ( ھ s.th.)
جد iadd pl. جدود judūd good luck, good
fortune
جد jidd seriousness, earnestness;
diligence, assiduity, eagerness; جدا jiddan
very, much│ بجد and من جد earnestly,
seriously; جد باھظ jiddu bāhiẓin very high
(price); جد عظيم j. ‘aẓīmin very great;
يختلفون جد الاختلاف (jidda l-iḳtilāf) they
differ widely; وقف على ساق الجد ل (sāqi l-j.)
to apply o.s. with diligence to, take pains
in, make every effort to
جدى jiddī serious; earnest; جديا jiddīyan
in earnest, earnestly, seriously
جدية jiddīya earnestness; seriousness,
gravity (of a situation)
جدة jidda newness, recency, novelty;
modernness, modernity; O rebirth,
renaissance
جدة judda2 Jidda (eeaport in W Saudi
Arabia, on Red Sea) 113
جديد jadīd pl. جدد judud, judad new,
recent; renewed; modem; novel,
unprecedented│ الجديدان al-jadīdān day and
night; من جديد anew, again; (eg.) جديد لنج
gadīd lang brand-new.
اجد ajadd2 more serious, more intent;
newer, more recent
تجديد tajdīd renewal (also. e.g., of a
permit); creation of s.th. new origination;
new presentation, new production (theat.);
innovation; reorganization, reform;
modernization; renovation, restoration,
remodeling. refitting. reconditioning,
refurbishing; rejuvenation, regeneration;
pl. -āt innovations; new achievements
تجدد tajaddud renewal, regeneration,
revival
جاد jādd in earnest, earnest; serious (as
opposed to comic, funny)
جادة jādda pl. –āt, jawādd2 main street;
street
مجدود majdūd fortunate. lucky
مجدد mujaddid renewer; innovator;
reformer
مجدد mujaddad renewed, extended;
remodeled, reconditioned, renovated,
restored; rejuvenated, regenerated, new,
recent, young
مجد mujidd painstaking, diligent,
assiduous
مستجد mustajidd new, recent; incipient
جدب jaduba u جدوبة judūba) to be or become
dry, arid (soil) IV to suffer from drought,
poverty or dearth; to be barren, sterile; to
come to nothing, go up in smoke, fall flat,
fizzle out; (syr.) to explode in the barrel
(shell; mil.)
جدب jadb drought, barrenness, sterility;
sterile, barren
جديب jadīb and اجدب ajdab2, f. جدباء
jadbā’2 barren, sterile
مجدب mujdib barren, sterile; desolate,
arid; unproductive, unprofitable
جدث jadat pl. اجداث ajdāt grave, tomb
جدجد judjud pl. جداجد jadājid2 cricket (zool.)
جدر 1 jadura u ( جدارة jadāra) to be fit, suitable,
proper. appropriate ( ب for s.o., for s.th.);
to befit, behoove ( ب s.o., s.th.); to be
worthy ( ب of), deserve ( ب s.th.)│ يجدر ذكره
(dikruhū) and يجدر بالذكر it is worth
mentioning
جدر jadr wall
جدير jadīr pl. -ūn جدراء judarā’2 worthy,
deserving ( ب of s.th.); becoming, befitting
ب) s.th.); proper, suited, suitable fit ( ب
for), appropriate ( ب to)│ جدير بالذكر (dikr)
worth mentioning
اجدر ajdar worthier; more appropriate;
better suited, more suitable
جدارة jadāra worthiness; fitness,
suitability, aptitude, qualification;
appropriateness
جدار jidār pl. جدر judur, جدران judrān
wall
جدارى jidārī mural, wall (adj.)
جدر 2 judira (pass.) and II to have smallpox
جدرى judarī, jadarī smallpox
مجدور majdūr and مجدر mujaddar
infected with smallpox; pock-marked
مجدرة mujaddara dish made of rice or
(in Syr.) of bulgur with lentils, onions and
oil (eg., syr.)
جدع jada‘a a (jad‘) to cut off, amputate ( ھ
s.th., esp. some part of the body)
بجدع الانف bi-jad‘i l-anf (prop., at the
cost of having the nose cut off) at any
price, regardless of the sacrifice involved
اجدع ajda‘ mutilated (by having the
nose, or the like cut off) 114
2□ جدع gada‘ (= جذع jada‘) pl. جدعان gid‘ān
(eg.) young man, young fellow; heman
جدف 1 II to curse, blaspheme ( على s.o., esp.
God)
تجديف tajdīf imprecation, blasphemy
جدف 2 jadafa i and II to row (o a boat)
مجداف mijdāf pl. مجادف majādif2 oar
جدل 1 jadala u i (jadl) to twist tight, tighten,
stretch ( ھ a rope); to braid, plait ( ھ s.th.,
the hair, etc.) II to braid, plait, ( ھ s.th.) III
to quarrel, wrangle, bicker ( ه with s.o.); to
argue, debate ( ه with s.o.); to dispute,
contest ( فى s.th.) VI to quarrel, have an
argument; to carry on a dispute
جدل jadal quarrel, argument; debate,
dispute, discussion, controversy│ فرض
جدلا faraḍa jadalan to assume for the sake
of argument, propose as a basis for
discussion
جدلى jadalī controversial; disputatious;
a disputant
جدال jaddāl and مجدال mijdāl
disputatious, argumentative; mijdāl see
also below
جديلة jadīla pl. جدائل jadā’il2 braid, plait;
tress
مجدال mijdāl pl. مجادل majādil2 flagstone,
ashlar; see also above under jaddāl
جدال jidāl and مجادلة mujādala pl. –āt
quarrel, argument; dispute, discussion,
debate│ لا يقبل الجدال (yaqbalu)
incontestable, indisputable; لا جدال lā
jidāla and بلا جدال bi-lā j. incontestably,
indisputably
مجدول majdūl tightly twisted; braided,
plaited; interwoven, intertwined (tress of
hair); slender and trim, shapely (e.g., leg)
مجادل mujādil disputant, opponent in
dispute
جدول 2 jadwal pl. جداول jadāwil2 creek, brook,
little stream; column; list, roster; index;
chart, table, schedule│ جدول دراسى (dirāsī)
curriculum; جدول البورصة stock list, خارج
جدول البورصة (ḳārija) not quoted (stock
exchange); جدول الاعمال agenda; working
plan
جدا (جدو ) jadā u to give a present ( على to s.o.)
IV to give as a present ( ب على s.o. s.th.),
present ( ب على s.o. with); to be of use, be
useful, profitable│ اجدى نفعا (naf‘an) to be
useful; ھذا لا يجديك that won’t help you, that
will be of no use (to you); ما يجدى عنك ھذا
do.; لا يجدى فتيلا (fatīlan) = لالا يغن ى فتيلا see
فتيل X to beg for alms; to implore, beg ( ھ ه
s.o. for s.th.), plead ( ھ for s.th.)
جداء jadā’ advantage, gain (.r for s.o.)
جدوى jadwā gift, present; advantage,
benefit, gain│ بلا جدوى (bi-lā) and على غير
جدوى (gairi) of no avail, useless, futile, in
vain
اجدى ajdā more useful, more
advantageous
جدى jady pl. جداء jidā’, جديان jidyān kid, young
billy goat; Capricorn (astron.); الجدى the
North Star
جذ jadda u (jadd) to cut off, clip ( ھ s.th.)
جذاذة jadāda pl. -āt slip of paper; pl.
جذاذات small pieces, shreds, scraps,
clippings
جذب jadaba i (jadb) to pull, draw ( ھ s.th.); to
attract ( ھ s.th.); to pull out, draw out,
whip out ( ھ s.th.), draw ( ھ a weapon, or
the like); to appeal, prove attractive ( ه to
s.o.), attract, captivate, charm, allure ( ه
s.o.), win ( ه s.o.) over ( اليه to one’s side) III
to contend ( ه with s.o.) at pulling, tugging,
etc. ( ھ s.th.)│ جاذبه الحبل ١١٥ (ḥabla) to vie
with s.o.; (to be able) to compete with s.o.,
measure up to s.o., be a match for s.o.;
جاذبه الكلام or جاذبه حديثا or جاذبه اطراف الحديث
(aṯrāfa l-ḥ.) he engaged him in
conversation, involved him in a
discussion; جاذبه اطراف الحضارة (aṯrāfa l-
ḥaḍāra) to vie with s.o. in culture VI to
pull back and forth ( ه s.o.); to contend (، ه
ھ for); to attract each other│ تجاذبوا اطراف
الحديث (aṯrāfa l-ḥ.) they were deep in
conversstion, they were talking together
VII to be attracted; to be drawn, gravitate
(JI toward, to) VIII to attract ( ه s.o., ھ
s.th., اليه to o.s.; also magn.); to allure,
entice ( ه s.o.); to win ( ه s.o.) over ( اليه to
one's side); to draw, inhale ( ھ puffs from
a cigarette, etc.)
جذب jadb attraction; gravitation; appeal,
lure, enticement, captivation│ اخذ جذبا to
wrest away, take away by force; الجذب
الجنسى (jinsī) sex appeal
جذاب jaddāb attractive; magnetic (fig.);
suction, suctorial; winning, fetching,
engaging; charming, enticing, captivating,
gripping
اجذب ajdab2 more attractive, more
captivating
انجذاب injidāb attraction, inclination,
pronenesa, tendency
اجتذاب ijtidāb attraction; enticement, lure
جاذب jādib attractive; magnetic (fig.);
winning, fetubing, engaging; charming,
enticing, captivating, gripping
جاذبية jādibīya gravitation; attraction;
attractiveness; charm, fascination;
magnetism (fig.); lure, enticement│O
جاذبية الثقل j. ataql gravitational force; جاذبية
مغنطيسية (magnaṯisūya) magnetism; جاذبية
الجنس j. al-jins sex appeal
مجذوب majdūb attracted; possessed,
maniacal, insane; (pl. مجاذب majādib2)
maniac, lunatic, madman, idiot│ مستشفى
المجاذيب mustašfā l-m. mental hospital
متجاذب mutajādib mutually attractive;
belonging together, inseparable
منجذب munjadib attracted; inclined,
tending ( الى to)
جذر jadara u (jadr) to uproot, tear out by the
roots ( ھ s.th.) II do.; to extract the root ( ھ
of a number; math.); to take root
جذر jidr, jadr pl. جذور judūr root (also
math.); stem, base, lower end; (pl. اجذار
ajdār) stub (of a receipt book, or the
like)│ جذر تربيعى (tarbī‘ī) square root
(math.)
جذرى jidrī, radical, roct (adj.)
تجذير tajdīr evolution, root extraction
(math.)
جذع jada‘ pl. جذع jud‘ān young man, young
fellow (cf. □ جدع gada‘); new, incipient│
عادت الحرب جذعة (ḥarbu, jada‘atan) the
war broke out again, started all over again;
اعاد الامر جذعا (l-amra) he reopened the
whole affair, he reverted to the earlier
status
جذع jid‘ pl. اجذاع ajdā‘, جذوع judū‘ stem,
trunk.; stump, tree stump; torso
جذعى jid‘ī truncal
جذف II to row ( ھ a boat)
مجذاف mijdāf pl. مجاذف majādif2 oar
جذل jadala a (jadal) to be happy, gay,
exuberant, rejoice IV to make happy,
gladden, cheer ( ه s.o.)
جذل jidl pl. اجذال ajdāl, جذول judūl stump
(of a tree)
جذيل jadīl wooden post on which camels
rub themselves
جذل jada1 gaiety, hilarity, exuberance,
happiness 116
جذل jadil pl. جذلان judlān gay, hilarious,
cheerful, in high spirits, exuberant, happy
جذلان jadlān2 gay, hilarious, cheerful, in
high spirits, exuberaut, happy
جذم ijdama i (jadm) to out off, chop off ( ھ
s.th., esp. a part of the body); to remove,
ta.ke out, excise ( ھ e.g., the tonsils, the
appendix; surg.); pass. judima to be
afllicted with leprosy
جذم jidm pl. جذوم judūm, اجذام ajdām root
جذام judām leprosy
جذامة judāma stubble
اجذام ajdām2 pl. جذامى jadmā mutilated
(from having an arm, a hand, etc., cut off);
leprous; leper
مجذوم majdūm leprous; leper
جذمور judmur stump
جذوة jadwa, jidwa, judwa pl. جذى jidan, judan,
جذاء jidā’ firebrand; burning log
جر jarra u (jarr) to draw, pull ( ھ s.th.); to
drag, tug, haul ( ھ s.th.): to tow ( ھ s.th.); to
trail ( ھ s.th.); to drag along ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.);
to draw ( على ھ s.th. on s.o.), bring ( ھ s.th.)
down ( على upon s.o.); to lead ( الى to),
bring on, cause ( الى s.th.); to entail ( ھ e.g.,
some evil, على for s.o.); (gram.) to
pronounce the final consonant with i, put
(a word) into tho genitive│ جر جريرة
(jarīratan) to commit an outrage, a crime (
على against s.o.); جر قيودا (quyūdan) to be
in shackles, go shackled; جر النار الى قرصه
(qurṣihī) to secure advantages for o.s.,
feather one’s nest; لا يجر لسانه بكلمة
(lisānahū bi-kalima) he won’t let a word
escape his lips IV to ruminate VII passive
of I; to be driven; to be swept along, drift,
float│ انجر الى الوراء (warā’i) to withdraw,
fall back, give way VIII to ruminate│ اجتر
آلامه (ālāmahū) to mull over one’s grief
جر jarr pull(ing), drawing, draft.;
traction, drag(ging), tugging, towage,
hauling; bringing on, causing; genitive│
حرف الجر ḥarf al-j. (gram.) preposition;
وھلم جرا wa-halumma jarran and so forth
جرة jarra pl. جرار jirār (earthenware) jar
جرة jarra, jurra trail, track; rut (left by a
wagon)│ بجرة قلم bi-j. qalam with one
stroke of the pen
جرة jirra cud (of a ruminant)
من جرى min jarrā because of│ من جراك
because of you, on your account, for your
sake
من جراء min jarā’i because of, due to│ من
جراء أن because
جرار jarrār huge, tremendous (army);
potter; (pl. -āt) tractor; tugboat, steam tug,
towing launch
جارور jārūr pl. جوارير jawārīr2 (syr.)
drawer (of a desk, etc.)
جارورة jārūra (leb.) rake (tool)
جريرة jarīr pl. جرائر jarā’ir2 guilt;
offense, outrage, crime│ من جريرة min
jarīrati because of, on account of
جرارة jarrāra pl. -āt a variety of
scorpion; tractor
مجر mijarr trace, tug (of a harness)
مجرة majarra galaxy
انجرارية injirārīya (eg.) towage charges
for watercraft
مجرور majrūr drawn, dragged, towed,
etc.; word governed by a preposition,
word in the genitive form; (pl. مجارير
magārir2) drain, sewer (eg.); مجارير
sewers, sewage system (eg.)
مجتر mujtarr ruminant (adj. and n.)
جرؤ jaru’a u ( جرأة jur’a, جراءة jarā’a) to dare,
venture, risk, hazard ( على s.th.), take the
risk ( على of, ان of doing s.th.), have the
117 courage ( على for s.th.) II to encourage
على ه) s.o. to s.th.) V to dare, venture, risk.
hazard ( على s.th.) VIII to be venturesome,
be daring; to become bold, make bold ( على
with s.o.); to venture ( على s.th. or upon
s.th.), have the audacity ( على to do s.th.)
جرئ jarī’ pl. اجرياء ajriyā’2 bold,
courageous ( ب، على in s.th.); forward,
immodest, insolent; daring, reckless, foolbardy
جرأة jur’a and جراءة jarā’a courage,
boldness, daring; forwardness, insolence
مجترئ mujtari’ bold, forward
جراج (Fr.) garāž pl. -āt garage (eg.)
جرام grām gram (eg.)
جرانيت granīt granite (eg.)
جرانيتى granītī granitic (eg.)
جرب 2 jariba a (jarab) to be mangy; (eg.) to
fade (color) II to test ( ھ s.th.); to try, try
out, essay ( ھ s.th.); to sample ( ھ s.th.); to
rehearse, practice ( ھ s.th.); to attempt ( ھ
s.th.); to put to the test, try, tempt ( ھ
s.o.)│ جرب نفسه فى to try one’s hand at;
جرب الايام (ayyāma) to gather experience
جرب jarab mange; itch, scabies
جرب jarib mangy; scabby
اجرب ajrab2, f. جرباء jarbā’2, pl. جرب
jurb and جربان jarbān2 mangy; scabby
جراب jirāb pl. اجربة ajriba, جرب jurub
sack, bag, traveling bag; knapsack;
scrotum; covering, case; sheath, scabbard
(for the sword)
جراب jurāb pl. -āt stocking, sock
جريب jarīb a patch of arable land
تجربة tajriba pl. تجارب tajārib2 trial, test;
tryout; attempt; practice, rehearsal;
scientific test, experiment; probation; trial,
tribulation; temptation; experience,
practice; proof sheet, galley proof, also
تجربة مطبعية (maṯba‘īya)
تجريب tajrīb trial, test(ing); trial,
tribulation; temptation
تجريبى tajrībī trial, test (adj.);
experimental; based on experience,
empirical│ علم النفس التجريبى (‘ilm an-nafs)
experimental psychology
O تجريبية tajrībīya empiricism (philos.)
مجرب mujarrib experimental; tester;
examiner; tempter
مجرب mujarrab tried, tested; proven or
establisbed by experience, time-tested,
time-tried; experienced, practiced,
seasoned; man of experience
جورب 2 look up alphabeticaUy
جربذة jarbada = جربزة
جربز jurbuz pl. جرابزة jarābiza impostor,
confidence man, swindler
جربزة jarbaza (also جربذة ) deception,
swindle
جربوع jarbū‘ (= يربوع ) pl. جرابيع jarābī‘2 jerboa
(zool.)
جربندية jarabandīya (and جرابندية ) knapsack,
rucksack
جرثوم jurtūm, جرثومة jurtūma pl. جراثيم jarātīm2
root; origin; germ; microbe, bacillus,
bacterium│ تحت الجرثوم taḥt al-j.
inframicrobe
جراج look up alphabetically
جرجر jarjara ( جرجرة jarjara) to gargle; to jerk
or pull back and forth; to trail, drag ( ھ
s.th.); to tow away ( ھ s.th.)│ جرجر خطاه
(ḳuṯāhū) to drag one’s feet, shuffle along
II tajarjara pass. and refl. of I
جرجرة jarara gargling; rombling noise;
rumble, clatter (of a wagon)
جرجر jirjir (large, thick) beans
جرجير jirjīr watercress (eg., syr.) 118
جرح jaraḥa a (jarḥ to wound ( ه s.o.); to injure,
hurt ( ه s.o.; also fig., the feelings) II to
invalidate ( ھ teatimony), challenge,
declare unreliahle ( ه a witness), take
formal exception ( ه، ھ to) VIII to commit
ھ) an outrage, a crime)│ اجترح السيآت
(sayyi’āt) to do evil things
جرح jurḥ pl. جراح jirāḥ, جروح jurūḥ,
جروحات jurūḥāt, اجراح ajrāḥ wound,
injury, lesion
جراح jarrāḥ pl. -ūn surgeon│ جراح الاسنان
dental surgeon
جراحة jirāḥa surgery
جراحى jirāḥī surgical│ عملية جراحية
(‘amalīya) surgical operation
جريح jarīḥ pl. جرحى jarḥā wounded,
injured, hurt
تجريح tajrīḥ surgery; defamation,
disparagement
جارح jarīḥ injuring; wounding, stinging,
painful, hurting; rapacious (beast),
predatory
جارحة jāriḥa pl. جوارح jawāriḥ2
predatory animal or bird│ جوارح الطير j.
aṯ-ṯair predatory birds
جوارح jawāriḥ2 limbes, extremities (of
the hody)│ بكل جوارحه with might and
main, with all his strength
مجروح majrūḥ pl. مجاريح majārīḥ2
wounded, injured, hurt
جرد jarada u (jard) to peel, pare ( ھ s.th.); to
remove the shell, peel, rind or husk ( ھ of
s.th.); to denude, diveet, strip, bare ( ھ
s.th.); (com.) to take stock; to make an
inventory ( البضائع of goods on hand) II to
peel, pare ( ھ s.th.); to remove the shell,
peel, rind or husk ( ھ of s.th.); to denude,
divest, strip, dispossess, deprive ( من ھ or ه
s.o. or s.th. of); to withhold ( من ه from s.o.
s.th.); to draw, unsheathe ( السيف the
sword); to unleash ( على ھ s.th. against
s.o.); to send, dispatch ( ھ a military
detachment, troops, ضد or على against
s.o.); to free ( من ھ or ه s.o. or s.th. from);
to isolate ( ھ s.th.); to abstract ( ھ s.th.); to
divest ( من ss.o. of his citizenship, of a
rank, of a vested right, etc.)│ جرده من السلاح
to disarm s.o.; جرد نفسه من to free o.s. from,
rid o.s. of, give up s.th. V pass. of II; to
strip o.s., rid o.s., get rid ( من or عن of), free
o.s. ( من or عن from); to be free ( من or عن
from, ل for a task); to devote o.s.
exclusively ( ل to s.th.); to give up,
renounce ( من or عن s.th.); to isolate o.s. ;
to be absolute
جرد jard bare, threadbare, shabby, worn;
(com.) inventory; stocktaking
جريد jarīd without vegetation, barren,
bleak, stark (landscape)
اجراد ajrād2, f. جرداء jardā’2, pl. جرد jurd
desolate, bleak, without vegetation;
hairless, bald; threadbare shabby, worn
(garment); open, unprotected (border)
جراد jarād (coll.; n. un. ة) locust(s)│ جراد
الرحال (raḥḥāl) migratory locust(s); جراد
البحر j. al-baḥr langouste, sea cray-fish;
بجرادھا bi-jarādihā in its entirety
جريد jarīd palm branches stripped of
their leaves; jeered, a blunt javelin used in
equestrian games
جريدة jarīda pl. جرائد jarā’id2 (n. un. of
جريد ) palm-leaf stalk; list, register, roster,
index; newspaper│ جريدة يومية (yaumīya)
daily newspaper; جرائد المساء j. al-masā’
the evening papers; الجريدة الناطقة and الجريدة
السينمائية tho newsreel
اجرودى ajrūdī (syr.) beardless, hairless
مجرد mijrad pl. مجارد majārid2 scraper
تجريد tajrīd peeling. paring;
disrobement, stripping; denudation;
deprivation; divestment; disarmament;
dispatching (of troops); freeing; isolation;
abstraction│ تجريد من السلاح disarmament
119
تجريدة tajrīda pl. -āt تجاريد tajārīd2
military detachment, expeditionary force
تجرد tajarrud freedom ( من or عن from);
isolatedness, isolation; independence,
impartiality; absoluteness; abstractness,
abstraction
مجرد mujarrad denuded, bare, naked;
freed, free ( من or عن from); pure, mere,
nothing more than; sole; very, absolute;
abstract; selfless, disinterested; 1st stem of
tbe verb (gram.)│with foll. noun in
genitive = mere, sheer, nothing but:) مجرد
لھو mujarradu lahwin mere play, just fun;
بالعين المجردة with the naked eye; بمجرد ما
bi-mujarradi mā as soon as, at the very
moment when
جردل jardal pl. جرادل jaradil2 bucket, pail
جرذ jurad pl. جرذان jirdān, jurdān large rat
جرذون jirdaun pl. جراذين jarādīn2 large
rat
جرس 1 jarasa i (jars) to ring, toll, knell,
(re)sound II to make experienced, inure by
severe trials, sorely try ( ه s.o.; time,
events); to compromise, disgrace,
discredit, expose, bring into dierepute ( ب
s.o.)
جرس jars, jirs sound, tone
جرس jaras pl. اجراس ajrās bell
جرسة jursa defamation, public exposure;
scandal, disgrac
جرساية 2 jirsāya, جرسية jirsīya pl. -āt jersey,
woolen sweater; جرسى jersey cloth
جرش jaraša u (jarš) to crush ( ھ s.th.); to grate,
bruise, grind ( ھ s.th.)
جرش jarš a grating, scraping noise
جريش jarīš crushed, bruised, coarsely
ground; crushed grain; grits
جاروشة jārūša pl. جوارش jawarīš2 quern,
hand mill (for grinding grain)
جرض jaraḍa a (jaraḍ): جرض بريقه (bi-rīqihī)
he choked on his saliva, could not
swallow his saliva (because of excitement,
alarm, or grief), he was very upset, in a
atate of great agitation, deeply moved; --
jaraḍa u (jarḍ) to choke, sulfocate ( ه s.o.)
IV اجرضه بريقه (cf. I) to alarm s.o., fill s.o.
with apprehension
جريض jarīḍ: حال الجريض دون القريض ḥāla
l.j. dūna l-qarīḍ (proverb; lit.: choking
prevented poetry, i.e.) in the face of death
one does not think of rhyming (among
other interpretations)
جرع jara‘a a (jar‘) and jari‘a a (jara‘) to
swallow, gulp, devour ( ھ s.th.); to pour
down, toss down ( ھ a drink) II to make ( ه
s.o.) swallow ( ھ s.th.); to gulp down V to
drink ( ھ s.th.) VIII to swallow, gulp down
ھ) s.th.)
جرعة jur‘a, jar‘a pl. جرع jura‘, -āt gulp,
mouthful, draught; potion, dose (med.)
جرف jarafa u (jarf) and VIII to sweep away ( ھ
s.th.); to wash away ( ھ s.th.); to shovel
away ( ھ s.th.); to remove ( ھ s.th.); to tear
away, carry off ( ھ s.th.); to carry along ( ھ
or ه s.o. or s.th.) VII to be swept away, be
carried away
جرف jurf, juruf pl. جروف jurūf, اجراف
ajrāf undercut bank or shore; clilf, steep
slope, precipice; bluff (along a river or
coast)│ جرف جليدي (jalīdī) avalanche
جرافة jarrāfa pl. -āt, جراريف jarārīf 2
rake; harrow
مجرف majraf pl. مجارف majārif2
torrent, .trong current
مجرفة mijrafa shovel, scoop; (syr.)
mattock; trowel
مجراف mijrāf pl. مجارف majārīf2 shovel,
scoop
جارف jārif torrential (stream, mountain
creek); stormy, violent (emotions,
passions) 120
الجركس al-jarkas the Circassians
جركسى jarkasī pl. جراكسة jarākisa
circassian (adj. and n.)
جرم jarama i (jarm) to sone ( الحم al-laḥma the
meat); -- to commit an offense, a crime, an
outrage ( على or الى against s.o.), sin ( على or
الى against s.o.), injure, harm, wrong ( على
or الى s.o.) II to incriminate, charge with a
crime ( ه s.o.; syr.) IV to commit a crime,
to sin ( على or الى against s.o.), do wrong (
على or الى to s.o.), harm, wrong ( على or الى
s.o.) VIII = IV
جرم garm pl. جروم gurūm (eg.) long, flatbottomed
sarge, lighter (naut.)
جرم jirm pl. اجرام ajrām, جرم jurum body;
mass, sulk, volume (of a body)│ الاجرام
الفلكية (falakīya) the celestial bodies
جرم iunn pl. اجرام ajrām, جروم jurūm
offense, crime, sin
لا جرم lā jarama surely, certainly, of
course
جريم jarīm hulking, bulky, huge,
voluminous, of great size
جريمة jarīma pl. جرائم jarā’im2 crime;
offense; sin│( عظمى or) جريمة كبرى
(kubrā, uẓma) capital offense; قانون الجرائم
penal code
اجرام ijrām crime; culpability,
delinquency
اجرامى ijrāmī criminal
لحم مجروم laḥm majrūm fillet (meat)
سنة مجرمة sana mujarrama an entire year
مجرم mujrim criminal; (pl. -ūn) a
criminal; evildoer, culprit, delinquent│
مجرم عائد recidivous criminal
جرامز jarāmiz2 and جراميز jarāmīz2
limbs, legs│ ضم جراميزه (ḍamma) he beat
it, he made off
الجرمان al-jarmān the Germanic tribes, the
Teutons
جرمانى jarmānī Germanic, Teutonic
جرن 1 jurn pl. اجران ajrān (stone) basin; mortar;
(eg.) threshing floor, barn│ جرن المعمودية j.
al-ma‘mūdīya baptismal font
جران 2 jirān the front part of a camel’s neck│
ضرب بجرانه to become established, take
root; القى عليه جرانه (alqā, jirānahū) to
apply o.s. to s.th. and adjust to it,
accustom o.s. to s.th.
جرنال jurnāl (eg. also gurnāl) pl. جرانيل žarānīl2
(eg., garānīl2) journal, newspaper,
periodical
جرانيت granīt granite
جرانيتى grānītī granitic
جرو jarw (jirw, jurw) pl. اجر ajrin, جراء jirā’,
اجراء ajrā’, اجرية ajriya puppy, whelp, cub
(of a dog or beast of prey)
جروسة grōsa gross (= 12 dozen)
جرى jarā i (jary) to flow, stream (water); to
run; to hurry, rush; to slow (wind); to take
place, come to pass, happen, occur; to be
under way, be in progress, be going on
(work); to befall ( ل s.o.), happen ( ل to); to
be in circulation, circulate, be current; to
wend one’s way ( الى to), head ( على for); to
proceed ( على in accordance with); to
follow ( مع s.th.), yield, give way ( مع to,
e.g., to a desire); to entail ( ب s.th.); (with
وراء ) to run or be after s.th., seek to get
s.th.│ جرى له حديث مع he had a talk with;
جرى مجراه (majrāhū) to take the same
course as, be analogous to, follow the
same way as, proceed or act in the same
manner as; جرى منه الشيء مجرى الدم (minhu
š-šai’u majrā d-dam) it had become
second nature to him; جرى على الالسن
(alsun) to circulate, make the rounds
(rumor); جرى على كل لسان 121 to be on
everyone’s lip; جرى على قلمه (qalamihī) to
come to s.o.’s pen (e.g, a poem); جرى على
خطة (ḳiṯṯa) to follow a plan; ما يجرى عليه
العمل (‘amalu) the way things are handled,
what is customary practice; جرى به العمل to
be in force, be valid, be commonly
observed (law, custom); جرت العادة ب to be
customary, be common practice, be a
common phenomenon, have gained
vogue; جرى بالعادة على to do s.th.
customarily, se in the habit of doing s.th.;
جرت بذلك عادتھم that was their habit II to
cause to run│ جرى ريقه (rīqahū) to make
s.o.’s mouth water III to concur, agree, be
in agreement ( ه with s.o., فى in s.th.); to
keep pace, keep up ( ه with s.o.; also
intellectually); to be able to follow ( ه s.o.);
to go (along) ( ھ with); to adapt o.s. adjust,
conform ( ھ to), be guided ( ھ by) IV to
cause to flow, make flow ( ھ s.th.); to
cause to run, set running ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.);
to make ( ھ s.th.) take place or happen,
bring about ( ھ s.th.); to carry out, execute,
enforce, put into effect, apply ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., rules, regulations); to carry out,
perform ( ھ an action); to Set going, set in
motion ( ھ a project), launch ( ھ an
undertaking); to channel ( على or ل ھ s.th.
to), bestow, settle ( على or ل ھ s.th. upon
s.o.); to impose, inflict ( على ھ s.th., a
penalty, on s.o.)│ اجرى تجربة (tajribatan)
to carry out an experiment; اجرى تحقيقا to
conduct an investigation; اجرى له اعانة
(i‘ānatan) to grant s.o. a subsidy; اجراه
مجرى (majrā, with foll. genitive) to treat
s.th. in the same manner as, put s.th. on
equal footing with
جرى jary course│ جريا على jaryan ‘alā in
accordance with, according to
جراك min jarāka and min jarā’ika
because of you, on your account, for your
sake
جراء jarrā’ runner, racer
جراية jirāya pl. -āt daily (food) rations;
pay, salary│ عيش جراية ‘ēš girāya (eg.)
coarse bread
جريان jarayāan flow, flux; course;
stream
مجرى majra.. pl. مجار majārin
watercourse, stream, rivulet, gully; torrent
or flood of water; pipeline; canal, channel;
drain, sewer, pl. sewers, sewage system;
power line (el.); current (el.); current (of a
stream); guide rail (tech.); course (of
events), progress, passage│ مجرى البول m.
l-baul urethra (anat.); مجارى التنفس m. ttanaffus
respiratory tract (anat.); مجرى
الھواء m. l-hawā’ air stream, current of air,
draft; اخذ مجراه to take its course; See also
جرى I and IV
ماجريات mājarayāt, mājariyāt (pl. of ما
جرى ) (course of) events, happenings
مجاراة mujārāh keeping up (with foll.
genitive: with); conformity (with foll.
genitive: with)│ مجاراة ل mujārātan li in
conformity with, in accordance with,
according to
اجراء ijrā’ pl. -āt performance (of an
action); execution; enforcement; pl.
measures, steps, proceedings│ اتخذ اجراءات
(ittaḳada) to take measures; اجراءات قانونية
(qānūnīya) legal step, proceedings at law
جار jārin flowing, streaming, running;
circulating; current, present│ الشھر الجارى
(šahr) the current month
جارية jāriya pl. –āt, جوار jawārin girl;
slave girl; maid, servant; ship, vessel
جز jazza u (jazz) to cut off, clip ( ھ s.th.); to
shear, shear off ( ھ s.th.; esp. the wool of
sheep)
جزة jizza pl. جزز jizaz, جزائز jazā’iz2
shorn wool, fleece, slip
جزازة juzāza pl. -āt slip of paper; label,
tag
جزاز jazzāz pl. –ūn shearer, woolshearer
مجز mijazz woolshears 122
جزأ jaza’a a and VIII to be content, content
o.s. ( ب with) II to divide, part, separate,
break up, cut up, partition ( ھ s.th.) V to
divide, break up, be or become divided; to
be separated, be detached, be partitioned
off; to be divisible, separable ( عن from)
جزء juz’ pl. اجزاء ajzā’ part, portion;
constituent, component; fraction; division;
section; the 30th part of the Koran (= 2
ḥizb)
جزئى juz’ī partial; minor, trivial,
insignificant, unimportant; (jur.) minor,
petty; جزئيا juz’īyan partly; جزئيات juz’īyāt
details, particulars; trivialities; subordinate
partly; divisions, sections (e.g., of a court
of justice)│ مواد جزئية (mawādd) petty
cases (jur.); جنح جزئية (junaḥ) summary
delicts (jur.); محاكم جزئية courts of
summary justice; نيابة جزئية (niyāba)
parquet of a summary court; حادثة جزئية
minor incident; تسوية جزئية (taswiya) part
payment; الجزئيات والكليات (kullīyāt) the
particular and general aspects, the minor
and the major issues
جزيء juzai’ pl. -āt molecule
اجزائى ajzā’ī pl. -ūn pharmacist, druggist
اجزاجى ajzājī pl. -īya pharmacist,
druggist
اجزائية ajzā’īya and اجزاخانة ajzāḳāna pl.
-āt pharmacy, drugstore
تجزئة tajzi’a division; partition;
separation; dissociation; breakdown (into
classes, categories, etc.); fragmentation│
قابل للتجزئة divisisle; قابلية التجزئة divisibility;
تاجر التجزئة retailer, retail merchant
جزدان juzdān, jidān pl. -āt wallet; change purse
جزر jazara u (jazr) to slaughter; to kill,
butcher ( ھ an animal); -- i u (jazr) to sink,
fall, drop, ebb (water)
جزر jazr slaughter; butchering; ebb (of
the sea)
جزرة jazra blood sacrifice
جزور jazūr pl. جزر juzur slaughter camel
جزار jazzār pl. ة, -ūn butcher
جزيرة jazīra pl. جزائر jazā’ir جزر , 2 juzur
island│ شبه جزيرة šibhu j. peninsula; الجزيرة
Al Jazira, (Northwest) Mesopotemia;
الجزائر Algeria; Algiers; جزيرة العرب j.
al-‘arab Arabia, the Arabian Peninsula;
الجزائر الخالدات (ḳālidāt) the Canary Islands;
الجزيرة الخضراء (ḳaḍrā’) Algeciras (seaport
in SW Spain)
جزرى jazarī insular; (pl. -ūn) islander
جزائرى jazā’rī pl. -ūn Algerian (adj. and
n.); islander
مجزر majzar pl. مجازر majāzir2
slaughterhouse, abattoir; butchery
مجزرة majzara pl. مجازر majāzir2
butchery; massacre, carnage
جزر 2 jazar (coll.; n. un. ة) carrot(s)
جزع jazi‘a a (jaza‘, جزع juzū‘) to be or become
anxious, worried, concerned; to be sad,
unhappy ( من about); to feel regret ( على for
s.o.), pity ( على s.o.); to mourn (j. for s.o.)
V to break apart, break, snap
جزع jaz‘ onyx
جزع juz’ axle; shaft (techn.)
جزع jaza‘ anxiety, uneasiness,
apprehension, concern; anguish, fear;
sadness
جزع jazi‘ restless, impatient; anxious,
worried, uneasy, apprehensive
جزع jazū‘ and جازع jāzi‘ restless;
impatient; anxious, worried, uneasy,
apprehensive
مجزع mujazza‘ marbled, veined;
variegated, dappled 123
جزف III to act at random, blindly,
Indiscriminately, take a chance; to
speculate (fin.); to speak vaguely, in
general terms; to risk, stake ( ب s.th.)│
جازف بنفسه to risk one’s life; جازف به فى to
plunge s.o. into (some adventure)
جزاف juzāf purchase of a certain amount
of things (Isl. Law); جزافا juzāfan at
random, haphazardly
مجازفة mujāzafa rashness, recklessness,
foolhardiness; risk, hazard; adventure,
venture
مجازف mujāzif rash, reckless, foolhardy;
adventurous; venturesome
جزل 2 jazūla u to be considerable, abundant,
plentiful IV اجزل له العطاء (‘aṯā’) to give
generously, openhandedly, liberally to s.o.
VIII to write shorthand
جزل jazl and جزيل jazīl pl. جزال jizāl
abundant, plentiful, ample, much; pure,
lucid, eloquent (style)│ جزل الرأي of
sound, unerring judgment; شكره شكرا جزيلا
šakarahū šukran jazīlan he thanked him
profusely; شكرا جزيلا many thanks!
جزل jizla piece, slice
جزالة jazāla profusion, abundance;
(rhet.) purity (of style)
مجتزل mujtazil stenographer
جوزل 1 look up alphabetically
جزلان 2 juzlān = جزدان
جزم 1 jawma i (jazm) to cut off, cut short, clip (
ھ s.th.); to judge; to decide. Settle ( ھ
s.th.); to be positive ( ب about), be
absolutely certain ( ب of s.th.); to assert
authoritatively ( ب s.th.); to make up one's
mind, decide, resolve ( على to do s.th.); to
impose, make incumbent ( على ھ s.th. on
s.o.); (gram.) to pronounce the final
consonant (of a word) without a vowel; to
put ( ھ a verb) into the apocopate form or
the imperative
جزم jazm cutting off, clipping; decision;
resolution, resolve; apodictic judgment;
(gram.) apocopate form│ علامة الجزم
‘alāmat al-j. = jazma
جزمة jazma diacritical mark (o)
indicating vowellessness of a final
consonant
جازم jāzim decisive; peremptory,
definite, definitive, final; firmly
convinced, absolutely certain ( ب of s.th.);
(pl. جوازم jawāzim2) governing the
apocopate form (gram.)
مجزوم majzūm cut off. cut short, clipped;
decided. settled; (gram.) vowelless (final
consonant); in the apocopate form
منجزم munjazim (gram.) in the apocopate
form
جزمة 2 jazma pl. –āt, جزم jizam (pair of) shoes
(pair of) boots│ جزمة برباط (bi-ribāṯ) laced
soots; جزمة لماعة (lammā‘a) patent-leather
shoes
جزمجى gazmagī (eg.) and جزماتى
gizamātī (eg.), jazmātī (syr.) pl. -īya
shoemaker
جزى jazā i ( جزاء iazii') to requite, recompense (
ه s.o., ب or على for), repay ( ه to s.o., ب or
على s.th.); to reward ( ه s.o., ب or على for);
to punish ( ه s.o., ب or على for); to satisfy ( ه
s.o.), give satisfaction ( ه to s.o.); to
compensate, make up ( ب ھ for s.th. with
or by); to compensate, offset ( عن s.th.)│
جزاك لله خيرا (ḳairan) may God bless you
for it!; جزاه جزاء سنمار (jazā’a sinimmāra)
he returned to him good for evil III to
repay, requite ( ب ھ s.th. with, ب ه s.o. for),
recompense ( ب ه s.o. for); to reward ( على
or ب ه s.o. for); to punish ( على or ب ه s.o.
for)│ جزاھم خيرا (ḳairan) he invoked God’s
reward upon them IV to suffice ( ه s.o.), do
for s.o. ( ه); to take the place, serve instead
عن) of), replace ( عن s.th.)
جزاء jazā’ requital, repayment;
recompense, return; compensation, setoff;
124 amends, reparation; punishment,
penalty│ جزاء نقدي (naqdī) fine
جزائى jazā’ī penal
جزية jizya pl. جزى jizan, جزاء jizā’ tax;
tribute; head tax on free non-Muslims
under Muslim rule
تجزية tajziya reward
مجازاة mujāzāh requital, repayment;
punishment
جس jassa u (jass, مجسة majassa) to touch, feel,
handle ( ھ s.th.); to palpate, examine by
touch ( ھ s.th.); to test, sound, probe ( ھ
s.th.); to try to gain information ( ھ about),
try to find out ( ھ s.th.); to spy out ( ھ
s.th.)│ جس نبضه (nabḍahū) to feel s.o.’s
pulse, (fig.) جس نبض الشيء to probe, sound
out, try to find out s.th. V to try to gain
information ( ھ about), try to find out ( ھ
s.th.); to reconnoiter, scout, explore ( ھ
s.th.); to be a spy, engage in espionage; to
spy, pry, snoop ( على on s.o.)│ تجسس له
اخبارا (aḳbāran) to gather information for
s.o., spy for s.o. VIII to touch, feel, handle
ھ) s.th.); to spy out ( ھ s.th.)
جس jass: طرى الجس ṯarīy al-j. delicate to
the touch, having a tender surface, fresh
جاسوس jāsūs pl. جواسيس jawāsīs2 spy
جاسوسة jāsūsa woman spy
جاسوسى jāsūsī of espionage, spy- (in
compounds)
جاسوسية jāsūsīya spying, espionage
جوسسة jausasa spying, espionage
مجس majass spot which one touches or
feels; sense of touch│ خشن المجس ḳašin alm.
coarse to the touch, having a rough
surface
مجس mijass probe (med.)
تجسس tajassus spying, espionage
جاسئ jāsi’ hard, rough, rugged
جسد II to make corporeal, invest with a body,
embody, incarnate ( ھ s.th.), give concrete
form ( ھ to s.th.); to render or represent in
corporeal form ( ھ s.th.) V to become
corporeal, assume concrete form,
materialize; to become incarnate (Chr.); to
become three-dimensional
جسد jasad pl. اجساد ajsād body│ عيد الجسد
‘īd al-j. and خميس الجسد Corpus Christi Day
(Chr.)
جسدى jasadī bodily, fleshly, carnal
جسدانى jusdānī bodily
تجسد taia.snul materialization; incar·
nation (OM.)
مجسد mujassad embodied, corporified
متجسد mutajassid corporeal; incarnate
(Chr)
جسر jasara u to span, cross, traverse ( ھ s.th.);
جسارة) jasāra, جسور jusūr) to venture, risk
على) s.th.), have the courage ( على to do
s.th.) II to build a dam or dike; to
embolden, encourage ( ھ s.o., على to do
s.th.) VI to dare, venture, risk ( على s.th.),
have the audacity ( على to do s.th.); to be
sold, forward, insolent, impudent ( على
with s.o.) VIII to span, cross, traverse ( ھ
s.th.)
جسر jisr pl. اجسر ajsur, جسور jusūr
bridge; dam, dike, embankment, levee; --
(pl. جسورة jusūra) beam, girder; axle,
axletree│ جسر متحرك (muḥarrik) movable
bridge; جسر معلق (mu‘allaq) suspension
bridge; جسر عائم pontoon bridge, floating
bridge
جسور jasār sold, daring; forward,
insolent, impudent
جسارة jasāra boldness, recklessness,
intrepidity; forwardness, insolence
تجاسر tajāsur boldness, recklessness,
intrepidity; forwardness, insolence
متجاسر mutajāsir bold, daring; forward,
insolent, impudent 125
جسطن see جصطن
جسم jasuma u ( جسامة jasāma) to be great. Big,
large. bulky. huge. immense II to make
corporeal. invest with a body ( ھ s.th.),
give ( ھ s.th.) shape or form; to materialize
ھ) s.th.); to cause to stand out. bring out (
ھ s.th.); to enlarge, magnify ( ھ s.th.; e.g.,
microscope); to make big, bulky, huge ( ھ
s.th.); to play up, exaggerate ( ھ s.th.) V to
become corporeal, become embodied; to
materialize; to assume a form, take shape,
become tangible or concrete; to be
materialized; to become big, large, huge,
increase in volume, grow in size
جسم pl. اجسام ajsām, جسوم jusūm body
(also O of an automobile); substance,
matter; mass; form, shape
جسمى iiaa1 bodily, physical; substantial,
material
جسيم jasīm pl. جسام great, big, large;
voluminous, bulky, huge; vast, immense;
stout, corpulent; weighty, most
significant, momentous, prodigious
جسيم jusaim pl. -āt particle (phys.);
corpuscle (biol.)
اجسم ajsam2 more voluminous, larger;
stouter, more corpulent
جسم jasāma size, volume; stoutness,
corpulence
جسمان jusmān body, mass
جسمانى jusmānī bodily, physical.
Corporal│ التأديب الجسمانى corporal
punishment
تجسيم tajsīm embodiment; relief;
enlargement, magnification, magnifying
power
جسم mujassam bodily, corporeal; (math.)
body; three-dimensional; tangible,
material, concrete; raised, relieflike,
standing out in relief (e.g., خريطة مجسمة
relief map); relief; enlarged. Magnified│
فلم مجسم (film) three-dimensional
(stereoscopic) film, 3-D motion picture
جسمانية jasmānīya2 Gethseman
جسا (جسو ) jasā u to become hard, solid
جش jašša u (jašš) to grind, crush, bruise, grate
ھ) s.th.)
جش jušša hoarseness, huskiness, raucity
(of the voice)
جشيش jašīš ground, grated, crushed
اجش ajašš2, f. جشاء jaššā’2 hoarse,
husky, raucous (voice)
جشأ II and V to belch, burp
جشاء jušā’ and جشأة jaš’a belch(ing),
burp(ing)
جشار jušār livestock
جشع jaši‘a a (jaša‘) and V to be covetous,
greedy
جشع jaša‘ greed, avidity, inordinate
desire
جشع jaši‘ greedy, covetous
جشم jašāma a (jašm, جشامة jašāma) to take
upon o.s. ( ھ some hardship) II to make ( ه
s.o.) suffer or undergo ( ھ s.th.); to impose
ھ ه) on s.o. s.th. difficult), burden ( ھ ه s.o.
with s.th.) V to take upon o.s., suffer,
undergo ( ھ s.th., e.g., hardships)
جشنى (eg., cf. ششنى šišnī) sample, specimen;
sampling
جص II to plaster, whitewash ( ھ s.th.)
جص jiṣṣ gypsum; plaster of Paris
جصطن II tajaṣṯana to lounge, stretch lazily,
loll
جعة ji‘a beer
جعب II to corrugate ( ھ s.th.)
جعبة ja‘ba pl. جعاب ji‘āb quiver; tube, pipe; gun
barrel; o cartridge pouch (Syr.)│ جعبة اخبار
j. aḳbār town gossip (person) 126
جعجع ja‘ja‘a ( جعجع ja‘ja‘a) to clamor, roar,
shout; to clatter, clap; to bluster, explode
in anger
جعجعة ja‘ja‘a hubbub, rumpus, clamor,
roar; creak, clapping noise (of a mill
wheel); bluster
جعجاع ja‘jā‘ clamorous, boisterous,
noisy; bawler, loud-mouthed person
جعد ja‘uda a ( جعودة ju‘ūda, جعادة ja‘āda) and V
to become curly, frizzed, kinky, curl
(hair); to be wavy; to be creased; to be
wrinkled II to curl, frizz ( ھ s.th.; the hair);
to wave ( ھ s.th.; the hair); to crease, pleat,
plait ( ھ cloth); to wrinkle ( ھ the skin)
جعد ja‘d (or جعد اليد j. al-yad, جعد الكف j.
al-kaff) stingy, niggardly, tightfisted
جعدة ja‘da curl, lock, ringlet
جعدى ja‘dī and اجعد aj‘ad2 curly
جعيدى gə‘īdī (eg.) bum, loafer, good-fornothing
تجاعيد tajā‘īd2 wrinkles, lines (of the
face)
تجعدات taja‘‘udāt wrinkles
مجعد muja‘‘ad curled, frizzed; wavy;
furrowed, creased; wrinkled
متجعد mutaja‘‘id curled, frizzed; wavy;
furrowed, creased; wrinkled
جعدنة ja‘dana idle talk, gossip (leb.)
جعر ja‘ara a (ja‘r) to drop its manure (animal)
ابو جعران abū ji‘rān2 scarabaeus; dung
beetle
جعفر ja‘far little river, creek
جعل ja‘ala a (ja‘l) to make ( ھ s.th.); to put,
place, lay ( ھ s.th.); to create ( ھ s.th.); to
effect, bring about ( ھ s.th.); to make ( ھ ھ
s.th. a rule, a principle, or the like, ه ه s.o.,
e.g., leader, king, etc.), appoint ( ه ه s.o. to
an office, rank, or the like); to fix, set ( ھ ھ
a sum, a price, at); to think, deem, believe
ب ه) or ه ه s.o. to be …, ھ ھ s.th. to be ...),
take ( ب ه or ه ه s.o. for, ھ ھ s.th. for); to
represent ( ھ s.th., فى صورة as, or in the
form of, s.th. else); to appoint, settle ( ل ھ
s.th. for s.o., in s.o.’s favor); to give,
grant, concede ( ل ھ s.th., an advantage, to
s.o.), put s.o. ( ل) in the way of s.th. ( ھ ); to
attribute ( ھ ل to s.o. s.th.), maintain that
s.th. ( ھ ) belong. to s.o. ( ل); to entrust ( الى
ھ s.th. to s.o.); to put, get ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.,
into a specific state or condition); (with
foll. imperf.) to begin to, set out to│ جعله
يفعل to induce s.o. to do; to make s.o. do
s.th. (in a narrative); جعله بمننزلة (bimanzilati)
to place s.o. on equal footing
with; جعله فى متناول يده (fī mutanāwali
yadihī) to bring or put s.th. within s.o.’s
reach III to seek to bribe, try to win ( ب ه
s.o. with s.th.)
جعل ju‘l pl. اجعال aj‘āl pay, wages; piece
wages; reward, prize
جعلى ju‘līi: اتفاق جعلى (ittifāq) piece-work
contract
جعل ju‘al pl. جعلان ji‘lān dung beetle;
scarabaeus
جعالة ji‘āla, ja‘āla, ju‘āla pl. جعائل ja‘āil2
pay, wages; allowance; reward, prize:
bribe
جغرافيا jugrāfiyā and جغرافية jugrāfīya
geography│ جغرافية طبيعية (ṯabī‘īya)
physical geography
جغرافي jugrāfī geographical; geographer
جف jaffa (1st pers. perf. jafaftu) i ( جفاف jafāf,
جفوف jufūf) to dry, become dry; to dry out
II to dry, make dry ( ھ s.th.)
جفاف jafāf dryness; desiccation; drying
up; dullness
تجفاف tajfāf pl. تجافيف tajāfīf2 protective
armor
تجفيف tajfīf drying; desiccation;
dehydration; drainage 127
جاف jāff dry│ قلم حبر جاف (qalam ḥibr)
ball-point pen
مجفف mujaffaf dried, desiccated,
dehydrated; مجففات dehydrated foods
جفاء jufā’ useless, vain, futile│ ذھب جفاء
dahaba jufā’an to be in vain, be of no
avail, pass uselessly
جفت jift, چفت čift (pronounced šift; eg.) pincers,
tweezers; metal clamp│ جفت شريان j.
šaryān arterial clamps
چفتشى (pronounced šiftišī; eg.) filigree
جفتلك jiftlik farm, country estate; government
land (Pal.)
جفر jafr, علم الجفر ‘ilm al-j. divination,
fortunetelling
جفرة jufra pl. جفر jufar pit, hole
جفل jafala i u (jafl, جفول jufūl) and IV to start,
jump with fright; to shy (horse) II to start,
rouse ( ھ s.th., .s.o.); to scare away ( ه s.o.)
جفل jafl and جفول jufūl fright, alarm;
shying
چفلك (pronounced šiflik; eg.) = جفتلك
جفن pl. جفون jufūn, اجفان ajfān eyelid
جفنة jafna pl. جفان jifān, جفنات jafanāt
bowl; grapsvine
جفو) جفا) jafā u (jafw, جفاء jafā’) to be rough,
coarse; to treat ( ه s.o.) roughly, harshly; to
turn away (. from), shun, avoid, flee ( ه
s.o.) III to treat ( ه s.o.) roughly, rudely,
harshly; to be cruel ( ه to s.o.); to be cross (
ه with s.o.); to elude, flee ( ه s.o.; slumber);
to offend ( ھ against good taste, one’s
sense of honor, or the like) VI to withdraw
عن) from), shun, avoid ( ه s.o.); to loathe (
عن s.o., s.th.), have an aversion ( عن to); to
display rude manners, act the ruffian
جفو jafw roughness, harshness
جفوة jafwa roughness; estrangement,
alienation; disagreement, dissension,
quarrel
جفاء jafā’ roughness; harshness;
sternness; antipathy, aversion, distaste,
loathing; estrangement, alienation
اجفى ajfā refraining even more ( ل from),
more averse ( ل to s.th.)
جاف jāfin pl. جفاة jufāh harsh, rough,
coarse; brutish, uncouth, rude
جاكتة look up alphabetically
جكر III (syr.) to tease ( ه s.o.)
جل 1 jalla i ( جلال jalāl) to be great, lofty,
exalted, illustrious, sublime; to be too
great ( عن for), be beyond s.th. ( عن ), be far
above s.th. ( جل عن الحصر │( عن (‘an il-ḥaṣr)
to be innumerable II to honor, dignify,
exalt ( ه s.o.); to cover ( ھ s.th., esp. the
ground, as snow, plants, etc.); to envelop,
wrap, drape, clothe; to border, edge ( ھ
s.th., ب with) IV to honor, dignify, revere,
venerate, esteem highly, exalt ( ه s.o.); to
deem too high, too exalted ( عن for s.th.),
consider far beyond s.th. ( عن ) VI to deem
o.s. far above s.th. ( عن ) X to be great,
exalted, sublime
جل great, outstanding; bulky
جل jull major portion, bulk, majority,
main part│ جله julluhū most of it; جل الامة j.
al-umma the majority of the people; جل ما
فيه its main contents; وجل ما يقال انه (jullu)
that much, at least, can be said that ...
جلل jalal important, significant,
momentous, weighty
جلى jullā pl. جلل julal matter of great
importance, momentous undertaking,
great feat, exploit
جلة julla, jilla droppings, dung (of
animals); julla pl. جلل julal (cannon) ban;
bomb 128
جلة julla attire, clothing│ الجلة الجبروتية
الكھنوتية ) ) (ḥabrawīya, kahnūtīya)
Episcopal (sacerdotal) vestments (Chr.)
جليل jalīl pl. اجلاء ajillā’ اجلة , 2 ajilla, جلائل
jalā’il2 great, important, significant,
weighty, momentous; lofty, exalted,
sublime; revered, honorable, venerable;
glorious, splendid
جلال jalāl loftiness, sublimity,
augustness; splendor, glory
جلالة jalāla loftiness, sublimity,
augustness; majeoty│ صاحب (صاحبة) الجلالة
His (Her) Majesty, جلالة الملك j. al-malik
His Majesty, the King
اجل ajall2 greater; more sublime; more
splendid
مجلة majalla pl. -āt periodical; review,
magazine│ مجلة اسبوعية (usbū‘īya) weekly
magazine; مجلة شھرية (šahrīya) monthly
publication; مجلة خاصة ب (ḳāṣṣa)
professional journal for a. ; مجلة الاحكام
lawbook, code; مجلة القوانين do.
تجلة tajilla and اجلال ijlāl honor,
distinction; esteem, deference, respect;
reverence
جل 2 jull rose
جلاب julāb, jullāb rose water; julep
جلاتين (Fr. gélatine) želātīn jelly
جلاسية (Fr. glacé) glasēh (eg.) kid leather
جلب 1 jalaba i u (jalb) to attract ( ھ s.th.); to
fetch, get, bring ( ھ s.th., ل to s.o.); to
import ( ھ goods); to bring about ( ھ a
state, condition); to bring ( ھ harm, shame,
etc., على upon s.o.); to gain, win, obtain ( ھ
s.th.); to earn ( ھ s.th.); ( جلوب julūb) to scar
over, heal (wound) II to shout, clamor; to
be noisy, boisterous IV to earn, gain,
acquire ( ھ s.th.); = II; VII pass. of I VIII
to procure, bring, fetch, get ( ھ s.th.); to
draw ( ھ on s.th.); to import ( ھ goods) X
to import ( ھ goods); to fetch, summon,
call in ( ه s.o.); to attract, draw ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to seek to attract or win ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to get, procure ( ھ s.th.)
جلب jalb bringing, fetching;
procurement; acquisition; importation,
import; causation, bringing on, bringing
about
جلب jalab imported; foreign
جلب jalab and جلبة jalaba clamor; uproar,
tumult, turmoil
جلبة julba scar
جليب jalīb imported, foreign; (pl. جلبى
jalbā, جلباء julabā’2) foreign slave
جلاب jallāb attractive, captivating;
importer, trader; see also alphabetically│
جلاب العبيد slave trader
جلابية gallābīya (eg.) pl. -at, جلاليب
galālīb2 galabia, a loose, shirtlike garment,
the common dreao of the male population
in Egypt
جلباب below under جلبب
جلب ajlab2 more attractive, more
captivating
مجلبة majlaba pl. مجالب majālib2
causative factor, motive, reason, cause,
occasion
استجلاب istijlāb procurement,
acquisition; importation, import; supply;
attraction│ استجلاب السائحين promotion of
tourist traffic
جالب jālib causative factor, motive,
reason, cause, occasion
جلاب 2 julāb, jullāb rose water; julep
جلبا 3 jalabā jalap (bot.)
جلبب II tajalbaba to clothe o.s. ( ب with), be
clothed, be clad ( ب in a garment, also fig.)
جلباب jilbāb pl. جلابيب jalābīb2 garment,
dress, gown; woman's dress
جلبان julubbān chickling vetch, grass pea
(Lathyrus sativua)
جلجل 1 jaljala to reverberate; to resound, ring
out; to rattle; to shake ( ھ s.th.)
جلجل juljul pl. جلاجل jalājil2 (little) bell,
sleigh bell; cowbell; jingle
جلجلة jaljala sound of a bell; loud, shrill
sound
مجلجل mujaljil shrill, piercing; ringing,
resounding, reverberant
جلجلة 2 juljula, جبل الجلجلة jabal al-j. Golgotha
جلجلان 3 juljulān, jiljilān sesame
جلح jaliḥa a (jalaḥ) to be or become bald
اجلح ajlaḥ2, f. جلحاء jalḥā’2, pl. جلح julḥ
bald-headed, bald
جلخ jalaḳa a and II to sharpen ( ھ s.th.); to
whet, hone ( ھ a knife), strop ( ھ a razor);
to stretch, extend, roll out ( ھ metal)
جلخ jalḳ grindstone, whetetone, hone
جلد jalada i (jald) to whip, flog, lash ( ه s.o.); --
jalida a to be frozen, freeze; -- jaluda u to
be tough, hardy, undismayed, steadfast,
patient II to bind ( ھ a book); (to cause) to
freeze ( ھ s.th.) III to fight ( ه s.o.) IV to
freeze; to be frozen, be covered with ice V
to take heart; to show o.s. tough, hardy,
robust; to resign o.s. to patience; to bear,
suffer VI to engage in a sword fight
جلد jald flogging; -- (pl. اجلاد ajlād)
staunch, steadfast; strong, sturdy
جلد jild pl. جلود julūd, اجلاد ajlād skin,
hide; leather│ جلد سختيان (suḳtiyān)
morocco; جلد لماع (lammā‘) patent leather
جلدة jilda skin, hide; piece of leather;
race│ ابن جلدتنا ibn jildatinā our
countryman, our fellow tribesman, pl. بنو
جلدتنا banū j.
جلدى jildī dermal, cutaneous, skin
(adj.)│ امراض جلدية skin diseases
جليدة julaida pl. -āt membrane, pellicle;
O film (phot.)
جلد jalad enduranos; suffering; patience;
firmament
جلدة jalda lash, stroke with a whip
جليد jalīd pl. جلداء juladā’2 staunch,
steadfast; strong, sturdy
جليد jalīd ice│ جبل جليد jabal j. iceberg;
قطعة من الجليد (qiṯ‘a) ice floe
جليدى jalīdī icy, ice-covered, glacial, ice
(adj.); snow-covered│ العصر الجليدى (‘aṣr)
the Ice Age
جلود jalūd long-suffering, patient
جلاد jallād pl. -ūn leather merchant;
executioner, hangman
جلادة jalāda and جلودة julūda endurance,
patience
مجلدة mijlada whip, lash, scourge
تجليد tajlīd freezing; bookbinding
جلاد jilād fight, battle (against)
تجلد tajallud endurance, patience
مجلد mujallid: مجلد الكتب m. al-kutub
bookbinder
مجلد mujallad frozen, icy, ice-covered;
bound (book); (pl. -āt) volume (book)
مجالد mujālid pl. -ūn gladiator
متجلد mutajallid patient
جلمز jillauz (coll.; n. un. ة) hazelnut; hazel
جلس jalasa i ( جلوس julūs) to sit down ( الى with
s.o., at a tabl., etc., على on a chair); to sit (
الى with s.o., at a table, على on a chair)│
جلس الى الرسام (rassām) to sit for a painter
III to sit ( ه with s.o., next to s.o., in s.o.’s
company); to keep s.o. ( ه) company IV to
ask to sit down, make sit down, eeat ( ه
s.o.)
جلسة jalsa pl. -āt seat (in an auditorium);
session (of parliament, of a committee,
130 of a court, etc.); party, gathering,
meeting│ عقد جلسة ‘aqada jasatan to
convene a session; جلسة عامة (‘āmma)
plenary session
جلسة jilsa manner of sitting
جليس pl. جلساء julasā’2 participant in a
social gathering; table companion: one
with whom one sits together; جليسه the
man who was at the party with him
جليسة jalīsa lady companion; fem. of
جليس
جلوس julūs sitting: sitting down;
accession to the throne; pl. of جالس sitting
مجلس majlis pl. مجالس majālis2 seat;
session room, conference room; party,
gathering, meeting; social gathering:
session, sitting; council meeting; council;
concilium; collegium, college: board,
committee, commission; administrative
board; court, tribunal│ فى مجلسه in s.o.’s
presence, in s.o.’s company; مجلس التأديب
and مجلس تأديبى disciplinary board; مجلس
تأسيسى constituent assembly; مجلس آفاقى
regional court (tribunal régional; Tun.);
مجلس الأمة m. al-umma parliament (Ir.);
مجلس الأمن m. al-amn the Security Council;
مجلس البلدية m. al-baladīya and مجلس بلدى
(baladī) local council, municipal council;
مجلس الحرب m. al-ḥarb war council; مجلس
حسبى (ḥasbī) probate court (for Muslim;
Eg.); مجلس مختلط (muḳtaliṯ) mixed court
(eg.); مجلس الدفاع defense council; مجلس
الادارة m. al-idāra administrative board,
committee of management, directorate;
board of directors (of a corporation or
bank); مجلس المديرية m. al-mudīrīya
provincial council, provincial parliament
(Eg.); مجلس الدولة m. ad-daula Supreme
Administrative Court (Eg.); مجلس روحى
(rūḥī) religious court, clerical court (of the
Coptic Church); مجلس شورى الدولة m. šūrā
d-daula council of state; مجلس الشيوخ
council of elders: Senate (Eg.); مجلس عدلى
(‘adlī) court, tribunal (Syr.); ( عسكرى or)
مجلس عرفى (‘urfī, ‘askarī) court-martial;
مجلس عصبة الأمم m. ‘uṣbat al-umam Council
of the League of Nations; مجلس العموم the
House of Commons; مجلس الأعيان m. ala‘
yān senate (Ir., Jord.); مجلس الاقتراع draft
board, recruiting commission (mil.); مجلس
قروى (qarawī) local council; مجلس اقتصادى
(iqtiṣādī) economic council: مجلس قومى
(qaumī) national assembly; مجلس قيادة الثورة
m. qiyādat at-taura Supreme
Revolutionary Tribunal (Eg.): المجلس الكبير
and المجلس الاكبر (akbar) the Grand Council
(= le Grand Conseil; Tun.); مجلس اللوردين
the House of Lords: مجلس النواب m. annuwwāb
lower house, chamber of
deputies; مجلس نيابى (niyābī) parliament;
مجلس الجھة m. al-jiha approx.: provincial
council (= conseil de région; Tun.); مجلس
الوزراء m. al-wuzarā’ cabinet, council of
ministers
مجالسة mujālasa social intercourse
جالس jālis pl. جلوس julūs, جلاس jullās
sitting; pl. جلاس participants in a social
gathering
جلط jalaṯa i (jalṯ) to chafe, gall, abrade ( ھ the
skin); to shave ( الرأس ar-ra’sa the head
جلطة julṯa lump, clot│ جلطة دموية
(damawīya) blood clot, thrombus
جلف jilf pl. اجلاف ajlāf boorish, rude, uncivil
جلفط jalfaṯa ( جلفطة jalfaṯa) to calk ( ھ a ship)
جلفن galfana (eg.) to galvanize
جلفنة galfana galvanization
مجلفن mugalfan galvanized
جلاقة jalāqa: جلاقة قروية (qarawīya) yokel,
bumpkin
جلم jalama i (jalm) to clip, shear off ( ھ s.th.)
جلم jalam pl. اجلام ajlām shears
ابو جلمبو abū galambū (eg.) a variety of crab
جلمد II tajalmada to be petrified
جلمد jalmad pl. جلامد jalāmid2 and جلمود
julmūd pl. جلاميد jalāmīd2 rook, bolder
جلنار jullanār pomegranate blossom
جلو) and جلى) جلا jalā u to clean, polish (
ھ s.th.); to clear ( ھ the view); to make
clear, make plain, clarity, clear up ( ھ
s.th.), throw light on ( ھ ), to reveal, unveil,
disclose ( ھ s.th.), to dislodge, oust,
remove ( عن ھ or ه s.o. or s.th. from), to
shine, be brilliant, distinguish o.s. ( فى in
s.th.); to be or become clear, evident,
manifest; to pull out, move out ( عن of a
place), go away, depart ( عن from a place),
leave, quit, evacuate ( عن a place); -- جلى
jalā i to polish, burnish ( ھ s.th.) II to
reveal, disclose, bring to light ( عن or ھ
s.th.); to show, represent ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.),
IV to remove, dislodge, oust, drive away (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to evacuate ( ه s.o. from);
to move away, go away ( عن from a place),
leave ( عن a place) V to become clear,
evident, manifest; to reveal itself, be
revealed, to appear, show, come to light,
come out, manifest itself, to be
manifested, be expressed, find expression
VII to be clean or cleaned, be polished, be
burnished, to be removed, be dislodged,
be ousted; to move away ( عن from a
place), vacate, evacuate ( عن a place), to be
dispelled, vanish, go away, pass (crisis,
difficulty, etc.), to disappear, to reveal
itself, be revealed, be disclosed; to be
unveiled (bride), to become manifest,
manifest itself; to become clear or plain;
to clear up and reveal ( عن s.th.), to lead,
come ( عن to), end ( عن in), to result ( عن
in)│ ما ينجلى عنه الأمر the outcome of the
matter, what will come of it VIII to reveal,
disclose ( ھ s.th.), to regard ( ھ s.th.), look
at ( ھ ) X to seek to clarify ( ھ s.th.), to
clarify, clear up ( ھ s.th.), throw light ( ھ
on); to uncover, unearth, bring to light,
find out, discover, detect ( ھ s.th.)
ابن جلا ibn jalā a famous, well-known
man, a celebrity
جلى jalīy clear, plain, evident, patent,
manifest, obvious, conspicuous; جليا
jalīyan obviously, evidently
جلية jalīya pl. جلايا jalāyā sure thing,
plain fact│ جلية الأمر jalīyat al-amr the true
state of the affair
اجلى ajlā clearer, more obvious, more
distinct
جلوى jalwā unveiling (of the bride)│ ليلة
الجلوة lailat al-j. wedding night
جلاء jalā’ clarification, elucidation;
clarity, clearness, plainness, distinctness;
departure, (e)migration ( عن from),
evacuation ( عن of an area; mil.); بجلاء
clearly, plainly
جليان jalayān vision, revelation,
apocalypse (Chr.)
مجال majālin (pl. of مجلى majlan)
manifestations
تجلية tajliya: تجلية الاھية (ilāhīya) divine
revelation; theophany (Chr.)
تجل tajallin revelation, manifestation;
Transfiguration (of Christ)│ عيد التجلى ‘īd
at-t. Transfiguration Day (Chr.)
اجتلاء ijtilā’ contemplation
استجلاء istijlā’ clarification, elucidation
جالية jāliya pl. -āt, جوال jawālin colony
(of foreigners); colony of emigrants
المجلى al-mujallī the winner (in a race)
متجل mutajallin obvious, evident,
manifest, patent
جلون galōn pl. -āt gallon (eg.)
مجلون mugalwan galvanized (eg.)
جلى jullā see جل 1
جليوتين gilyotīn guillotine (eg.)
ج م 1 abbreviation of جنيه مصرى Egyptian pound
جم 2 jamma i u (jamm) to gather; to collect
one’s thoughts, concentrate; to rest II and
V to grow luxuriantly (plants) X to gather;
to collect one’s thoughts, concentrate; to
rest, relax, seek recreation ( من from); to
be covered with luxuriant vegetation
(ground)
جم jamm abundant, plentiful; much, a
great deal of; many, numerous; manifold,
multiple; crowd, group of people│ جم الأثر
j. al-atar effective, efficacious; احبه حبا جما
(aḥabbahū ḥubban) to be more than fond
of; فوائد جمة numerous advantages, ample
benefits; جم غفير large crowd, throng
جمام jamām rest, relaxation, recreation,
gathering of new strength
مجم majamm place where s.th. gathers or
flows together│ مجم ھذا الرأي ومستجمعه
(mustajma‘uhū) what this opinion
amounts to
تجميم tagmīm (eg.) bobbed hairdo (of
women)
استجماتم istijmām collectedness;
concentration; attentiveness, attentive
reverence; rest, relaxation, recreation
جمباز، جنبازى see جنباز، جنبازى
جمبرى (from It. gambero) gambarī, جمرى
gammarī (eg.) shrimp (zool.)
جمجم 2 jamjama ( جمجمة jamjama), جمجم الكلام
(kalāma) and II tajamjama to articulate
indistinctly, stammer; to express o.s.
poorly, speak incoherently; to mumble
جمجمة 2 jumjuma pl. جماجم jamājim2 skull,
cranium
جمجمى jumjumī cranial
جمح jamaḥa a (jamḥ, جماح jimāḥ, جموح jumūḥ
to holt (horse); to he refractory, unruly,
recalcitrant; to be defiant; to be
capricious, whimsical; to run out on her
husband, run away from home (wife)
جماح jimāḥ recalcitrance, defiance;
willfulness
جموح jumūḥ recalcitrance, defiance;
willfulness
جموح jamūḥ headstrong, defiant, unruly,
ungovernable
جامح jāmiḥ headstrong, defiant, unruly;
indomitable, untamable
جمد 2 jamada u, jamuda u (jamd, جمود jumūd)
to freeze; to congeal, harden, stiffen, be or
become hard or solid, solidify; to
coagulate, clot (blood); to be rigid,
inflexible (in one’s thinking); to stagnate;
to be apathetic, indolent, dull, indifferent│
جمدت نفسه على to be indifferent toward, put
up with, acquiesce in; جمدت يده (yaduhū) to
be niggardly, tightfisted II to freeze, frost,
congeal ( ھ s.th.); to solidify, coagulate,
harden, stiffen ( ھ s.th.); to curdle ( ھ s.th.);
to freeze ( ھ assets V to freeze, become
frozen, turn into ice, freeze up. become
icebound; to freeze to death; to congeal; to
solidify; to harden, set (e.g., cement); to
coagulate, clot (blood) VII to freeze up,
become icebound; to freeze, become
frozen, turn to ice
جمد jamd freezing; congelation,
solidification, coagulation│ درجة الجمد
darajat al-j. freezing point
جمد jamad ice
جماد jamād pl. -āt a solid; inorganic
body; mineral; inanimate body, inanimate
being; O neuter (gram.)
جمود jumūd frozen state; solid, compact
state, compactness, solidity; rigor, rigidity,
stiffness; inorganic state; hardening,
induration; hardness, inflexibility;
deadlock, standstill; inertia, inaction,
inactivity; lethargy, apathy, passivity,
indifference
جمودة jumūda solidity, hardness
تجميد tajmīd solidification, hardening;
consolidation; reinforcement (of a
foundation)│ تجميد الاموال t. al-amwāl
freezing of assets
تجمد tajammud freezing; frost;
congelation; solidification; coagulation
انجماد injimād freezing up or over, icing
up; ice formation
جامد jāmid hard, solid; stiff; rigid;
motionless; inanimate, inorganic; (gram.)
defective; dry. dull (book, and the like);
impervious to progress to innovation,
ossified, ultraconservative; pl. جوامد
jawāmid2 inanimate things, inorganic
matter, minerals
متجمد mutajammid frozen, icy; stiff,
congealed; coagulated
منجمد munjamid frozen, icy, ice (adj.);
arctic│ المحيط المنجمد (muḥīṯ) the Arctic
Ocean
جمادى 2 jumādā name of the fifth and sixth
months of the Muslim year ( جمادى الاولى j.
al-ūlā Jumada I and جمادى الآخرة j. al-āḳira
Jumada II)
جمر II to roast ( ھ meat) VIII to bum incense
جمر jamr embers, live coal│ كان على احر
من جمر (aḥarra) to be on tenter-hooks; to
be in greatest suspense, be dying with
curiosity
جمرة jamra (n. un. of جمر ) live coal;
firebrand, smoldering embers; rankling
resentment; (pl. -āt) carbuncle (med.)│O
الجمرة الخبيثة anthrax
جمار jummār palm pith, palm core
(edible tuber growing at the upper end of
the palm trunk)
مجمرة mijmara pl. مجامر majāmir2
brazier; censer
جمرى 2 see جمبرى
جمرك (eg.) gumruk pl. جمرك gamārik2 customs;
customhouse│ رسم الجمرك rasm al-g.
customs duty, tariff
جمركى gumrukī customs, tariff (used
attributively)│ اتحاد جمركى (ittih􀀀ād)
customs union
مجمرك mugamrak duty paid
جميز jummaiz (coll.; n. un. ة) sycamore (Ficus
sycomorus; bot.)
جاموس look up alphabetically
جمش jamaša i u (jamš) to unhair ( ھ s.th.) II to
make love, caress, pet
جمع jama‘a a (jam‘) to gather ( ھ s.th.); to
collect ( ھ e.g., money); to unite, combine,
bring together (parts into a whole); to put
together. join ( ھ things); to set, compose (
ھ type; typ.); to compile ( ھ a book); to
summarize. sum up ( ھ s.th.) to rally,
round up ( ھم people); to pile up, amass
accumulate ( ھ s.th.); to assemble ( ھم
several persons); to convoke, convene,
call ( ھ a meeting); to add ( ھ numbers),
add up ( ھ a column); (gram.) to make
plural, pluralize ( ھ a word); to unite, link,
bring together ( بين several things or
persons); to combine ( بين – و e.g., both
strength and courage); to contain, hold,
comprise ( ھ s.th.)│ جمع اطراف الشيء
(aṯrāfa) to summarize, sum up s.th.; to
give a survey of s.th.; جمع البراعة من اطرافھا
(barā‘ata) to be very efficient, do an
excellent job, do superlatively good work;
جمع شمل القطيع (šamla l-q.) to round up the
herd; يجمع الكتاب بين صفحاتھا (ṣafaḥātihā) the
book contains, lists …; يجمع بيت على بيوت
(yujma‘u) the plural of bait is buyūt II to
pile up, amass, accumulate ( ھ s.th.); to
rally, round up ( ھ s.th., ھم s.o.); to
assemble ( ھ the parts of a 134 machine)
III to have sexual intercourse ( ھا with a
woman) IV to agree ( على on s.th., to do
s.th.); to be agreed ( على on); to decide
unanimously ( على on), resolve ( على to do
s.th.)│ اجمعوا امرھم (amrahum) they came to
terms, they made a joint decision V to
gather; to assemble, congregate; to rally,
band together, flock together (people); to
pile up; to accumulate; to gather into a
mass, agglomerate; to cluster; to coagulate
VIII to be close together; to come
together, meet, join; to unite, combine ( ب
with); to assemble, meet, convene (an
organization, a committee, etc.); to be or
get together, have a meeting, interview or
conference, hold talks ( ب، مع with s.o.),
meet ( ب، مع s.o.; to concur ( على in), agree,
be agreed ( على on s.th.) X to gather,
collect ( ھ s.th.; also قواه quwāhu one’s
strength, افكاره afkārahū one’s thoughts);
to summarize, sum up ( ھ s.th.); to
possess, combine ( ھ s.th.)
جمع jam’ gathering; collection;
combination; connection, coupling,
joining; accumulation; (arith.) addition;
union, merger, aggregation, integration (
بين of) holding together ( بين of divergent,
separate things); (pl. جموع jumū‘)
gathering, crowd, throng; gang, troop;
(gram.) plural│ جمع الشمل j. aš-šaml union,
integration; جمع التكسير the broken (=
internal) plural, الجمع السالم the regular (=
external) plural; اسم الجمع ism al-j.
collective noun (gram.); جمع اليد j. al-yad
fist
جمع jum‘, جمع الكف j. al-kaff, جمع اليد j. alyad
fist, clenched hand│ بجمع يديه with
clenched fists
جمعة jum‘a pl. جمع juma‘, -āt week;
Friday│ يوم الجمعة yaum al-j. Friday; جمعة
الآلام Passion Week; الجمعة العظيمة and يوم
الجمعة الحزينة Good Friday (Chr.)
جمعية jam‘iya pl. -āt club, association,
society; corporation, organization; 135
assembly│ جمعية الأمم j. al-umam League of
Nations; جمعية خيرية (ḳairīya) charitable
organization; جمعية الاسعاف j. al-is‘āf
approx.: civil ambulance service; جمعية
(tašrī‘īya) legislative assembly; جمعية
عمومية ‘umūmīya) and جمعية عامة (‘āmma)
general assembly; general meeting;
plenum, plenary session; جمعية تعاونية
(ta‘āwunīya) cooperative
جميع jamī‘ (with foll. genitive) total;
whole, entire; all; entirety; e.g., جميع الناس
all men, all mankind; الجميع all people,
everybody; the public at large; جميعا
jamī‘an in a body, altogether, one and all,
all of them; entirely, wholly, totally
جمع ajma‘2 pl. -ūn, f. جمعاء jam‘ā’2, pl.
جمع juma‘2 entire, whole, all`│ العالم الاسلامى
اجمع (ajma‘a) the entire Islamic world; الدار
جمعاء (jam‘ā’a) the whole house; باجمعه biajma‘
ihī in its entirety, to its full extent,
completely, altogether; جاؤوا باجمعھم all of
them came
جماع jummā‘ aggregate; total, total
amount
O جماع كھربائى jammā‘ kahrabā‘ī;
storage battery
جماعة jamā‘a pl. -āt group (of people);
band, gang, party, troop; community;
squad (military unit; Eg. 1939)│ جماعات
وافرادا jamā‘ātin wa-afrādan in groups and
individually
جماعى jamā‘ī collective (as opposed to
فردى fardī individual)
مجمع majma‘ pl. مجامع majāmi‘2 place
where two or more things meet, place or
point of union, junction; meeting,
congregation, convention, assembly; (also
مجمع علمى m. ‘ilmī) academy (scientific);
college (e.g., of ecclesiastical dignitaries);
synod│ مجمع بلدى (baladī) provincial synod
(Chr.); مجمع اكليركى (iklīrīkī) clerical synod
(of the Coptic Church); اخذ بمجامع القلوب to
win or captivate the hearts; بمجامع عينيه 135
bi-m. ‘ainaihi (to look at s.o.) with
complete concentration, intently
مجمعى majma‘ī academy member,
academician
تجمي tajmī‘ assembly, assemblage (of
the parts of machinery)
جماع jimā‘ sexual intercourse; s.th.
comprising or involving another thing or a
number of things│ الخمر جماع الاثم al-ḳamr
j. al-itm wine involves sin, wine
اجماع ijmā‘ agreement, unanimity (also
اجماع الرأي ); unanimous resolution ( على to
do s.th.); (Isl. Law) consensus (of the
authorities in a legal question; one of the
four uṣūl of Islamic Law)│ بالاجماع
unanimously
اجماعى ijmā‘ī based on general
agreement, unanimous; collective,
universal
تجمع tajammu‘ pl. -āt coming together,
meeting; gathering; troop concentration;
crowd, throng, mob; agglomeration; O
agglutination (chem.-med.)
اجتماع ijtimā‘ pl. -āt meeting ( ب with
s.o.; of a corporate body; of parliament);
get-together, gathering, assembly;
reunion; rally; convention; conjunction,
constellation (astron.); confluence (of
rivers); life in a social group, community
life, social life; الاجتماع human society│
اجتماع الطرق ijtimā‘ aṯ-ṯuruq crossroads,
intersection, junction; علم الاجتماع ‘ilm alijt.
sociology; علماء الاجتماع sociologists
اجتماعى ijtimā‘ī community, group (used
attributively); social; socialist(ic);
sociological│ وزارة الشؤون الاجتماعية
ministry for social affairs; الحالة الاجتماعية
personal status; الخدمة الاجتماعية (ḳidma)
social service, social work; المساواة الاجتماعية
(musāwāh) social equality; الھيئة الاجتماعية
(hai’a) human society
اجتماعية ijtimā‘īya socialism
جامع jāmi‘ comprehensive, extensive,
broad, general, universal; collector;
compiler (of a book); compositor,
typesetter; (pl. جوامع jawāmi‘2) mosque│
مسجد جامع (masjid) great, central mosque
where the public prayer is performed on
Fridays
جامعة jāmi‘a pl. -āt league, union,
association; community; federation;
religious community, communion;
commonness, community of interests or
purpose; university│O جامعة الكھرباء j. alkahrabā’
storage battery, accumulator;
جامعة الامم j. al-umam League of Nations;
الجامعة الاسلامية (islāmīya) Pan-Islamism;
الجامعة العربية (‘arabīya) and جامعة الدول
العربية (duwal) the Arab League; جامعة شعبية
(ša‘bīya) university extension, adult
education courses, evening courses
جامعى jāmi‘ī academic, collegiate,
university (adj.); university graduate
مجموع majmū‘ collected, gathered;
totality, whole; total, sum (arith.)│ الحروف
المجموعة matter (typ.); مجموع اراضى القطر m.
arāḍī l-quṯr the total area of the country;
مجموع طوله m. ṯūlihī its total length; المجموع
العصبي (‘aṣabī) the nervous system
مجموعة majmū‘a pl. -āt, مجاميع majāmī‘2
collection (e.g., of works of art, of stamps,
etc., also of stories); compilation, list;
group {also, e.g., of trees, of islands, etc.);
series (e.g., of articles in a newspaper; O
battery (el.); alliance, league, bloc (e.g., of
states); collective, collectivistic
organization; aggregate; complex, block
(of buildings); system; bulletin,
periodical│ المجموعة الشمسية (šamāīya) the
solar system; مجموعة صناعية (ṣinā‘īya)
syndicate
مجمع mujammi‘ collector (techn.); O
storage battery, accumulator
مجمع عليه mujma‘ ‘alaihi (that which is)
agreed upon, unanimous
مجتمع mujtama‘ pl. -āt gathering place,
place of assembly; meeting place,
rendezvous; assembly, gathering, meeting;
society; human society; community,
commune, collective
جمكية = جامكية look up alphabetically
جمل 1 jamala u (jaml) to sum up, summarize ( ھ
s.th.); -- jamula u ( جمال jamāl) to be
beautiful; to be handsome, pretty, comely,
graceful; to be proper, suitable,
appropriate ( ب for s.o.), befit ( ب s.o.) II to
make beautiful, beautify, embellish, adorn
ھ، ه) s.o., s.th.) III to be polite, courteous,
amiable (. to 8.0.) IV to sum, total, add ( ھ
s.th.); to treat as a whole, mention
collectively ( ھ s.th.); to sum up,
summarize ( ھ s.th.); to act well, decently,
be nice V to make o.s. pretty, adorn o.s.
VI to be courteous, be friendly to one
another
جملة jumla pl. جمل jumal totality, sum,
whole; group, troop, body; crowd;
wholesale; (gram.) sentence, clause; جملة
jumlatan completely, wholly, on the
whole, altogether, in general, at all│ جملة
واحدة jumlatan wāḥidatan all at once, at
one swoop; جملة الكائنات everything in
existence; كان من جملة اصحابه he was one of
his companions, he belonged to his
companions; قال فى جملة ما قاله (jumlati)
among other things, he said ... ; وجملة القول
ان wa-jumlatu l-qauli anna or وجملة الامر ان
in short ... , to sum up …, briefly
stated ... ; على الجملة in short, in a word;
بالجملة wholly, on the whole, altogether, in
general, at all; by wholesale (com.); جملة
الاجرة المستحقة j. al-ujra al-mustaḥiqqa
gross wage; تاجر الجملة wholesaler,
wholesale dealer; 41.J:1 ~ sr,. al·j. wholesale
price; جملة اسمية (ismīya) nominal
clause; جملة فعلية (fi‘līya) verbal clause; جملة
اخبارية (iḳbārīya) or جملة خبرية (ḳabarīya)
declarative sentence (or clause); جملة انشائية
(inšā’īya) exclamatory sentence; جملة حالية
(ḥālīya) circumstantial clause; جملة
شرطي (šarṯīya) conditional clause; جملة
معترضة (mu‘tariḍa) parenthetical clause
حساب الجمل ḥisāb al-jummal (or jumal)
use of the letters of the alphabet according
to their numerical value
جمال jamāl beauty│O علم الجمال ‘ilm al-j.
aesthetics
جميل jamīl beautiful, graceful, lovely,
comely, pretty, handsome; friendly act,
favor, service, good turn; courtesy│ اعتراف
بالجميل، معرفة الجميل ma‘rifat al-j. and عرفان
بالجميل (‘irfān) gratitude; نكران
الجميل nukrān al-j. ingratitude; ناكر الجميل
ungrateful; حفظ له جميلا (ḥafiẓa) to keep s.o.
in fond remembrance, remember s.o. with
gratitude
اجمل ajmal2 more beautiful
تجميل tajmīl beautification,
embellishment; cosmetics
مجاملة mujāmala pl. -āt (act of) courtesy;
civility, amiability; flattery; مجاملة
mujāmalatan amicably, in a friendly way│
زيارة مجاملة ziyārat m. courtesy call; قواعد
المجاملات etiquette
اجمال ijmāl summation, summing up;
summarization; اجمالا ijmālan on the
whole, in general, generally speaking, as a
general principle│ اجمالا لذلك اقول to sum
up, I (would) say ... ; فى اجماله in its
entirety, as a whole; بالاجمال and على الاجمال
in general, on the whole, altogether; بوجه
الاجمال bi-wajhi l-i. = اجمالا
اجمالى ijmālī comprehensive, summary,
general, over-all, total, collective│ تقرير
اجمالى over-all report; غرامة اجمالية
(garāma) collective penalty; نظرة اجمالية
(naẓra) general view
مجمل mujmil pl. -ūn wholesaler,
wholesale dealer
مجمل mujmal summary, resume,
synopsis, compendium; general concept;
sum, total│ بالمجمل by wholesale
جمل 2 jamal pl. جمال jimāl, اجمال ajmāl camel│
جمل اليھود j. a1-yahūd chameleon
جمال jammāl pl. -ūn camel driver
جمان jumān (coll.; n. un. ة) pearls
جمھر jamhara to gather, collect ( ه، ھ s.th.,
s.o.); to assemble ( ه s.o.) II tajamhara to
gather, flock together (crowd)
جمھرة jamhara multitude, crowd, throng;
the great mass, the populace
جمھور jumhūr pl. جماھير jamāhīr2
multitude; crowd, throng; general public,
public; الجماھير the masses, the people
جمھرى iumhllri republican (adj. and n.)
جمھورية jumhūriya pl. -āt republic│
الجمھورية العربية المتحدة (‘arabīya, muttaḥida)
the United Arab Republic; الجمھورية الاتحادية
الالمانية (ittiḥādīya) the Federal Republic of
Germany; الجمھورية الديموقراطية الالمانية
(dīmūqrāṯīya) the German Democratic
Republic
تجمھر tajamhur gathering (of people;
crowd
جن janna u (jann, جنون junūn) to cover, hide,
conceal, veil ( ھ، على s.th.); to descend,
fall, be or become dark (night); pass.
junna: to be or become possessed, insane,
mad, crazy│ جن جنونه (junūnuhū) to get
madly excited, become frantic II to craze,
make crazy, drive insane, madden, enrage,
infuriate ( ه s.o.) IV to cover, veil, hide,
conceal ( ھ s.th.); = II; V to go mad,
become crazy X to be covered, veiled,
concealed; to regard ( ه s.o.) as crazy, think
ه) s.o.) mad
جن (coll.) jinn, demons (invisible beings,
either harmful or helpful, that interfere
with the lives of mortals)
جنى jinnī demonic; jinni, demon
جنية jinnīya female demon
جنة janna pl. -at, جنان jinān garden;
paradise│ جنات النعيم paradise; ساكن الجنان
inhabitant of paradise, deceased person,
one of blessed memory
جنينة junaina pl. -āt, جنائن janā’in2 little
garden; garden
جنائنى janā’inī gardener
جنة jinna possession, obsession; mania,
madness, insanity
جنة junna pl. جنن junan protection,
shelter, shield
جنان janān pl. اجنان ajnān heart, soul
جنان jannān gardener
جنين janīn pl. اجنة ajinna, اجنون ajnūn
embryo, fetus; germ (in a seed, etc.)
جنون junūn possession, obsession;
mania, madness, insanity, dementia;
foolishness, folly; frenzy, rage, fury;
ecstasy, rapture│ الجنون فنون al-j. funūn
madness has many varieties, manifests
itself in many ways
جنوني junūnī crazy, insane, mad; frantic,
frenzied
مجن mijann pl. مجان majānn2 shield
مجنة majanna madness, insanity
جان jānn jinn, demons
مجنون majnūn pl. مجانين majānīn2
possessed, obsessed; insane, mad;
madman, maniac, lunatic; crazy, cracked;
crackpot; foolish; fool
جنب janaba u to avert, ward off ( ھ ه from s.o.
s.th.) II to keep away, avert, ward off ( ھ ه
from s.o. s.th.), keep s.o. ( ه) out of the way
of ( ھ ), spare ( ھ ه s.o. s.th.) III to be or
walk by s.o.’s ( ه) side; to run alongside of
ھ) ), run parallel to ( ھ ), skirt, flank ( ھs.
th.); to avoid ( ھ s.th.) V to avoid ( ھ
s.th., ه s.o.); to keep away ( ھ، ه from),
steer clear, get out of the way ( ھ، ه of) VI
and VIII = V; VIII to be at the side of ( ,(ھ
run side by side with ( ھ ), run alongside of
ھ) ), skirt, flank ( ھ s.th.)
جنب janb pl. جنوب junūb, اجناب ajnāb
side; janba (prep.) beside, next to, near,
at│ جنبا الى جنب (also جنبا لجنب ) side by side;
بين جنبيه (janbaihi) inside (it), within; ما بين
جنبيه (baina janbaihi) what it contains,
comprises, its contents; على جنب aside,
apart; ذات الجنب pleurisy
جنبة janba pl. janabāt side; region,
area│ فى جنباته in it, within, wide; ضمه بين
جنباته (ḍammahū) to comprise, hold,
contain s.th.; جنبات الغرفة j. al-gurfa the
whole room; بين جنبات الغرفة in (the middle
of) the room; زاخر الجنبات crammed, chockfull,
brimful, filled to overflowing or
bursting
جنبى janbī lateral, side (adj.)
جنب junub in a state of major ritual
impurity; not belonging to the tribe, not a
kinsman│ الجار الجنب the neighbor not
belonging to the family
جناب jināb (title of respect) approx.:
Right Honorable; جنابكم Your Honor; you
(polite form)
جنابة janāba major ritual impurity (Isl.
Law)
جناب junāb (= ذات الجنب ) pleurisy
جنوب janūb south; جنوبا janūban
southward, to the south
جنوب janūbī southern│ جنوبى افريقيا South
Africa
جنب jānib pl. جوانب jawānib2 side; lateral
portion; sidepiece; flank; wing; face
(geom.); part, portion, partial amount;
partial view, section ( من of a scene, picture
or panorama); quantity, amount; a certain
number ( من of), a few, some│ من جانبه on
his part; من جانب – من جانب آخر on the one
hand -- on the other hand; الى جانبه to him,
to his address; at his (its) side, next to him
(it); بجانبه beside him (it), next to him (it);
الى جانب and بجانب side by side with; in
addition to; apart from, aside from; وضعه
جانبا to put s.th. aside; ودعه جانبا to leave
s.th. aside, omit s.th.; فى جانب in
comparison with, as compared with, as
against; regarding, with regard to; ما بين
جوانبھم their hearts; جانبا الفم jānibā l-fam the
comers of the mouth; جانب من a
considerable, or certain, degree of; a
considerable amount of, a good deal of;
جانب كبير من a great deal of, a large portion
of; على جانب كبير من he is very …; كان على
جانب عظيم من الكرم (karam) to be very
generous; على جانب عظيم من الاھمية
(ahammīya) of great importance; على اعظم
جانب من الخطورة ‘alā a‘ẓami jānibin min alkuṯūra
of utmost importance, of greatest
significance; فى كل جانب everywhere, on all
sides; خفض له جانبه (ḳafaḍa, jānibahū) to
show o.s. condescending, affable or
gracious to s.o.; to meet s.o. on fair terms;
امن جانبه amina jānibahū to be safe from
s.o.; لم اعره جانب اھتمام (u‘irhu) I paid not
the least attention to him; ( خاف (رھب، ھاب
جانبه (jānibahū) to fear s.o., be afraid of
s.o.; ملك الجانب milk al-j. crown lands; جانب
الميري j. al-mīrī (eg.) fisc, treasury; لين
الجانب layyin al-j. gentle; docile, tractable,
compliant; لين الجانب līn al-j. gentleness;
رحب الجوانب raḥb al-j. roomy; spacious,
unconfined; رقيق الجانب friendly, amiable,
gentle; مرھوب الجانب feared, dreaded; عزيز
الجانب powerful, mighty, strong; عزة الجانب
‘izzat al-j. power; مھيب الجانب mahīb al-j.
dreaded, respected; فى جوانب الدار about the
house, all over the house; often = فى جوانبه
فيه
جانبى jānibī lateral, side, by- (in
compounds)
اجنبي ajnabī foreign, alien; (pl. -ūn, اجانب
ajānib2 foreigner, alien│ البلاد الأجنبية the
foreign countries, the outside world; فرقة
الاجانب firqat al-ajānib the Foreign Legion
جنابية gannābīya pl. –āt (eg.) curb;
embankment, levee; side channel, lateral
(following a road or railroad tracks);
bypass (of a lock or sluice)
تجنب tajannub avoidance
اجتناب ijtināb avoidance
مجنبة mujanniba flank, wing (of an
army
جنبري see جمبري
جنباز junbāz, جمباز calisthenics; gymnastics;
athletics
جنبازي junbāzī ( جمبازي ) calisthenic(al),
gymnastic│ الالعاب الجمبازية gymnastic
exercises, physical exercises
جنح janaḥa a ( جنوح junūḥ) to incline, be
inclined, tend ( ل or الى to); to lean ( ل or الى
to or toward); to turn, go over ( الى to), join
الى) s.th.), associate o.s. ( الى with); to
strand ( على or الى on a coast; ship); to
diverge, deviate, depart ( عن from); to turn
away ( عن from), break ( عن with) II to
provide ( ھ s.th.) with wings, lend wings (
ھ to s.th.) IV to incline, be inclined, tend (
ل or الى to); to lean ( ل or الى to or toward);
to turn ( ل or الى to s.th.); to strand (ship)
جنح jinḥ side
جنح junḥ, jinḥ darkness gloom│ فى جنح
الليل (j. il-lail) in the dark of night, under
cover of night; بين جنحي الكرى (junḥay ilkarā)
lit.: between the two halves of
slumber, i.e., at night when everyone’s
asleep
جنحة junḥa pl. جنح junaḥ misdemeanor
(jur., less than a felony, جناية , and more
than an infraction, (مخالفة
جناح janāḥ pl. اجنحة ajniḥa, اجنح ajnuḥ
wing (of a bird. of an airplane, of a
building, of an army); side; flank│ انا فى
جناحه I am under his protection; على جناح
الاثير over the ether, by radio; على جناح
السرعة (j. is-sur‘a) with winged haste
جناح junāḥ misdemeanor (jur.); sin│ لا
جناح عليه (junāḥa) it won’t be held against
him if he ... ; it won't do any harm if he …
اجنح ajnaḥ2 more inclined ( الى to
جنوح janūḥ inclined ( الى s.th.)
جنوح junūḥ inclination, leaning, bent,
tendency ( الى to)
جانح jāniḥ side, flank, wing
جانحة jāniḥa pl. جوانح jawāniḥ2 rib; pl.
also bosom, heart, soul│ بين جوانحي in my
bosom, at heart; طفرت جوانحھا (ṭafarat) she
became happily excited, she trembled with
joy
مجنح mujannaḥ winged
جند II to draft, conscript, enlist, recruit ( ه s.o.;
mil.); to mobilize ( ھ an army, على against)
V to be drafted, be conscripted, be
enlisted (for military service)
جند jund m. and f., pl. جنود junūd, اجناد
ajnād soldiers; army│ جند الخلاص j. al-
ḳalāṣ Salvation Army
جندى jundī pl. جنود junūd soldier,
private│ جندى اول (awwal) private first
class (Ir., Syr.); جندى مستجد (mustajidd)
recruits (Ir., Syr.); الجندي المجھول the
Unknown Soldier
جندية jundīya military affairs, the army,
the military; military service
تجنيد tajnīd draft, enlistment (mil.)
recruitment; mobilization│ التجنيد الاجباري
(ijbārī) military conscription
تجند tajannud military service
مجند mujannad recruit
جندارى gindārī standard-bearer, comet (Eg.)
جندب jundub pl. جنادب janādib2 grasshopper
جندر 1 gandara (eg.) to mangle ( ھ laundry)
جندرة gandara mangling (of laundry);
press; O rotary press (typ.)
جندارى 2 look up alphabetically
جندرمة žandarma gendarmery
جندرمى žandarmī gendarme
جندفلى ganduflī (eg.) oysters 140
جندل 1 jandala to throw to the ground, bring
down, fell ( ه s.o.)
جندل jandal pl. جنادل janādil2 stone; pl.
جنادل cataract, waterfall (eg.)
جندول 2 gundūl (eg.) pl. جناديل ganādīl2 gondola
جنرال jenərāl, ginrāl (eg.) general (military
rank)
جنز II to say the burial prayers, conduct the
funeral service ( ه for the deceased; Chr.)
جنازة jināza, janāza pl. -āt جنائز janā’iz2
bier; funeral procession
جناز junnāz pl. جنانيز janānīz2 requiem,
funeral rites, obsequies; funeral
procession
جنزبيل janzabīl (= زنجبيل ) ginger
جنزير 1 janzara (= زنجر ) to be or become
covered with verdigris
جنزار jinzār (= زنجار ) verdigris
جنزير 2 jinzīr (= زنجير ) pl. جنازير janāzīr2 chain;
track (of a caterpillar, of a tank, etc.); a
linear measure (= 5 qaṣaba = 17.75 m;
also = 20 m; Eg.)│ طارة جنزير ṭārat j. track
sprocket, sprocket wheel
مجنزر mujanzar track-laying (vehicle)
جنس II to make alike, make similar ( ھ s.th.); to
assimilate, naturalize ( ه s.o.); to class,
classify, sort, categorize ( ھ s.th.) III to be
akin, be related, similar ( ھ، ه to), be of the
same kind or nature ( ه as s.o., ھ as s.th.),
be like s.o. or s.th. ( ھ، ه ) resemble ( ه s.o.,
ھ s.th.) V to have o.s. naturalized, acquire
the citizenship ( ب); to be naturalized VI to
be akin, related, of the same kind or
nature, homogeneous
جنس jins pl. اجناس ajnās kind, sort,
variety, species, class, genus; category;
sex (male, female); gender (gram.); race;
nation│ اسم الجنس ism al-j. (gram.) generic
noun, collective noun of nonpersonal
things (which form a n. un. in ة) ؛ الجنس
البشري (bašarī) the human race; ابناء جنسنا
abnā’ jinsinā our fellow tribesmen; ھو
مصري الجنس he is Egyptian by nationality; ا
لجنس اللطيف the fair sex; الجنس الخشن the
strong sex
جنسي jinsī generic; sexual; racial
لاجنسي lā-jinsī asexual, sexless
جنسية jinsīya pl. -āt nationality,
citizenship
تجنيس tajnīs naturalization; paronomasia
(rhet.)
جناس jinās (rhet.) assonance, pun,
paronomasia
مجانسة mujānasa relatedness, kinship,
affinity; similarity, likeness, resemblance
تجنس tajannus acquisition of citizenship,
naturalization
تجانس tajānūs homogeneity,
homogeneousness; likeness, similarity,
resemblance
مجانس mujānis similar, like, related;
homogeneous
متجنس mutajannis naturalized
متجانس mutajānis akin, related, of the
same kind or nature, homogeneous
جنطيانا (Lat. Gentiana) gentian (eg.)
جنف 1 VI to deviate ( عن from); to incline, be
inclined ( الى or ل to s.th.)
جنيف 2 look up alphabetically
جنفاص junfāṣ, جنفيص junfaiṣ sackcloth, sacking
جنك junk pl. جنوك junūk harp
جنوا janowā Genoa (seaport in NW Italy)
جنى janā i (jany) to pick, gather, harvest, reap (
ھ s.th., also the fruits of one’s work); to
pocket, rake in, collect ( ھ s.th.); to derive
ھ) profit, من from); to secure, realize ( ھ
profits, an advantage); to incur ( ھ evil,
harm, punishment); to cause, 141 provoke,
bring about ( ھ s.th.); -- ( جناية jināya) to
commit a crime, an outrage ( على on); to
offend, sin ( على against); to commit,
perpetrate ( جناية، ذنبا danban a crime, an
offense; على , less frequently الى , on or
against); to inflict ( ھ some evil, على on
s.o.); to harm ( على s.o., s.th.) V to
incriminate, accuse, charge with a crime (
على s.o.), lay the blame ( على on s.o.),
blame ( على s.o.); to act meanly VIII to
gather, harvest ( ھ s.th.)
جنى jany harvest; reaping (fig.); -- janan
(coll.) fruits
جناية jināya pl. -āt perpetration of a
crime; felony (jur.; in the strictly legal
sense, more than a misdemeanor, ,جنحة
and an infraction, مخالفة ), capital offense │
محكمة الجنايات maḥkamat al-j. criminal
court
جنائي jinā’ī criminal│ law محكمة جنائية
(maḥkama) criminal court; القانون الجنائي
criminal law, penal law
مجنى majnan pl. مجان majānin that which
is picked or harvested, a crop; source of
profit or advantage
تجن tajannin incrimination, accusation (
على of s.o.); mean way of acting, low,
underhand dealings
جان jānin pl. جناة junāh perpetrator (of a
delict); delinquent, criminal
مجنى عليه majnīy ‘alaih, harmed, injured;
aggrieved party; victim of a crime
جنيف (Fr. Geneve) žənēf Geneva
جنيه (Engl. guinea) ginēh, also gunaih pl. –āt
pound (eg.)│ جنيه انجليزي ( استرليني ) pound
sterling, English pound; جنيه مصري
Egyptian pound (abbreviation: (ج م
جھة see وجه
جھبذ jahbad pl. جھابذة jahābida man endowed
with a critical mind; great scholar; bright,
brilliant, intelligent
جھد jahada a (jahd) to endeavor, strive, labor,
take pains, put o.s. out; to over-work,
overtax, fatigue, exhaust ( ه s.o.) III to
endeavor, strive; to fight ( فى سبيل الشيء for
s.th.); t.o wage holy war against the
infidels IV to strain, exert ( ھ s.th.); to tire,
wear out, fatigue ( ه s.o.), give trouble ( ه
to)│ اجھد نفسه فى (nafsahū) to go to great
lengths, go out of one’s way ( في for or in
s.th.); اجھد فكره فى (fikrahū) to concentrate
on, put one's mind to, apply o.s. t.o VIII to
put o.s. out ( فى for s.th.), work hard; (Isl.
Law) to formulate an independent
judgment in a legal or theological question
(based on the application of the 4 uṣūl; as
opposed to taqlid, q.v.)
جھد jahd pl. جھود juḥūd strain; exertion;
endeavor, attempt, effort; trouble, pains (
فى on behalf or for the sake of s.th.); O
voltage, tension (el.)│ جھد جھده jahada
jahdahū, also عمل (حاول) جھده to do (try)
one’s utmost, do (try) all in one’s power,
make every conceivable effort; بجھد جھيد
bi-jahdin jahīdin with great difficulty, by
dint of atrenuous efforts; بعد جھد جھيد after
a lot of trouble O جھد عال (‘ālin) high
tension (el.)
جھد juhd strain, exertion; juhda (used
prepositionally) to the limit of ... │ جھد
الطاقة juhda ṭ-ṭāqa as far as possible, as
much as possible; جھد طاقته j. ṭāqatihī as
much as he can, to the limit of his
abilities; جھد امكانه juhda imkānihī do.; جھد
ما juhda mā as much as. to the limits of
what ... ; جھدي juhdī as far as I can
جھيد jahīd see جھد jahd
جھاد jihād fight, battle; jihad, holy war
(against the infidels, as a religious duty)
جھادي jihādī fighting, military
مجاھدة mujāhada fight, battle
اجھاد ijhād exertion; overexertion,
overstrain(ing) 142
اجتھاد ijtihād effort, exertion, endeavor,
pains, trouble; application, industry,
diligence; (Isl. Law) independent
judgment in a legal or theological
queetion, based on the interpretation and
application of the 4 uṣūl, as opposed to
taqlīd, q.v.; individual judgment
مجھود majhūd pl. -āt endeavor, effort,
exertion, pains, trouble, work; O voltage,
tension (el.)│ بذل مجھوداته to make every
effort, go to greatest lengths
مجاھد mujāhid pl. -ūn fighter, freedom
fighter; warrior; sergeant (Eg. 1939)
مجھد mujhid strenuous, exacting, trying,
grueling; -- mujhad overworked,
exhausted
مجتھد mujtahid diligent, industrious; (pl.
-ūn) mujtahid, a legist formulating
independcnt decisions in legal or
theological matters, based on the
interpretation and application of the four
uṣūl, as oppoeed to muqallid, q.v.
جھر jahara a (jahr, جھار jihār) to be brought to
light, come out, show, appear; -- to
declare publicly, announce ( ھ or ب s.th.);
to avow in public, proclaim ( ب s.th.); to
raise ( ھ the voice); -- jahura u ( جھارة
jahāra) to be loud, be clearly audible
(voice) III to declare or say openly, voice,
utter, express frankly ( ب s.th.)
جھر jahr and جھار jihār publicness,
publicity, notoriety; جھرا jahran and جھارا
jihāran publicly, in public
جھرة jahratan openly, overtly, frankly,
publicly
جھري jahrī notorious, well-known,
public
جھير jahīr loud (voice, shout)
اجھر ajhar2 day-blind
اجھر ajhar2 (elative) louder, more
audible
جمھري jahwarī loud (voice)
مجھر mijhar loud-voiced
مجھر mijhar pl. مجاھر majāhir2
microsoope
مجھرى mijharī microscopic(al)
مجھار mijhār loud-voiced; O
loudspeaker
مجاھرة mujāhara franknees, candor (of
one’s words)
جھز jahaza a to finish off ( على a
wounded man), deliver the coup de grace
to ( على ) II to make ready, prepare ( ھ s.th.);
to arrange ( ھ s.th.); to provide, supply ( ھ
s.th.); to equip, fit out, furnish, supply,
provide ( ب ه or ھ s.th. or s.o. with) IV to
finish off ( على a wounded man), deliver
the coup de grace to ( على ); to finish, ruin (
على s.o.) V to he equipped, furnished,
supplied, provided; to equip o.s.; to
prepare o.s., get ready; to be ready, be
prepared
جھاز jahāz (alas pronounced jihāz) pl.
-āt, اجھزة ajhiza equipment, appliances,
outfit, gear, rig; trousseau; contrivance,
gadget; implement, appliance, utensil;
installation, apparatus (techn.); system,
apparatus (anat.) │ جھاز لاسلكي (lā-silkī)
wirelees set, radio; جھاز راديو radio
(receiving set); O جھاز مستقبل (mustaqbil),
O جھاز الاستقبال , O جھاز الالتقاط receiver,
receiving set (radio); جھاز مذيع (muḍī‘), O
جھاز الارسال j. al-irsāl transmitter (radio);
جھاز تليفزيوني television set; جھاز الحفر j.
al-ḥafr drilling rig; oil derrick; جھاز دوري
(daurī) circulatory system (anat.); جھاز
لتسجيل الاھتزازات الارضية or جھاز قياس الھزات
الارضية (hazzāt, arḍīya)seismograph; جھاز
سري (sirrī) secret organization,
underground organization; جھاز الاستماع
sound locator; الجھاز العصبي (‘aṣabī) the
nervous system; جھاز الھضم j. al-haḍm
digestive apparatus
تجھيز tajhīz equipment, furnishment;
preparation; pl. تجھيزات equipment, gear
144
تجھيزي tajhīzī preparatory; (of a school)
preparing for college
جاھز jāhiz ready, prepared; readymade;
equipped │ جاھزة ( ملبوسات or) البسة (albisa)
ready-made clothes
مجھز mujahhaz equipped, provided,
furnished, supplied ( ب with); armed ( ب
with guns; of a ship, tank, etc.)
جھش IV to sob, break into sobs│ اجھش بالبكاء
(bukā’) to be on the verge of tears,
struggle with tears; to break into tears
جھشة jahša (n. vic.) pl. -āt sob; outburst
of tears
اجھاش ijhāš outburst of tears
جھض IV to bear young ones, litter; to have a
miscarriage (woman)│ اجھضت نفسھا
(nafsahā) she induced an abortion
جھض jihḍ miscarried fetus
جھيض jahīḍ miscarried fetus
اجھاض ijhāḍ miscarriage, abortion;
induced abortion
جھل jahila a (jahl, جھالة jahāla) to be ignorant;
not to know ( ب or ھ s.th., how to do s.th.);
to be irrational, foolish; to behave
foolishly ( على toward) VI to ignore ( ھ
s.th.); to refuse to have anything to do ( ھ
with), shut one’s eyes ( ھ to), disregard ( ھ
a fact); to affect ignorance, pretend to
know nothing X to consider ignorant or
stupid ( ه s.o.)
جھل jahl and جھالة jahāla ignorance;
folly, foolishness, stupidity│ عن جھل out
of ignorance
جھول jahūl ignorant; foolish, stupid
مجھل majhal pl. مجاھل majāhil2
unknown region, unexplored territory │
مجاھل افريقيا unknown Africa
تجھيل tajhīl stultification
تجاھل tajāhul ignoring, disregard(ing)
جاھل jāhil pl. جھلة jahala, جھل juhhal,
جھال juhhāl, جھلاء juhalā’ not knowing ( ب
s.th., how to do s.th.); ignorant,
uneducated, illiterate; foolish; fool
جاھلى jāhilī pagan, of or pertaining to
pre-Islamic times
جاھلية jāhilīya state of ignorance; pre-
Islamic paganism, pre-Islamic times
مجھول majhūl unknown; anonymous
(also مجھول الاسم m. al-ism); pl. مجاھيل
majāhīl2 unknown things│ صيغة المجھول
ṣīgat al-m. passive (gram.)
مجھولية majhūlīya being unknown,
unknown nature
جھم jahuma u ( جھامة jahāma, جھومة juhūma) to
frown, glower V to frown, scowl, glower;
to regard with displeasure (, ھ ه or ل s.o. or
s.th.), frown ( ھ or ل on); to eye gloomily,
coolly, grimiy ( ھ، ه or ل s.o., s.th.); to
become sullen, gloomy (face)
جھم jahm sullen, glum, morose, gloomy
(face)
جھام jahām clouds
جھامة jahāma and جھومة juhūma grim
look, sullen expression; gloominoss;
brooding silence
جھنم jahannam2 (f.) hell
جھنمي jahannamī hellish, infernal
جو jaww pl. اجواء ajwā’, جواء jiwā’ (pl.
frequently with singnlar meaning) air;
atmosphere (also fig.); sky; weather;
sphere, milieu, environment; جوا jawwan
by air; by telegraph, telegraphically│ بريد
الجو air mail; طبقات الجو ṭabaqāt al-j. air
layers; فى جو ممطر (mumṭir) in rainy
weather
جوى jawwī air, aerial, aero- (in
compounds); airy, atmospheric(al);
weather (used attributively),
meteorologic(al)│ الضغط الجوي (ḍagṯ)
atmospheric pressure; طبقات جوية (ṭabaqāt)
air layers; اسطول جوي (usṭūl) air fleet; غارة
جوية air raid; القوات الجوية (quwāt) air force;
الملاحة الجوية aviation; ميناء جوية (mīnā’)
airport; ارصاد جوية meteorological
observations; حجر جوي (ḥajar) meteorite
جوا (colloq.) jawwā (pronounced gūwa
in Eg.) in it, within; inside
جوانى jawwānī, juwwānī inner, inside,
interior
جوافة guwāfa (eg.) guava (fruit); guavshrub
جوال (eg.) guwāl pl. -āt sack
جوانتي (It. guanti; eg.) gloves
جوب 1 (Fr. jupe) skirt
جوب) جاب) 2 jāba u (jaub) to travel, wander ( ھ
through), traverse, roam, tour, explore ( ھ
s.th., e.g., foreign lands); to pierce,
penetrate ( ھ s.th.), cut through ( ھ ); to
wander, cruise ( ھ about a place) III to
answer ( ه s. خ.، على s.th.), reply, respond ( ه
to s.o., على to s.th.); to comply ( ھ with),
accede ( ھ to) IV to answer ( ه or الى s.o.,
عن or على a question), reply, respond ( ه or
الى to s.o., على to s.th.); to comply ( ھ with
a request), accede, defer ( ھ to); to hear ( ه
s.o.), accede to the request or wishes of (
ه); to fulfill, grant ( ھ a wish); to consent,
assent, agree ( الى to); to concur ( الى in)│
اجاب الى طلبه ṯalabihi) to comply with s.o.’s
request VI to reply to one another; to echo
ھ، ب) from); to ring out (voices); to be
(mutually) corresponding, harmonize; to
be favorahle, propitious ( مع to s.o.;
situation) VIl to scatter, break up, pass
over (clauds); to be dispelled, disappear,
vanish (worries); to fade (darkness) X
استجاب to hear, answer ( ھ a prayer), grant (
ھ a request); to comply with the request of
ل) ), accede or defer to the wiohes of ( ;(ل
to react ( ل to); to respond ( ل to, ب with),
listen, pay attention ( ل to), show interest (
ل in); to meet, answer ( ب ل s.o. with),
reply ( ب ل to s.o. with or hy doing s.th.);
to resound, reverberate, re-echo; to
resonate ( ل or الى to s.th.), be in resonance
with (phys.); -- استجوب istajwaba to
interrogate, examine, question ( ه s.o.); to
hear ( ه the defendant or witn...); to
interpellate ( ه s.o.; in parliament)
جوب jaub travening, touring, exploration
(of foreign countries); piercing,
penetration
جوبة jauba pl. -āt, جوب juwab opening,
gap; hole, pit
جواب jawāb pl. اجوبة ajwiba answer,
reply; octave (to a given tone; mus.); (eg.;
pronounced gawāb pl. -āt) letter,
message│ جواب الشرط j. aš-šarṭ, main
clause (conclusion) of a conditional
sentence, apodosis
جوابى jawābī answering (used
attributively)
جواب jawwāb traverser (of foreign
countries), traveler, explorer
اجابة ijāba answer(ing), reply(ing),
response, respondence; compliance;
fulfillment, granting (of a request);
accession, consent, assent│ اجابة لطلبكم
ijābatan li-ṭalabikum, in compliance with
your request; in answer to your request
تجاوب tajāwub agreement, conformity;
harmony
استجابة istijāba hearing, answering (of a
prayer); granting, fulfillment (of a
request); resonance; consonance (phys.)│ ا
ستجابة ل istijābatan li in compliance with,
in answer to, in deference to
استجواب istijwāb pl. -āt interrogation,
questioning; hearing; interview;
interpellation (in parliament)
متجاوب mutajāwib harmonious
مستجيب mustajīb hearing, answering,
granting; reverberant, resonant,
resonating; responsive, susceptible,
impressible 145
جوت (Engl.) jūt jute
جاح (جوح ) jāḥa u and IV to annihilate, destroy,
ruin; to flood, inundate ( ھ the land) VIII
do.; to carry away, sweep away ( ه s.o.,
s.th.; storm); to put down, subdue, quell (
ھ s.th., e.g., a riot)
اجاحة destruction, annihilation; crop
damage; crop failure, bad harvest
اجتياح ijtiyāḥ destruction, annihilation;
subdual, suppression
جائح jā’iḥ crushing, devastating;
disastrous
جائحة jā’iḥa pl. جوائح jawā’iḥ2 calamity,
disaster, ruin; epldemic; crop damage
جوخ jūḳ pl. اجواخ ajwāḳ broadcloth
جاد (جود ) jāda u ( جودة jūda) to be or become
good, become better, improve; -- (jūd) to
grant generously ( ب s.th.), be so generous
as to do s.th. ( ب with verbal noun); to be
liberal, openhanded ( ب with s.th., على
toward s.o.), bestow liberally ( ب s.th., على
upon s.o.), grant, give lavishly ( ب of s.th.,
على to s.o.), shower ( ب على s.o. with); to
donate ( ب a sum of money, etc.) │ جاد بنفسه
to sacrifice o.s.; to give up the ghost; جادت
عيناه بالدمع (‘aināhu bi-d-dam‘) tears
welled from his eyes; جادت السماء (heavens
granted rain) it rained II to do well ( ھ
s.th.); to make better, improve, better,
ameliorate ( ھ s.th.); to recite (the Koran;
cf. تجويد ) IV to do well, do excellently ( ھ
s.th.); to master ( ھ s.th.), be skilled,
proficient ( ھ in), be an expert ( ھ at), be
conversant ( ھ with an art or field of
knowledge); to accomplish or say good,
excellent thing; to achieve excellent
results; to be excellent, outstanding,
distinguish o.s. (e.g., as a poet) │ اجاد لغة
(lugatan) to master language; اجاد العزف
على البيانو (‘azfa) to play the piano well X
to think ( ھ s.th.) good or excellent,
approve of ( ھ ); to consider ( ھ s.th.)
suitable for or appropriate to ( (ل
جود jūd openhandedness, liberality,
generosity
جود jaud heavy rains
جادة see under جد 2
جودة jūda goodness, excellence
جيد jayyid pl. جياد jiyād good, perfect,
faultless; outstanding, excellent, first-rate;
good (as an examination grade); جيدا
jayyidan well, excellently; thoroughly │
جيد جدا (jidda) very good (also as an
examination grade)
اجود ajwad2 better ,
جواد jawād pl. اجواد ajwād, اجاود ajāwid2,
اجاويد ajawīd جود , 2 jūd openhanded, liberal,
generous, magnanimous; jawād pl. جياد
jiyād, اجياد ajyād, اجاويد ajāwīd2 race horse,
racer; charger │ ابن الاجواد noble man
تجويد tajwīd art of reciting the Koran,
Koran reading (in accordance with
established rule, of pronunciation and
intonation)
مجيد mujīd adept, efficient, proficient
جودار jaudār see جاودار (alphabetically)
جار (جور ) jāra u (jaur) to deviate, stray ( عن
from); to commit an outrage ( على on), bear
down ( على upon), wrong, persecute,
oppress, tyrannize ( على s.o.); to encroach,
make inroads ( على on another’s territory)
III to be the neighbor of s.o. ( ه), live next
door to ( ه); to be adjacent, be next ( ھ to
s.th.), adjoin ( ھ s.th.); to be in the
immediate vicinity of ( ه ھ ), be close to (، ه
ھ ); to border ( ھ on) IV to grant asylum or
a sanctuary ( ه to s.o.); to protect ( ه s.o., من
from), take ( ه s.o.) under one’s wing; to
stand by s.o. ( ه), aid ( ه s.o.) VI to be
neighbors; to be adjacent; to have a
common border X to seek protection, seek
refuge ( ب with s.o., من from s.th.), appeal
for aid ( ه to s.o., من against s.th.) 146
جور jaur injustice; oppression, tyranny;
outrage
جار jār pl. جيران jīrān neighbor; refugee;
protégé, charge
جارة jāra pl. -āt neighboress
جيرة jīra neighborhood
جورة jūra pl. جور juwar pit, hole
جورى see alphabetically
جوار jiwār neighborhood, proximity;
بجوار in the neighborhood of, in the
vicinity of, near, close to
مجاورة mujāwara neighborhood,
proximity
جائر jā’ir pl. جورة jawara, جارة jāra
unjust. unfair; tyrannical, despotic; tyrant,
oppressor, despot
مجاور mujāwir neighboring, adjacent;
near, close by; (pl. -ūn) student (esp. of Al
Azhar University; living in the vicinity of
the Mosque)
ئمجير mujīr protector
متجاور mutajāwir having a common
border; adjoining, adjacent, contiguous
جورب jaurab pl. جوارب jawārib2 stocking; sock
جورجيا jorjiyā Georgia (republic of the
U.S.S.R.)
جوري 1 jūrī damask rose (Rosa damascena,
bot.); crimson
جوري 2 (Engl.) jūrī jury
جوز) جاز) 1 jāza u ( جواز jawāz, مجاز majāz) to
pass, come, travel ( ھ through); to pass ( ھ
an examination, a test); to be allowed,
permitted, permissible; to be possible,
conceivable; to work, succeed ( عليه with
s.o.; deceit, artifice) │ جازت عليه الحيلة (ḥīla)
the trick worked with him, he fell for the
trick II to permit, allow ( ھ s.th.); to
approve ( ھ of), sanction, warrant,
authorize ( ھ s.th.) III to pass ( ھ s.th. or by
s.th.), go or walk past s.th. ( ھ ); to go
beyond s.th. ( ھ ), overstep, cross, leave
behind ( ھ s.th.), also, e.g., جاوز الثلاثين من
العمر (‘umr) he is past thirty; to exceed,
surpass ( ھ s.th.); to pass over s.th. ( ,(عن
disregard ( عن s.th.), pay no attention ( عن
to); to let ( عن s.th.) go unpunished; to give
up, forgo, relinquish ( عن s.th.) IV to
traverse, cross ( ھ s.th., الى on the way to);
to permit, allow ( ھ ل to s.o. s.th.); to
authorize ( ھ ل s.o. to do s.th., also ھ ه ); to
license ( ھ s.th.); to approve, confirm,
endorse ( ھ a decision, a judgment); to
approve ( ھ of s.th.), sanction ( ھ s.th.) V to
tolerate, suffer, bear VI to pass ( ھ s.th. or
by s.th.), go or walk past s.th. ( ھ ); to go
beyond s.th. ( ھ ), overstep, cross, leave
behind ( ھ s.th.); to exceed, surpass ( ھ
s.th., also على ); to go too far, overstep all
bounds, encroach, make inroads; to pass
over s.th. ( عن ), disregard ( عن s.th.) pay no
attention ( عن to); to give up, forgo,
re1inquish (A s.th.); to refrain from) VIII
to pass, run, go ( ھ through), cut across (
ھ ); to cross ( ھ a border, a street, a
mountain range); to traverse ( ھ a country
or sea); to cover ( ھ a distance); to pass ( ھ
through the mind; said of ideas, thoughts);
to go ( ھ through hard times or a crisis); to
surmount, overcome ( ھ a crisis) X to
deem permissible ( ھ s.th.); to ask
permission
جوز jauz pl. اجواز ajwāz heart, center (of
a desert, of a large area, etc.) │ فى
اجواز amid, in the middle of, in; فى اجواز
الفضاء (faḍā’) in space
جواز jawāz permissibility, admissibility;
lawfulness, legality; permission, (official)
permit, license, authorization; possibility,
conceivability; passing (of an
examination) │ جواز السفر j. as-safar (pl.
-āt) (traveling) passport 147
مجاز majāz crossing; passage; corridor
(pol.-georgr.); metaphor, figurative
expression (rhet.) │ مجازا majāzanl, على
سبيل المجاز figuratively, metaphorically
مجازى majāzī figurative, metaphorical
اجازة ijāza pl. -āt permission,
authorization; approval; license; = Fr.
licence as an academic degree; permit;
vacation, leave (of absence) │ اجازة الحصر
i. al-ḥaṣr grant of patent, issue of letters
patent; patent; اجازة قنصلية (qunṣulīya)
exequatur of a consul (dipl.); اجازة مرضية
(maraḍīya) sick leave; الاجازات المدرسية
(madrasīya) school vacation; غائب بالاجازة
on leave, on vacation
مجاوزة mujāwaza and تجاوز tajāwuz
crossing; exceeding; overdraft,
overdrawing (of an account); disregard (
عن for); relinquishment ( عن of s.th.)
اجتياز ijtiyāz traversing, crossing;
passage; transit; covering (of a distance);
passing (of an examination); surmounting
(of difficulties)
جائز jā’iz permitted, lawful, legal;
conceivable, thinkable
جائزة jā’iza pl. جوائز jawā’iz2 prize,
reward, premium │ جائزة دراسية (dirāsīya)
stipend, scholarship
مجاز mujāz licensed; licentiate (as an
academic title, = Fr. licencié; e.g., مجاز فى
العلوم licencié ès sciences)
زوج 2 = □ جوز II to give in marriage
□ جوز jauz pl. اجواز ajwāz = زوج couple
□ مجوز (syr.; pronounced məžwez, 
مزوج muzwaj) wind instrument with a
double pipe, corresponding to the
Egyptian zummāra)
الجوزاء 3 al-jauzā’ Gemini (astron.)
جوز 4 jauz (coll.; n. un. ة pl. -āt) walnut │ جوز
الطيب j. aṭ-ṭīb nutmeg; جوز القيء j. al-qai’
nux vomioa; جوز الھند j. al-hind, جوز ھندي
(hindī) coconut; جوز القز j. alqazz cocoon,
chrysalis of the silkworm
جوزة gōza (eg.) narghile
جوزي jauzī nut (used attributively and in
compounds); nut-brown, hazel
جاز 5 look up alphabetically
جوزل jauzal pl. جوازل jawāzil2 young pigeon
جوس) جاس) jāsa u to peer around, pry around,
look around ( خلال kilāla in); to search,
investigate, explore ( ھ s.th.) VIII to
search, investigate, explore ( ھ s.th.)
جوسق jausaq pl. جواسق jawāsiq2 palace; manor,
villa
جويطة gawīṭa pl. جوائط gawā’iṭ2 (eg.) dowel,
peg
جاع (جوع ) jā‘a u to be hungry; to starve II to
cause ( ه s.o.) to starve, starve out, famish (
ه s.o.) IV do.
جوع jū‘ hunger, starvation │ مات جوعا to
starve to death
جوعان jau‘ān2, f. جوعى jau‘ā’, pl. جياع
jiyā‘ hungry, starved, famished
مجاعة majā‘a pl. -āt famine
جائع jā’i‘ pl. جياع jiyā‘, جوع juwwa‘
hungry, starved, famished
تجويع tajwī‘ starving out
اجاعة ijā‘a starving out
جوف II to make hollow, hollow out ( ھ s.th.)
جوف jauf pl. اجواف ajwāf hollow, cavity;
depression; interior, inside, center, heart;
belly, abdomen; north (magr.) │ في جوف
inside, in the interior of, in the middle of;
في جوف الليل (j. il-lail) or جوف الليل (jaufa) in
the middle of the night
جوفي jaufī inner, interior, inside;
subterranean, underground, subsurface (of
geological strata); northern (magr.) │ مياه
جوفية ground water 148
اجوف 1 ajwaf2, f. جوفاء jaufā’, pl. جوف jūf
hollow; empty; vain, futile, inane,
pointless, senseless
تجويف tajwīf pl. تجاواف tajāwīf2, hollow,
cavity
مجوف mujawwaf hollowed out, hollow
جوق jauq pl. اجواق ajwāq and جوقة jauqa
pl. -āt troop, group; theatrical troupe,
operatic company; choir (mus.); orchestra,
band (also مدير الجوق │ ( جوقة موسيقية mudīr
al-j. conductor, bandleader, choir leader;
جوقة الشرف j. aš-šaraf Legion of Honor
جال (جول 1 ) jāla u (jaul, جولة jaula, تجوال tajwāl,
جولان jawalān) to roam, rove, wander
about; to move freely, be at home ( في in a
field of learning), occupy o.s. ( في with); to
be circulated, go the rounds; to pass ( في، ب
through the mind)│ جال برأسه to preoccupy
s.o., engross s.o.’s attention; ما يجول في
خاطره (بخاطره ) what he is preoccupied with,
what is on his mind; جال الدمع في عينيه
(dam‘, ‘ainaihi) his eyes swam in tears;
جالت يده في (yaduhū) he laid his hands on,
he committed defalcations of IV to
circulate, pass around ( ھ s.th.) │ اجال الرأي
(ra’ya) to weigh s.th. thoroughly, ponder
s.th.; اجال النظر (naẓara) to let one’s eyes
wander about; to look around V to roam,
rove, wander about, move around; to
patrol, go the rounds; to cruise; to tour,
travel from place to place, travel about
جولة jaula pl. -āt circuit, round; patrol;
excursion, outing; tour; (round) trip;
voyage, run (of a steamer); (round-trip)
flight (of an airplane); round (in sports)
جوال jawwāl wandering, migrant,
itinerant, roving; cruising; traveling;
ambulant; traveler, tourist; see also
alphabetically │ رام جوال rāmin jawwāl pl.
رماة جوالة rumāh jawwāla rifleman (mil.;
Syr.)
جوالة jawwāla one given to roaming or
traveling; wanderer, wayfarer; O
motorcycle; cruiser
تجوال tajwāl migration, wandering,
roving, traveling; nomadic life, nomadism
جولان jawalān migration, wandering,
roving, traveling; nomadic life, nomadism
│ جولان اليد j. al-yad embezzlement,
defalcation
مجال majāl pl. -āt room, space ( ل for
s.th.); field, domain, sphere; scope, extent;
reach; range; elbowroom, free scope; play,
clearance; field (magn.)│ ما ترك مجالا للشك
(šakk) to admit of no doubt; لا مجال للطعن
فيه (majālan, ṭa‘n) (it is) incontestable; في
ھذا المجال in this connection; ودع المجال امامه
فسيحا (amāmahū) to give s.o. a free hand,
wide scope of action; مجال حيوي (ḥayawī)
lebensraum; مجال العمل m. al-‘amal field of
activity; مجال مغنطيسي (magnaṭīsī)
magnetic field; شدة المجال šiddat al-m. field
intensity (magn.)
تجول tajawwul roaming, roving,
wandering, migration; going out, moving
about; patrol, round; (round) trip, tour;
traveling │ منع التجول man‘ at-t. curfew
بائع جاول bā’i‘ jāwil pl. باعة جائلون
peddler, hawker
متجول mutajawwil wandering, migrant,
roaming, roving, itinerant; ambulant;
traveling; traveler │ وكيل متجول traveling
salesman; بياع متجول (bayyā‘) peddler,
hawker; قسيس متجول (qissīs) itinerant
preacher
جوال 2 look up alphabetically
جولف golf golf (eg.)
جام look up alphabetically
جون jūn pl اجوان ajwān gulf, inlet, bay
جونلة، جونلا، جونيلة (It. gonnella)gonella pl. -āt
(woman’s) skirt (eg.) 149
جاه look up alphabetically
جوھر II tajauhara to become substance
جوھر jauhar pl. جواھر jawāhir2 intrinsic,
essential nature, essence; content,
substance (as opposed to form; philos.);
matter, substance; atom; jewel, gem; pl.
jewelry │ الزيف والجوھر (zaif) the spurious
and the genuine
جوھرة jauhara jewel, gem
جوھري jauharī substantial; intrinsic,
essential, inherent; fundamental, main,
chief, principal; material; jeweler
جوھرجي jauharjī jeweler
مجوھرات mugauharāt (eg.) jewelry,
trinkets; jewels, gems
جوى 1 jawiya a (jawan) to be passionately
stirred by love or grief
جوى jawan ardent love, passion
جاوى 2 look up alphabetically
جويدار = جاودار look up alphabetically
جاء (جيء ) jā’a يجيء yajī’u ( مجيء majī’) to come
ه، ھ) to); to get ( ھ to), reach ( ھ a place);
to arrive; to bring ( ب s.th.; ب ه to s.o.
s.th.); to bring forth, produce ( ب s.th.); to
set forth ( ب s.th.); to do, perform; to
commit, perpetrate ( ھ s.th.); to occur, be
mentioned, be said ( فى in an article,
document or book); (with foll. Imperf.) to
be about or set out to do s.th. │ جاء فى جريدة
الأھرام ان the newspaper “Al Ahram”
reports that ... ; جاء من باريس ان a report
from Paris says that ... ; جاءت نتائجه مطابقة ل
(muṭābiqatan) its results coincided with ...
جيئة jī’a, jai’a coming, arrival │ جيئة
وذھاب (dahāb) coming and going, ذھب جيئة
وذھابا to pace the floor, walk up and down
مجيء majī’ coming, arrival, advent
الجائيات al-jā’iyāt the things to come
جيب 1 jaib pl. جيوب juyūb breast, bosom, heart;
sine (math.); hole, hollow, cavity,
excavation; pocket; purse │ الجيب
الخاص (ḳaṣṣ) the privy purse; تمام الجيب
tamām al-j., جيب التمام cosine (math.); ساعة
الجيب pocket watch; مصروف الجيب pocket
money; الجيوب الانفية (anfīya) the nasal
sinuses (anat.); جيوب المقاومة j. almuqāwama
pockets of resistance (mil.)
جيبي jaibī pocket (adj.)
جيب 2 jīp, جيب jīb and سيارة جيب sayyārat j. jeep
چيت (ir.) čīt a colorful cotton fabric, chintz
جيد 1 jīd pl. اجياد ajyād, جيود juyūd neck
جيد 2 jayyid see جود
جياد، اجياد 3 see جواد jawād
جير 1 jairi surely, truly, verily
جير 2 jīr lime
جير jīrī calcareous, lime (adj.)
جيار jayyār unslaked lime
جيارة jayyāra limekiln
جير 3 II to endorse (fin.)
جيرو (It. giro) endorsement (fin.)
جيرة، جيران 4 see جور
جيزة gīza Giza (city in N Egypt); a brand of
Egyptian cotton
جاش ( جيش ) jāša i ( جيشان jayašān) to be excited,
be agitated; to rage, storm; to boil, simmer
II to levy troops, mobilize an army X to
raise, mobilize ( ھ an army, also, e.g.,
انصارا anṣāran followers)
جيش jaiš pl. جيوش army, troops, armed
forces │ جيش الاحتلال occupation forces;
جيش احتياطي army reserve; جيش مرابط
(murābiṭ) territorial army; الانقاذ جيش j. alinqād
Salvation Army; جيش المساء almasā’
dusk, evening twilight 150
جياش jayyāš agitated, impassioned;
excited, boiling up; ebullient; pleasurably
excited, happily stimulated
جيشان jayašān excitement, agitation;
raging
جاف (جيف ) jāfa i, II and V to be putrid, stink
(decaying cadaver)
جيفة jīfa pl. جيف jiyaf, اجياف ajyāf corpse,
cadaver
چيكى čīkī Czech
جيل jīl pl. اجيال ajyāl people, nation, tribe;
generation; century; epoch, era
جيلاتي (It. gelati) jēlātī ice cream
جيم jīm name of the letter ج
جين (Fr. gaine) corselet, sheath corset (eg.)
جيوغرافيا jiyogrāfiyā geography │ الجيوغرافيا
البشرية (bašarīya) anthropogeography
جيوفيزيا jiyofīziyā geophysics
جيوفيزيائي jiyofīziyā’ī geophysical │ السنة
الجيوفيزيائية (sana) the geophysical year
جيوفيزيقي jiyofīzīqī geophysical
جيولوجيا jiyolōjiyā geology
جيولوجي jiyolōjī geologic(al)
ح
حاء ḥā’ name of the letter ح
حاخام ḥāḳām rabbi│ الحاخام الاكبر the chief rabbi
حؤول see حول
حامى ḥāmī Hamitic
حان and حانة see حين
حانبة (pronounced ḥamba) pl. حوانب ḥawānib2
(formerly Tun.) hamba, palace gendarme
of the Bey of Tunis
حانوت see حنو
حب 1 ḥabba i (ḥubb) to love, like II to evoke (
الى in s.o.) love or a liking ( ه، ھ for s.th. or
s.o.), make ( الى s.o.) love or like ( ه، ھ s.th.
or s.o.); to endear ( الى ھ s.th. to s.o.), make
ھ) s.th.) dear, lovable, attractive ( الى for
s.o.), make ( ھ s.th.) palatable, acceptable (
الى to s.o.); to urge ( الى ھ s.th. on s.o.),
suggest ( الى s.th. to s.o.) IV ( حب ḥubb, محبة
maḥabba) to love, like ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
wish, want, or like, to do s.th. ( احب ان │( ان
uḥibbu an I should like to ... ; احب له ان to
like about s.o. that he ... ; لا يحب الخير له
(ḳaira) he doesn’t want him to be happy,
he grudges him everything V to show
love, reveal one’s affections ( الى to s.o.);
to endear o. s. ( الى to s.o.), make o.s.
popular, ingratiate o.s. ( الى with s.o.); to
court, woo ( الى a woman) VI to love one
another X to like ( ھ s.th.); to deem ( ھ
s.th.) desirable, recommendable; to prefer
على ھ) s.th. to s.th. else)
حب ḥubb love; affection, attachment │
حب الذات ḥ. ad-dāt self-love, amour-propre;
حب الاستطلاع curiosity, inquisitiveness; حب
الوطن ḥ. al-waṭan patriotism; حبا ل
(ḥubban) out of love or affection for, out
of friendship for; حبا في in the desire to …
حبي ḥubbī friendly, amicable, loving; حبيا
ḥubbīyan in an amicable manner,
amicably; by fair means (jur.)
حب ḥibb pl. احباب aḥbāb darling, dear,
dearest (one)
حباب ḥabāb aim, goal, end 151
حبيب ḥabīb pl. احباء aḥibbā’ احبة , 2 aḥibba,
احباب beloved, sweetheart, lover; darling;
dear one, friend; dear ( الى to s.o.); popular;
الاحباب the beloved ones, the dear ones
حبيبة labība pl. حبائب ḥabā’ib2
sweet·heart, darling, beloved woman
احب aḥabb2 dearer, more desirable,
preferable ( الى to s.o.)
حبذا ḥabbadā (with foll. Nominative)
how nice, how lovely is ... ! how good,
excellent, perfect is …! │ حبذا لو how nice
it would be if …; حبذا الحال لو فعل h. l-ḥālu
lau fa‘ala it would be nice, or he would do
well, if he did it; يا حبذا الحال (ḥālu) that’s
just wonderful!
محبة maḥabba love; affection,
attachment │ محبة الوطن m. al-waṭan
patriotism
تحبب taḥabbub courtship, wooing
تحابب taḥābub mutual love, concord,
harmony
محبوب maḥbūb beloved; dear; lovable,
desirable; popular; favorite; beloved one,
lover; (pl. محابيب maḥābīb2) gold piece,
sequin (in Ottoman times; eg.)
محبوبة maḥbūba sweetheart, darling,
beloved woman
محبب muḥabbab agreeable, pleasant,
desirable, lovable, dear ( الى to s.o.); nice,
likable
محب muḥibb pl. -ūn loving; lover;
fancier, amateur, fan; friend │ محب الناس
philanthropic(al), affable; محبنا العزيز our
dear friend; محبو الآثار friends of archeology;
محب لذاته (li-datihī) egoist
متحاب mutaḥābb loving one another,
concordant
مستحب mustaḥabb (re)commendable,
desirable (said of acts whose neglect is not
punished by God, but whose performance
is rewarded; Isl. Law); well-liked, popular
حب 2 II to produce seed, go to seed (plant); to
bear seed (grain); to granulate, become
granulated; to granulate ( ھ s.th.) IV to
produce seed
حب ḥabb (coll.; n. un. ة) grains; seed; --
pl. حبوب ḥubūb grain, cereals, corn;
seed(s); grains, kernels; granules; pellets;
pills, pastilles; berries; acne, pustules,
pimples│ حب العزيز chufa (Cyperus
esculentus L.; bot.); حب الفقد ḥ. al-faqad
chaste tree (Vitex agous castus L.; bot.);
croton seeds (seeds of Croton tiglium;
bot.); (magr.) cherries; حب الھال ḥ. al-hāl
and ( حبھان) حب الھان ḥ. al-hān cardamom
(Amomum cardamomum L.; bot.); حب
الغمام ḥ. al-gamām hail, hail-stones
حبة ḥabba (n. un.; see also حب ḥabb) pl.
-āt grain, granule; seed; kernel; pill,
pastille; berry; pustule, pimple; triviality,
trille; a square measure (Eg.; = 58.345
m2); pl. حبات beads (of the rosary)│ حبة
شعير ḥ. ša‘īr a linear measure (Eg.; =
0.205 cm); حبة حلوة (ḥulwa) aniseed; حبة
سوداء (saudā’) black caraway (Nigella
sativa L.; bot.); حبات الرمال grains of sand;
حبة العين ḥ. al-‘ain eyeball; pupil (of the
eye); حبة القلب ḥ. al-qalb dearest one,
beloved, darling
حبب ḥabab blister
حبيبة ḥubaiba pl. -āt little grain, small
kernel; small pimple or pustule
حبيبي ḥubaibī granular, granulated│ الرمد
الحبيبي (ramad) trachoma (med.)
حبحب ḥabḥab (coll.) watermelon (hij.)
حباحب ḥubāḥib firefly, glowworm
حبذ II to approve, think wall ( ھ of s.th.),
commend ( ھ s.th.); to applaud, acclaim,
cheer ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.)
حبذا see حب 1
تحييذ taḥyīd approval; acclamation,
acclaim, applause, cheering 152
حبر ḥabara u (ḥabr) to gladden, make happy,
delight ( ه s.o.); -- ḥabira a ( حبور ḥubūr) to
be glad, happy II to embellish, refine,
make workmanlike ( ھ s.th.); to compose (
ھ s.th.) in elegant style; to write, compose
ھ) s.th.)
حبر ḥibr ink│ ام الحبر umm al-ḥibr squid,
cuttlefish; حبر على ورق (waraq) mere ink
on paper, of no effect (e.g., an agreement,
a treaty)
حبر ḥabr, ḥibr pl. احبار aḥbār a non-
Muslim religious authority, 1earned man,
scribe; hishop; rabbi│ الحبر الاعظم the Pope;
سفر الاحبار sifr al-a. Leviticus (Old Test.)
حبري ḥabrī pontifical │ قداس حبري
(quddās) pontifical mass (Chr.)
حبرية ḥabrīya office or dignity of a
bishop, bishopric, pontificate
حبرة ḥabara, ḥibara pl. -āt silken shawl
or wrap (worn in public by ladies)
حبار ḥabār, ḥibār pl. -āt mark, trace
(esp. of blows), welt, wale
حبور ḥubūr joy
حباري ḥubārā pl. حباريات ḥubārayāt
bustard (zool.)
يحبور yaḥbūr bustard chick (zool.)
محبر miḥbara, maḥbara pl. محابر
maḥābir2 inkwell
حبس ḥabasa i (ḥabs) to obstruct, shut off,
confine ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), block, bar, hold
back, check ( ھ s.th. عن from; also tears,
laughter, etc.); to withhold ( ھ عن from s.o.
s.th.); to hold in custody, detain ( ه s.o.) to
apprehend, arrest, jail, imprison ( ه s.o.); to
keep, keep back, put aside, put away ( على
ھ s.th. for); to tie up, invent inalienably ( ھ
capital) │ حبس نفسه على to devote o.s.
entirely to ... ; حبس يده عن (yadahū) to take
(s.th.) out from under s.o.’s power; حبس
عليه انفاسه (anfāsahū) to make s.o. catch his
breath, take s.o.’s breath away; حبس مع
الشغل ḥubisa ma‘a š-šugl he was
committed to prison under hard labor II to
tie up inalienably ( ھ funds, على for, esp.
for a pious purpose), make a religious
bequest ( ھ , for the benefit of على ) VII to
be held back, be held up, stop, be
interrupted, intermit; to restrain o.s., hold
back VIII to block, obstruct, bar, confine (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to detain, hold in custody (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to hold back, retain,
suppress ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to be detained,
held up; to be impeded, held back; to
falter, break, fail (voice), stop (breath)
حبس ḥabs (act of) holding or keeping
back, obstruction, check, repression;
blocking off, barring, confinement;
damming up, staving off; safekeeping,
custody, retention; imprisonment, arrest,
detention, jailing; (pl. حبوس ḥubūs) prison,
jail │ حبس احتياطي (iḥtiyāṭī) detention
(pending investigation); حبس انفرادي
(infirādī) solitary confinement; حبس شديد
penal servitude
حبس ḥibs pl. احباس dam, weir, barrage
حبس ḥubs, ḥubūs pl. احباس aḥbās (Tun.,
Alg. Mor. = waqf) inalienable property the
yield of which is devoted to pious
purposes, religious bequest, (Fr. jur.)
“habous”│ حبس عام (‘āmm) public habous,
حبس خاص (ḳaṣṣ) private habous; كان حبسا
على ( = كان وقفا على ) to be entirely
dependent on …
حبسة ḥubsa speech defect, impediment
of speech
حبيس ḥabīs blocked-off, shut-off,
barred, confined, locked-up; secluded;
bated (breath); choking (voice); (pl. حبساء
ḥubasā’2) hermit
محبس maḥbas, maḥbis pl. محابس
maḥābis2 place where s.th. is confined or
locked up; jail, prison; (prison) cell 153
محبس miḥbas device for shutting off or
blocking off
محبسة maḥbasa hermitage
انحباس inḥibās seclusion, confinement;
stoppage, interruption; cessation
احتباس iḥtibās retention, restraint;
inhibition, impediment, obstruction,
stoppage │ احتباس البول iḥtibās al-baul
suppression of urine, ischuria
محبوس maḥbūs shut-off (from the
outside world), isolated, secluded,
confined, locked-up; imprisoned, captive;
tied-up (funds); (pl. محابس maḥābis2)
prisoner, prison inmate, convict
محبس muḥabbis donor of a habous (see
حبس ḥubs)
المحبس عليه al-muḥabbas ‘alaihi
beneficiary of a habous (see حبس ḥubs)
منحبس munhabis secluded, shut-off
الحبش al-ḥabaš Abyssinia, Ethiopia; (pl. الاحباش
al-aḥbāš) the Abyssinians, Ethiopians
الحبشة al-ḥabaša (and (بلاد الحبش
Abyssinia, Ethiopia
الحبشي ḥabašī pl. احباش aḥbāš
Abyssinian, Ethiopian
حبط ḥabaṭa i ( حبوط (ḥubūṭ) and ḥabiṭa a to
come to nothing, fail, miscarry, go wrong;
to be futile, be of no avail, be lost IV to
frustrate, thwart, foil, defeat ( ھ s.th., على ھ
in s.th. s.o.; negotiations, efforts, an
attempt, etc.)
حبط ḥabaṭ scar of a wound, wale, welt
حبوط ḥubūṭ futility, failure
احباط aḥbāṭ frustration, thwarting, foiling
حبق ḥabaq basil (bot.); (eg.) a variety of
speedwell (Veronica anagallis aquatica L.)
حبك ḥabaka i u (ḥabk) to weave well and tight
ھ) s.th.); to braid, plait ( ھ s.th.); to twist,
twine, tighten ( ھ s.th.); to knit ( ھ s.th.); to
devise, contrive ( ھ a plan, a plot) II to
twist, twine, tighten ( ھ s.th.) to fasten ( ھ
s.th.)
حبكة ḥabka fabric, tissue; texture,
structure
حبك ḥubuk: p. حبك النجوم ḥ. an-nujūm the
orbits of the celestial bodies
حباكة ḥibāka weavers trade, weaving
محبوك maḥbūk tightly woven; tight, taut;
sturdy, strong, robust, husky
محتبك muḥtabik interwoven, intersecting
حبل 1 VIII to ensnare, catch in a snare ( ھ ، ه
s.o., s.th.)
حبل ḥabl pl. حبال ḥibāl, احبل aḥbul, حبول
ḥubūl, احبال aḥbāl rope, cable, hawser;
cord, string, thread; (pl. حبال ḥibāl) beam,
ray (e.g., of the sun, of light), jet (e.g., of
water); vein; sinew, tendon │ حبل الوريد
jugular vein; الحبل السري (surrī) umbilical
cord; الحبل الشوكي (šaukī) spine; حبال صوتية
(ṣautīya) vocal cords; حبل المساكين ivy
(bot.); حبال الماء jets of water; ( القى (اطلق
الحبل على الغارب alqā (aṭlaqa) l-ḥabla ‘alā
l-gārib to let things go, slacken the reins,
give a free hand, impose no restraint;
ارتخاء الحبل slackening of the reins,
yielding; relenting; اضطرب حبله iḍṭraba
ḥabluhū to get into a state of disorder, of
disorganization, of disintegration, get out
of control; تعب على الحبلين (la‘iba, ḥablain)
to play a double game, work both side, of
the street
احبولة uḥbūla pl. احابيل aḥābīl2 snare, net;
rope with a noose; pl. احابيل tricks, wiles,
artifices, stratagems (in order to get s.th.)
حبالة ḥibāla pl. حبائل ḥabā’il2 snare, net
حابل ḥābil: اختلط الحابل بالنابل (iḳtalaṭa)
everything became confused, got into a
state of utter confusion; حابل ونابلھم all
together, all in a medley 154
حبل 2 ḥlabila a (ḥabal) to be or become
pregnant, conceive and IV to make
pregnant ( ھا a woman)
حبل ḥabal conception; pregnancy
حبلى ḥublā pl. حبالى ḥabālā and حبلانة
ḥablāna pregnant
حبن ḥabana dropsy
حبھان (حبب الھان ḥabb al-hān) cardamom
(Amomum cardamomum L.; bot.)
حبا (حبو ) ḥabā u (ḥabw) to crawl, creep: to
present ( ھ ه s.o. with s.th.), give, award ( ھ
ه to s.o. s.th.) III to be obliging ( ه to s.o.),
show one’s good will ( ه toward s.o.); to
favor ( ه s.o.); to side ( ه with s.o.), be
partial ( ه to s.o.); to show respect,
deference ( ه to s.o.) VIII to sit with one’s
legs drawn up and wrapped in one's
garment
حبوة ḥibwa, ḥubwa, ḥabwa gift, present
حباء ḥibā’ gift, present
محاباة muḥābāh obligingness
complaisance, courtesy; favor(ing),
favoritism, partiality
حت ḥatta u (ḥatt) to rub off, scrape off, scratch
off ( ھ s.th.)
حتة ḥitta pl. ḥitat (eg.) piece, bit, morsel
حتى ḥattā (prep.) until, till, up to, as far
as; (conj.; with perf.) until, so that; (with
subj.) until, that, so that, in order that; --
(particle) even, eventually even; and even;
حتى لو even if; (with preceding negation)
not even, and be it only…
حتات ḥutāt scraps; morsels, crumbs
تحات taḥāt corrosion
حتد ḥatida a (ḥatad) to be of pure origin
محتد maḥtid descent, origin, lineage
حترة ḥutra small piece, bit, trifle
حتار ḥitār pl. حتر ḥutur border, edge,
fringe, surroundings, vicinity
حتف ḥatf pl. حتوف ḥutūf death │ يبحث عن (يسعى
الى) حتفه بظلفه yabḥatu ‘an (yas‘ā ilā)
ḥatfihī bi-ẓilfihī he brings about his own
destruction, digs his own grave; مات حتف
انفه māta ḥatfa anfihī he died a natural
death
حتم ḥatama i (ḥatm) to decree, make necessary,
prescribe ( على ھ s.th. for s.o.), make ( ھ
s.th.) a duty, a necessity ( على for s.o.); to
impose, enjoin ( على ھ s.th. upon s.o.); to
decide, determine definitely ( ب s.th.) II to
decree, make necessary, prescribe ( على ھ
s.th. for s.o.), make ( ھ s.th.) a duty, a
necessity ( على for s.o.) V to be necessary;
to be s.o.’s ( على ) duty, be incumbent ( على
upon s.o.)
حتم ḥatm pl. حتوم ḥutūm imposition,
injunction; final decision, resolution,
determination; حتما ḥatman decidedly,
definitely, neceaoarily, inevitably
حتمي ḥatmī decided, definite, final,
conclusive, definitive, unalterable,
irrevocable, inevitable
حتمية ḥatmīya decidedness, definiteness,
definitiveness, determinateness,
unalterableness; necessity
لا حتمية lā-ḥatmīya indeterminism
(philos.)
محتوم maḥtūm imposed, enjoined,
obligatory; determined, definitive,
determinate, unalterable, ineviroble;
destined, predestined, ordained (fate)
محتم muḥattam imposed, enjoined,
obligatory; determined, definitive,
determinate, unalterable, inevitable;
destined, predeotined, ordained (fate)
متحتم mutaḥattim absolutely necessary;
imperative (duty)
حتى see حت
حث 1 ḥatta u (ḥatt) to urge, incite, prompt,
goad, spur on, egg on, prod, provoke, 155
impel ( ه s.o., على to do s.th.) │ حث خطاه
(ḳuṭāhū) to quicken one’s pace, hurry ( الى
to a place); حث الطريق (ṭarīqa) to hurry,
hasten; حث قدميه (qadamaihi) to quicken
one’s pace, break into a run VIII and X = I
حثيث ḥatīt quick, rapid, quick
حاثة ḥātta hormone
حثي 2 ḥittī Hittite (n. and adj.)
حثالة ḥutāla dregs, lees, sediment; scum (fig.);
offal, discard, scraps │ حثالة الحرير silk
combings
حثا (حثو ) ḥatā u (ḥatw) to strew, scatter, spread,
disperse ( ھ s.th.)
حج ḥajja u to overcome, defeat ( ه s.o., with
arguments, with evidence), confute ( ه s.o.); to
convince ( ه s.o.); -- (ḥajj) to make the
pilgrimage (to Mecca), perform the hadj III to
dispute, debate, argue, reason ( ه with s.o.) VI
to argue against each other, carry on a dispute,
to debate; to take counsel VIII to advance ( ب
s.th.) as an argument, plea, excuse, or pretext;
to allege in support or vindication, plead ( ب
s.th.); to vindicate, justify ( ل s.th.); to protect,
remonstrate ( على against), object, raise
objections ( على to)
حج ḥajj and حجة ḥijja pl. -āt, حجج ḥijaj
pilgrimage; hadj, the official Muslim
pilgrimage to Mecca │ ذو الحجة dū l-ḥijja
Zu’lhijjah, the last month of the Islamic
calendar
حجة ḥujja pl. حجج ḥūjaj argument;
pretense, pretext, plea; proof, evidence;
document, writ, deed, record; authority │
بحجة ان under the pretense that …, on the
plea … on the pretext of …
حجاج ḥajāj pl. احجة aḥijja circumorbital
ring (anat.)
محج maḥajj destination (of a journey)
محجة maḥajja pl. محاج maḥājj2
destination of a pilgrimage, object of
pilgrimage, shrine; destination (of s
journey); goal; road; way; procedure,
method │ محجة الصواب m. aṣ-ṣawāb the
Right Way, the Straight Path; محجة الحديد
railroad
حجاج ḥijāj argument, dispute, debate
تحجج taḥajjuj argumentation, pleading,
offering of a pretext, pretense, excuse
احتجاج iḥtijāj pl. -āt argumentation;
pretext, excuse, plea, pretense; protest,
remonstrance ( على against), objection,
exception ( على to)
حاج ḥājj pl. حجاج ḥujjāj, حجيج ḥajīj
pilgrim; hadji, Mecca pilgrim, honorific
title of one who has performed the
pilgrimage to Mecca
حجب ḥajaba u (ḥajb) to veil, cover, screen,
shelter, seclude ( على ھ s.th. from); to hide,
obscure ( عن ھ s.th. from s.th. else, e.g.,
from sight); to eclipse, outshine,
overshadow ( ه s.o.); to make
imperceptible, invisible ( عن ھ s.th. to); to
conceal ( عن ھ s.th. from s.o.); to make or
form a separation ( بين -- وبين between –
and) II to veil, hide, conceal; to hide from
sight, keep in seclusion ( ھا a woman); to
disguise, mask ( ب ھ s.th. with) V to
conceal o.s. hide ( عن from), flee from
sight, veil o.s. VII to veil o.s., conceal o.s.;
to be covered up, become hidden be
obscured VIII to vanish, become invisible,
disappear from sight; to veil conceal ( عن
hide; to become hidden, be concealed ( عن
from); to withdraw; to elude perception; to
ease or interrupt publication (newspaper,
periodical)
حجب ḥajb seclusion; screening off;
keeping away, keeping off
حجاب ḥijāb pl. حجب ḥujub, احجبة aḥjiba
cover, wrap, drape; curtain; woman’s veil;
screen, partition, folding screen; barrier,
bar; diaphragm (also الحجاب الحاجز ; anat.);
amulet
حجابة ḥijāba office of gatekeeper
احتجاب iḥtijāb concealment, hiddenness,
seclusion; veiledness, veiling, purdah
حاجب ḥājib concealing, screening,
protecting; (pl. حجاب ḥujjāb, حجبة ḥajaba)
doorman, gatekeeper; chamberlain;
orderly (Syr., mil.); (pl. حواجب ḥawājib2)
eyebrow │ حاجب الھواء ḥ. al-hawā’ airtight,
hermetic
محجوب maḥjūb concealed, hidden, veiled
حجر 1 ḥajara u (ḥajr, ḥijr, ḥujr, حجران ḥijrān,
ḥujrān) to deny access ( على to s.o.); to
stop, detain, hinder ( على or ه s.o.); to
forbid, interdict ( على ھ s.th. to s.o.),
prohibit ( على s.o.) from doing s.th. ( ھ ); to
place ( على s.o.) under guardianship,
declare ( على s.o.) legally incompetent
حجر ḥajr restriction, curb(ing),
check(ing), obstruction, impeding,
limitation, curtailing ( على of s.th.); barring,
closing, debarment, preclusion; detention;
blocking, confinement, containment,
suppression (as a protective measure);
interdiction, prohibition, ban; revocation,
or limitation, of s.o.’s ( على ) legal
competence │ حجرصحي (ṣiḥḥī) quarantine
حجر (ḥijr forbidden, interdicted,
prohibited; lap; (pl. احجار aḥjār, حجور
ḥujūr, حجورة ḥujūra) mare
حجرة ḥujra pl. ḥujarāt, حجر ḥujar room;
cell; (railroad) compartment; chamber │
حجرة الانتظار waiting room; حجرة النوم ḥ. annaum
bedroom; الحجرة الفلاحية (fallāḥīya)
chamber of agriculture
حجر maḥjar pl. محاجر maḥājir2 military
hospital, infirmary; prison, jail, dungeon
│ محجر صحي (ṣiḥḥī) quarantine, quarantine
station
حجر maḥjir, miḥjar, maḥjar pl. محاجر
maḥājir محجر العين=) 2 m. al-‘ain) eye
socket; see also below
تحجير taḥjīr interdiction, prohibition,
ban; see also below
محجور maḥjūr pl. محاجر maḥājir2 (and
محجور عليه ) one placed under guardianship;
minor; ward, charge
حجر 2 II to petrify, turn into stone ( ھ s.th.); to
make hard as stone ( ھ s.th.) V to turn to
stone, petrify, become petrified
حجر ḥajar pl. احجار aḥjār, حجارة ḥijāra,
حجار ḥijār stone; weight (placed as an
equipoise on the scale of a balance) │
الحجر الاساسي (asāsī) the foundation stone,
cornerstone, وضع الحجر الاساسي (waḍ‘)
laying of the cornerstone; حجر البلاط ḥ. albalāṭ
flagstone, paving stone; حجر جھنم ḥ.
jahannam lunar caustic, silver nitrate; حجر
الجير ḥ. al-jīr limestone; الحجر السماقي or
حجر السماقي (summāqī) porphyry; الحجر
الاسود (aswad) the Black Stone (of the
Kaaba); حجر الشادنة hematite (min.); حجر
العثرة ḥ. al-‘atra stumbling block; حجر
الفلاسفة philosopher’s stone; O حجر القمر ḥ.
al-qamar selenite; حجر كريم and حجر ثمين
precious stone, gem; طبع على الحجر (tab‘)
lithograph; طباعة الحجر Lithography
حجري ḥajarī stony, stone (adj.) │ العصر
الحجري (‘aṣr) the Stone Age; العصر الحجري
الحديث the Neolithic period; العصر الحجري
القديم the Paleolithic period
حجير ḥajīr stony, petrified
حجار ḥajjār stone mason, stone cutter
محجر maḥjir pl. محاجر maḥājir2 (stone)
quarry
تحجير taḥjīr petrification; stone
quarrying
تحجر taḥajjur petrification
متحجر mutaḥajjir petrified
مستحجر mustaḥjir petrified 157
حجدز ḥajaza u i (ḥajz) to hold back, restrain,
hinder, prevent ( عن ھ s.th. from); to keep
away ( عن ھ s.th. from); to block (off),
close, bar; to isolate, insulate, confine,
seclude; to make inaccessible; to set apart;
to separate ( بين two things); to arrest,
detain; to seize, sequester, impound ( على
or ھ s.th., e.g., s.o.’s property, salary); to
confiscate, safeguard ( ھ s.th.); to reserve
ھ) s.th.); to make a reservation ( ھ for a.
theater seat, a steamer cabin, a ticket, etc.)
VIII to retain for o.s., reserve to o.s. ( ھ
s.th.)
حجز ḥajz curbing, prevention, restraint;
seclusion, confinement, containment,
isolation, insulation, separation; arrest,
detention, seizure, confiscation,
sequestration ( على of s.th.); reservation (of
seats) │ حجز الحرية ḥ al-ḥurrīya deprivation
of liberty, unlawful detention duress
(jur.); القى الحجر على (alqā) to confiscate
s.th.
الحجاز al-ḥijāz Hejaz, region in W
Arabia, on the Red Sea coast
حجازي ḥijāzī of or pertaining to Hejaz;
pl. -ūn) an inhabitant of Hejaz
حاجز ḥājiz and حاجزة pl. حواجز ḥawājiz2
obstacle, hindrance, impediment,
obstruction; partition, screen, dividing
wall j block, blockade, road block; fence,
gate, railing, balustrade; hurdle; bar,
barrier; barricade │ الحجاب الحاجز
diaphragm (anat.); O حاجز الامواج
breakwater; (الحواجز القمرقية (الجمركية
(qumruqīya, gumrukīya) customs barriers;
O حاجزة الصواعق lightning rod
موظف حاجز muwaẓẓaf ḥājiz approx.:
bailiff
محاجفة 1 muḥājafa singlestick fencing
احجاف 2 iḥjāf = اجحاف
حجل ḥajala u i (ḥajl, حجلان ḥajalān) to hop,
leap; to skip, gambol
حجل ḥajl, ḥijl pl. حجول ḥujūl, احجال aḥjāl
anklet
حجل ḥajal (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. حجلان
ḥajlān, حجلى ḥijlā partridge; mountain
partridge, mountain quail
حجل ḥajala pl. حجال ḥijāl curtained
canopy, or alcove, for the bride │ رباط
الحجال rabbāṭ al-ḥ. the ladies
لعبة الحجلة la‘bat al-ḥajala hopscotch
محجل muḥajjal wearing anklets
(woman); white-footed (horse); bright,
brilliant, radiant; unique, singular, esp. in
the phrase أغر محجل (agarr2)
حجم ḥajama u (ḥajm) to cup ( ه s.o.; med.) IV to
recoil, shrink, flinch ( عن from); to desist,
abstain, refrain ( عن from), forbear ( عن
s.th.); to withdraw, retreat
حجم ḥajm pl. حجوم ḥujūm, احجام aḥjām
bulk, size, volume; caliber (of a cannon)
│ كبير الحجم bulky, sizable, massive
حجام ḥajjām cupper
حجامة ḥijāma cupping, scarification, art
of cupping
محجم miḥjam, m محجم miḥjama pl. محاجم
maḥājim2 cupping glass
احجام iḥjām desistance, abstention;
restraint, aloofness, reserve
حجن ḥajana i (ḥajn) to bend, curve, crook ( ھ
s.th.) VIII to snatch up, grab ( ھ s.th.) take
hold ( ھ of s.th.)
احجن aḥjan2 curved, crooked, bent
محجن miḥjan pl. محاجن maḥājin2 staff or
stick with a crooked end, crosier; hook
حجا به خيرا (حجو ) ḥajā bihī ḳairan to think well
of s.o., have a good opinion of s.o. III to
propose a riddle ( ه to s.o.); to speak in
riddles, be enigmatic
حجا ، حجى ḥijan pl. احجاء aḥjā’ intellect,
brains, understanding, discernment,
acumen, sagacity, wit, intelligence 158
حجي ḥajiy appropriate, suitable, proper (
ب for)
احجى aḥjā more appropriate, more
suitable, more proper; more correct, better
احجية uḥjīya pl. احاجى aḥājīy, احاج aḥājin
riddle, puzzle, enigma
حخام ḥaḳām = حاخام (look up alphabetically)
حد ḥadda u (ḥadd) to sharpen, hone ( ھ a
knife); to delimit, delineate, demarcate,
mark off, stake off ( ھ land, من from); to
set bounds ( ھ to s.th.), limit, restrict,
confine ( ھ s.th.); to impede, hinder, curb,
check ( من or ھ s.th.); -- i ( حدة ḥidda) to
become furious, angry ( على at): -- i u ( حداد
ḥidād) to wear mourning, mourn ( على the
deceased) II to sharpen, hone ( ھ a knife);
to forge ( ھ s.th.; syr.); to delimit,
demarcate ( ھ s.th.); to set bounds ( ھ to
s.th.), circumscribe, mark off, delineate
sharply; to limit, restrict, confine ( من or ھ
s.th.); to determine, appoint, assign,
schedule, lay down, set down, establish ( ھ
s.th.); to fix). e.g., prices); to define ( ھ
s.th.) │ حدد بصره (baṣarahū) to dart sharp
glances; to scrutinize ( في s.th.), look
sharply ( في at s.th.) III to oppose ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.) act contrary ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.),
contravene, counteract, violate ( ھ s.th.) IV
to sharpen, make sharp ( ھ s.th.) │ احد النظر
الى (naẓar) to look sharply at, stare at; احد
بصره (baṣarahū) to dart sharp glances; to
scrutinize ( في s.th.), look sharply ( في at
s.th.); احد من بصره (baṣarihī) to glance
sharply; -- to put on garments of mourning
V to be delimited, be delineated, be
bounded, be circumscribed; to be
determined, be established, be set down,
be scheduled, be fixed; to by defined, be
definable VIII to be or become angry; to
become infuriated, be furious ( على at), be
exasperated ( على with); to be agitated, be
upset, be in a state of commotion
حد ḥadd pl. حدود ḥudūd (cutting) edge
(of a knife, of a sword); edge, border,
brink, brim, verge; border (of a country),
boundary, borderline; limit (fig.), the
utmost, extremity, termination, end,
terminal point, terminus; a (certain)
measure, extent, or degree (attained);
(math.) member (of an equation), term (of
a fraction, of a proportion); divine
ordinance, divine statute; legal
punishment (Isl. Law) │ لحد li-ḥaddi or الى
حد until, till, up to, to the extent of, الى حد
الآن، لحد الآن li-ḥ. l-āna up to now, so far;
الى حد ما (ḥaddin) to a certain degree, to a
certain extent; الى حد كبير، الى حد بعيد to a
considerable extent or degree,
considerably, extensively; الى أي حد (ayyi
ḥaddin) how far, to what degree or extent;
لا حد له (ḥadda) boundless, infinite,
unbounded, unlimited; بلا حد bi-lā ḥaddin,
الى غير حد ilā gairi ḥaddin boundless,
unlimited, without limits; على حد سواء ‘alā
ḥaddin sawā’, على حد سوى ‘alā ḥaddin
siwan in the same manner; equally,
likewise; على حد (ḥaddi) according to,
commensurate with; في حد ذاته fī ḥaddi
dātihī and بحد ذاته in itself, as such; الحد
الاعلى (a‘lā), الحد الاقصى (aqṣā) the
maximum; الحد الادنى (adnā) the minimum;
حد عمري) ‘umrī) age limit; ذو حدين dū
ḥaddain two-edged; في حدود (ḥudūdi)
within, within the framework of; بلغ اقصى
حدوده (aqṣā ḥudūdihI) to attain its highest
degree; حدود لله the bounds or restrictions
that God has placed on man's freedom of
action
حدة ḥidda sharpness, keenness; pitch (of
a tone); distinctiveness, markedness;
vehemence, violence, impetuosity; fury,
rage, wrath, ire, anger; excitability,
irascibility, passionateness
حدة ḥida see وحد
حدد ḥadad forbidden 159
حداد ḥidād (act of) mourning ( على over)
│ ثوب الحداد taub al-h.􀀀 garmente of
mourning; حداد البلاط ḥ. al-balāt court
mourning
حديد ḥadīd iron; pl. حدائد ḥadā’id2 iron
parts (of a structure); forgings, hardware,
ironware │ حديد خام crode iron, pig iron,
iron ore; O حديد مطاوع (mutāwi‘) wrought
iron; حديد غفل (gufl) unprocessed iron, pig
iron; ظھر الحديد ẓahr al-ḥ. حديد الظھر cast
iron; سكة الحديد sikkat al-ḥ. railroad; ضرب
في حديد بريد see ضرب
حديد ḥadīd pl. حداد ḥidād, احداء aḥiddā’2,
احدة aḥidda sharp (knife, eye, tongue, etc.),
keen (mind)
احد aḥadd2 sharper, keener; more
vehement, more violent
حديدة ḥadīda pl. حدائد ḥadā’id2 piece of
iron; object or tool made of iron │ حديد
الحرث ḥ. al-ḥart plowshare; على الحديدة (eg.)
in financial straits, pinched for money
حديدي ḥadīdī iron (adj.) │ سكة حديدية
(sikka) railroad
الحديدة al-ḥudaida Hodeida (seaport in
W Yemen)
حداد ḥaddād ironsmith, blacksmith
حدادة ḥidāda smithcraft, art smithing
تحديد taḥdīd pl. -āt limitation,
delimitation; delineation, demarcation;
restriction, curb, confinement;
determination, fixation, appointment;
definition │ على التحديد and على وجه التحديد
(wajh) to be exact …, strictly speaking …
حاد ḥādd sharp (also, fig., of a glance),
keen (mind); high-pitched (tone);
vehement, fiery, impetuous; fierce; vivid;
acute (illness) │ حاد المزاج ḥ. al-mizāj, حاد
الطبع ḥ. aṭ-ṭab‘ hot-blooded, hot-headed,
hot-tempered, irascible; زاوية حادة (zāwiya)
acute angle; تحت الحد subacute
محدود maḥdūd bounded, bordered ( ب
by); circumscribed, confined; limited (=
small, e.g., number, knowledge, etc.);
delimited, determinate, fixed, definite,
definitive │ محدود المعنى m. al-ma‘nā
unambiguous; محدود الضمان m. aḍ-ḍamān
of limited liability; (شركة محدودة (المسئولية
(širka) limited company, corporation
محدد muḥaddad sharpened, sharp;
determined, fixed, appointed, destined ( ل
for) strictly delimited, clearly defined
محتد muḥtadd angry, furious,
exasperated
حدأة ḥid’a, pl. حدأ ḥida’, حداء ḥidā’, حدآن ḥid’ān
kite (zool.)
حدأة ḥada’a pl. حداء ḥidā’ double-bladed
axe
حدب ḥadiba a (ḥadab) to be convex, domeshaped,
cambered, bent outward; to be
hunchbacked; to be nice, kind, friendly (
على or ب to s.o.). be solicitous ( على or ب
about s.o.), care ( على or ب for s.o.) take
care ( على or ب of s.o.) II to make convex,
emboss, camber, vault, curve, crook, bend
ھ) s.th.) V and XII احدودب iḥaudaba to be
crooked, vaulted, cambered, embossed,
convex
حدب ḥadab affection, fondness, love;
kindliness; solicitude, care; (pl. حداب
ḥidāb, احداب aḥdāb) elevation of the
ground │ من كل حدب وصوب (wa-ṣaubin) or
كل صوب وحدب from all sides, from all
directions, from everywhere; في كل صوب
وحدب everywhere, in every quarter, on all
sides
حدب ḥadib curved, cambered, vaulted,
convex; hunchbacked; kindly, friendly
حدب ḥadaba hunchback, hump; camber,
vaulting, curvature
احدب aḥdab2, f. حدباء ḥadbā’, pl. حدب
ḥudb hunchbacked, humped; -- (elative)
kindlier, friendlier
محدب muḥaddab embossed; cambered,
convex 160
حدث ḥadata u ( حدوث ḥudūt) to happen, occur,
take place, come to pass; -- (ḥaduta u (
حداثة ḥadāta) to be new, recent; to be
young II to tell, relate, report ( ه to s.o., ب
or ھ s.th., في، عن about); to speak, talk ( ه
to s.o., عن or في about, of) │ حدثه قلبه
(ḥaddatahū qalbuhū and حدثته نفسه
ḥaddatathu nafsuhū his heart, his
innermost feeling told him ( ب s.th.); حدث
نفسه ب (nafsahū) to talk o.s. into (s.th.), try
to believe s.th. or see s.th. (as factual); to
resolve, make up one’s mind to do s.th.;
حدث نفسه ان he said to himself, told himself
that … III to speak, talk ( عن or في ه to s.o.
about s.th.); to discuss ( عن or في ه with s.o.
s.th.), converse ( عن or في ه with s.o.
about); to negotiate, confer ( ه with s.o.) to
address, accost ( ه s.o.); to call up ( ه s.o., by
telephone) IV to bring forth, produce,
create, originate ( ھ s.th.); to found,
establish ( ھ s.th.); to bring about, cause,
occasion, provoke, effect ( ھ s.th.); to drop
excrement │ احدث حدثا (ḥadatan) to bring
about s.th.; to cause or do s.th., esp., s.th.
evil, do mischief V to speak, talk ( الى to
s.o., عن، ب or j about or of s.th.), converse,
chat ( الى or مع with s.o., عن to, ب or j about
s.th.) VI to talk with one another,
converse, have a conversation X to renew
ھ) s.th.) to buy new ( ھ s.th.); to introduce,
start, invent, originate, create ( ھ s.th.); to
find or deem ( ه s.o.) to be young
حدث ḥadat pl. احداث aḥdāt a new,
unprecedented thing, a novelty,
innovation; event, incident, occurrence,
happening; phenomenon; evil symptom;
misdeed; misfortune; ritual impurity (Isl.
Law); excrement, feces; (pl. احداث، حدثان
ḥudtān) young man, youth; احداث juveniles
حديث ḥadīt pl. حداث ḥidāt, حدثاء ḥudatā’2
new, novel, recent, late; modern; حديثا
ḥadītan recently, lately │ حديث البناء ḥ. albinā’
new-built, recently built; حديث السن
ḥ. as-sinn young; حديث العھد ḥ. al-‘ahd of
recent date, recent, new, young; حديث العھد
ب، حديث عھد ب (ḥ. ‘ahdin) having adopted
or acquired (s.th.) recently; not long
accustomed to (s.th.), inexperienced at
(s.th.), new at (s.th.), newly, e.g., حديث العھد
بالولادة (bi-l-wilāda) newborn, حديث الغھد
بالزواج (bi-z-zawāj) newly wed; كان حديث
العھد بأوربا he had not known Europe until
recently
حديث ḥadīt pl. احاديث aḥādīt حدثان , 2
ḥadtān speech; chat, chitchat, small talk;
conversation, talk, discussion; interview;
prattle, gossip; report, account, tale,
narrative; Prophetic tradition, Hadith,
narrative relating deeds and utterances of
the Prophet and his Companions │ حديث
خرافة ḥ. ḳurāfa fabulous story, silly talk;
حديث قدسي (qudsī) Muslim tradition in
which God Himself speaks, as opposed to
حديث نبوي (nabawī) an ordinary Prophetic
tradition; حديث النفس ḥ. an-nafs s.th. one
talks o.s. into; premonition
حدوث ḥudūt setting in (of a state or
condition), occurrence, incidence (of a
phenomenon); occurrence, incident,
happening
حداثة ḥadāta newness, recency, novelty;
youth, youthfulness
احداث aḥdāt2 newer, more recent
حدثان الدھر ḥidtān (or ḥadatān) ad-dahr
misfortune, adversities, reverses
احدوثة uḥdūta pl. احاديث aḥādīt2 speech;
discussion, talk, conversation; chatter;
fabling, fibbing; topic, subject of a
conversation; gossip, rumor (about a
person) │ حسن الاحدوثة ḥusn al-u. praise (of
s.o.) سوء الاحدوثة sū’ al-u. slander,
defamation
محادثة muḥādata pl. -āt discourse,
conversation, discussion, talk, parley
احداث iḥdāt production, creatuion,
invention, origination; causation,
effectuation 161
احداثيات iḥdātīyāt (pl.) co-ordinates
(math.) │ احداثيات عمودية (‘amūdīya)
ordinates; احداثيات أفقية (ufuqīya) abscissas
(math.)
استحداث istiḥdāt invention, creation,
production, origination
حادث ḥādīt occurring, happening, taking
place; new, recent; fresh; -- (pl. حوادث
ḥawādit2, also -āt) occurrence, incident,
event, happening; episode; case (jur.)
accident, mishap │ حادث تزوير a case of
forgery; مكان الحادث makān al-ḥ. site of
action, scene of the crime, locus delicti
حادثة ḥādita pl. حوادث ḥawādit2
occurrence, event, happening; plot (of a
play) ; incident, episode; accident, mishap
│ حادثة المرور ḥ. al-murūr traffic accident
محدث muḥaddit pl. -ūn speaker, talker;
spokesman; conversation partner,
interlocutor; relator, narrator; a transmitter
of Prophetic traditions, traditionary,
representative of the science or study of
Hadith (see above); O phonograph,
gramophone
متحدث mutaḥaddit spokesman, speaker
مستحدث mustaḥdat new, novel, recent, --
(pl. –āt) novelty, innovation; recent
invention, modern product; neologism
حدج ḥadaja i and II to stare, look sharply ( ھ، ه
at s.o., at s.th., often with ببصره bibaṣarihī
or بنظره bi-naẓarihī)
حدج ḥidj pl. حدوج ḥudūj, احداج aḥdāj
load, burden, encumbrance
ابو حديج abū ḥadīj stork
حداجة ḥidāja pl. حدائج ḥadā’ij2 camel
saddle
حدر ḥadara, ḥadura u (ḥadr, حدارة ḥadāra) to
be thick; -- ḥadara u i (ḥadr, حدر ḥudūr)
to bring down, lower ( ھ s.th.) to cause ( ھ
s.th.) to descend; to drop ( ھ s.th.); to shed
ھ) tears); حدر حدرا (ḥadran) to rattle off,
express quickly (an utterance, a thought);
-- (ḥadr) to come down, step down,
descend; to glide down, swoop II to drop (
ھ s.th.) to lower, inclines, dip ( ھ s.th.) V
to descend gradually; to glide down; to
come down, descend; to flow down
(tears); to derive, stem, originate ( من from)
VII to come or go down, descend; to glide
down, sink down; to be in decline, be on
the downgrade, to decline, wane; to flow
down (tears); to slope down, slant down,
be inclined (terrain); to come ( الى to a
place), arrive ( الى at)
حدر ḥadr rapid recitation of the Koran
(a terminus technicus of tajwīd)
حدور ḥadūr slope, downgrade,
declivity, declivitous terrain
تحدر taḥaddur descent, slant, slope,
inclination, incline, declivity
انحدار inḥidār slant, dip, pitch,
inclination, decent, slope; declivity; fall
(of a river); decline, waning; ruin, decay,
decadence
حادر ḥādir thick
متحدر mutaḥaddir descending, slanting,
sloping downward
منحدر munḥadir descending; lowered,
dipped; slanting, sloping, declivitous
(terrain); declining, waning, being on the
downgrade, in a state of decadence or
decline; run-down, seedy, down-at-theheels,
down-and-out
منحدر munḥadar pl. -āt depression; slope,
talus, incline, descent, declivity; fall (of a
river)
حدس ḥadata i u (ḥadt) to surmise, guess,
conjecture ( ھ s.th.)
حدس ḥadt surmise, guess, conjecture; O
intuition 162
□ حداف ḥaddāf ( حذاف)، حداف الماكوك (syr.)
shuttle (weaving)
□ طارة حدافة ṭāra ḥaddāfa (syr.)
flywheel
حدق 1 ḥadaqa i (ḥadq) to surround, encircle,
encompass ( ب s.o., s.th.); (with بعينه
bi-‘ainihī) to look, glance ( ه at s.o.) II to
look, glance, gaze, stare ( الى or في at, also
حدق النظر في │ ( ب(naẓara) to fix one’s
glance on … IV to surround, encircle,
encompass, enclose ( ب s.o., s.th.); to look,
glance ( في، الى or ب at) │ احدق النظر النظر في
(naẓara) to fix one’s glance on …
حدقة ḥadaqa pl. -āt, حدق ḥadaq, حداق
ḥidāq, احداق aḥdāq pupil (of the eye); pl.
احداق glances
حديقة ḥadīqa pl. حدائق ḥadā’iq2 garden │
حديقة الحيوانات ḥ. al-ḥayawānāt zoological
garden, zoo
احداق iḥdāq encirclement,
encompassment ( ب of)
خطر محدق ḳaṭar muḥdiq imminent
danger
2□ حدق II (= حدق ) to make acid, sour, tart, or
sharp ( ھ s.th.)
□ حادق ḥādiq (= حاذق ) sour, tart, acid,
sharp (taste)
حدل ḥadala i to flatten, level, even, roll ( ھ
s.th.); (ḥadl, حدول ḥudūl) to treat unjustly (
على s.o.)
محدلة miḥdala pl. محمدل maḥādil2 roller,
steamroller
حدم VIII to burn, glow, blaze; to burn up, be
consumed by fire; to flare up, break out
(fight); to be furious, burn with wrath ( على
at, over), also احتدم غيظا (gaiẓan)
احتدام iḥtidām paroxysm
محمدم muḥtadim furious, infuriated,
enraged
حدة ḥida see وحد
1 □ حدوة ḥidwa horseshoe
حدو) 2 and حدى) حدا ḥadā u (ḥadw, حداء ḥudā’,
ḥidā’ to urge forward by singing ( ھ
camels); to urge, spur on, egg on, prompt,
instigate, induce, move ( ب or ه s.o., الى to
s.th., to do s.th.); حدا ب to instigate s.th.; to
sway, rock, roll (rider, camel); to swing
along, rock along (in riding) │ حدا بھم الحديث
الى their conversation led them to …; غرض
تحدى اليه الركائب (garaḍun tuḥdā) a goal
much sought after or worth striving for V
to compete, vie ( ه with s.o.); to challenge,
provoke ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to defy, oppose,
resist, withstand ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), stand up
ھ، ه) against s.o., against s.th.) to incite,
stimulate, arouse, animate, sharpen ( ھ
s.th.; ذكاءه dakā’ahū s.o.’s intellect); to
intend ( ھ s.th., to do s.th.), be bent ( ھ on
doing s.th.)
حداء ḥudā’ animating singsong,
chanting of the caravan leader
حداء ḥaddā’ camel driver, cameleer
احدوة uḥduwa, احدية uḥdīya song of the
camel drivers
تحد taḥaddin pl. تحديات taḥaddiyāt
challenge, provocation
حاد ḥādin pl. حداة ḥudāh caravan leader
(who urges the camels forward by
singing); camel driver, cameleer; leader
متحد mutaḥaddin challenger, provoker
حدي 1 ḥadiya a to remain, stay ( ب at a place),
stick ( ب to a place)
حادى عشر 2 see احد
3 □ حداية ḥidāya, ḥiddāya = حدأة ḥid’a
حذر ḥadira a (ḥidr, ḥadar) to be cautious,
wary, to beware ( من or ھ، ه of s.o., of
s.th.), be on one’s guard ( من or ھ، ه
against) II to warn, caution ( من ه s.o. of or
about), put ( ه s.o.) on his guard ( من
against) III to watch out, be 163 careful;
to be on one’s guard ( ه against), be wary ( ه
of s.o.) V to beware, be wary ( من of) VIII
= I
حذر ḥidr and ḥadar caution,
watchfulness, alertness, wariness,
circumspection; precaution │ اخذ حذره
(ḥadarahū) to be on one’s guard; على جذر
‘alā ḥadarin cautiously, warily; on one’s
guard ( من against)
حذر ḥadir cautious, wary
حذاري ḥadārī beware ( ان of doing …, من
of s.th.)! watch out ( من for)! be careful ( من
of)!
تحذير taḥdīr warning, cautioning ( من of,
against)
محاذرة muḥādara caution, precaution,
precautionary measure
محذور maḥdūr that of which one should
beware, against which one should guard;
object of caution; -- (pl. -āt) danger, peril;
trouble, difficulty, misfortune
حذف ḥadafa i (ḥadf) to shorten, clip, curtail ( ھ
or من s.th.); to take s.th. away, cut s.th. off,
clip s.th. off ( من from s.th.), reduce ( من
s.th.), strike or cross s.th. ( من off s.th.); to
cancel, strike out, delete, drop, leave out,
omit, suppress ( ھ s.th.); (gram.) to elide,
apocopate, drop by aphaeresis; to deduct,
subtract ( ھ s.th.); to throw ( ب ه at s.o.
s.th.), pelt ( ب ه s.o. with s.th.); to cast
away, throw away, discard ( ب s.th.) II to
clip, trim ( ھ s.th.); to give ( ھ s.th.) shape,
to trim, clip, or cut ( ھ s.th.) into proper
shape
حذف ḥadf shortening, curtailing, cutting
off, trimming, etc.; canceling,
cancellation, striking off, crossing off,
deletion; omission, dropping, suppression;
(gram.) elision, ellipsis, apocopation
حذافير ḥadāfīr اخذه بحذافيره : 2 he took all of it, he
took it lock, stock and barrel
حذق ḥadiqa a, ḥadaqa i (ḥidq, حذاقة ḥadāqa) to
be skilled, skillful, well-versed, proficient
ھ) or في in s.th.), master ( ھ s.th.); --
ḥadaqa u ( حذوق ḥudūq) to turn sour (milk)
V to feign skillfulness, proficiency,
cleverness or smartness
حذق ḥidq and حذاقة ḥadāqa skill,
dexterity, proficiency; smartness,
cleverness, intelligence; perspicacity,
sagacity, acumen
حاذق ḥādiq pl. حذاق ḥuddāq skillful,
skilled, proficient; well-versed, clever,
smart; intelligent; sour
حذلق II taḥadlaqa to pretend to be clever or
skilful, feign skiIl or knowledge; to be
pedantic
حذلقة ḥadlaqa skillfulness, dexterity
حذا (حذو ) ḥadā u: حذا حذوه (ḥadwahū) to imitate
s.o., take after s.o., follow s.o.’s example
III to be opposite s.th. ( ھ ) face, parallel ( ھ
s.th.), run parallel ( ھ to) VI to be opposite
each other, be parallel VIII to imitate,
copy ( ب or على s.o. s.th., also ھ s.th.), take
or follow ( ب or على s.o., s.th., also ھ s.th.)
as an example or model; to be shod; to
wear ( ھ s.th.) as footgear
حذو ḥadwa (prep.) opposite, face to face
with │ حذوك النعل بالنعل ḥadwaka n-na‘la bin-
na‘li in a completely identical manner,
to a T, like two peas in a pod
حذاء ḥidā’ pl. احذية aḥdiya shoe; sandal
│ صانغ الأحذية shoemaker
حذاء ḥidā’a (prep.) and بحذاء bi-ḥidā’i
opposite, face to face with
حذاء ḥaddā’ shoemaker, cobbler
محاذاة (في) على ‘alā (fī) muḥādāti along,
alongside of, parallel to
احتذاء iḥtidā’ imitation, copying
محاذ muḥādin opposite, facing
حر ḥarra u i (ḥarr, حرارة ḥarāra) to be hot II to
liberate ( ه s.o.); to free, set free, 164
release ( ه s.o.); to emancipate ( ه s.o.); to
consecrate ( ه s.o.) to the service of God; to
clarify, clear up, make clear ( ه s.th.); to
formulate precisely, phrase accurately,
define exactly, pinpoint ( ھ s.th.); to revise
ھ) a book); to edit, redact ( ھ a book, a
periodical); to write, pen, indite, compose,
compile ( ھ s.th.) V to become free; to be
freed, be liberated ( من from); to be
emancipated VIII to be kindled, be heated,
flare up
حر ḥarr heat, warmth
حر ḥurr pl. m. احرار aḥrār, pl. f. حرائر
ḥarā’ir2 noble, free-bom; genuine (jewels,
etc.), pure, unadulterated; free; living in
freedom; freeman; independent; free
unrestrained; liberal (pol.; الاحرار the
Liberals); frank, candid, open ( على toward
s.o.); free, available, uninvested (money)
│ الاحتياط الحر (ihtiyaṭī) free reserves,
unencumbered reserves; من حر ماله min
ḥurr mālihī with his own cash, with funds
at his disposal
حرة ḥarra pl. -āt stony area; volcanic
country, lava field
حرية ḥurrīya pl. -āt freedom, liberty;
independence, unrestraint, license (e.g.,
poetic) │ حرية العبادة ḥ. al-‘ibāda freedom
of worship; حرية الفكر ḥ. al-fikr freedom of
thought; حرية الكلام ḥ. al-kalām freedom of
speech; حرية النشر (or الصحافة ) ḥ. an-našr
(aṣ-ṣiḥafa) liberty of the press
حرير ḥarīr silk; pl. حرائر ḥarā’ir (حراير) 2
silken wares, silks │ حرير صخري (ṣaḳrī)
asbestos; حرير صناعي rayon
حريري ḥarīrī silken, silky, of silk
حرائري ḥarā’irī silken, silk- (in
compounds), of silk; silk weaver
حرار ḥarrār ssailk weaver
حرارة ḥarāra heat; warmth; fever heat,
fever; temperature; ardor, fervor (of
emotion), passion; eagerness, enthusiasm,
zeal; vehemence, violence, intensity;
burning (of the skin)
حريرة ḥuraira pl. -āt calorie
حراري ḥarārī thermal, thermic, thermo-,
heat (used attributively); caloric │ وحدة
حرارية (waḥda) calorie
O حرارية ḥarārīya pl. -āt calorie
حرور ḥarūr f., pl. حرائر ḥarā’ir2 hotwind
حران ḥarrān2, f. حرى ḥarrā, pl. حرار
ḥirār, حرارى ḥarārā thirsty; passionate,
fervent, hot (fig.) │ زفرة حرى (zafra) a
fervent sigh; دموع حرى hot tears
احر aḥarr2 hotter, warmer │ على احر من
الجمر (jamr) on pins and needles, on
tenterhooks, in greatest suspense or
excitement
O محر miḥarr heating system, heating
installation
تحرير taḥrīr liberation; release;
emancipation; record(ing), writing;
editing, redaction; editorship (of a
newspaper, a periodical); (pl. -āt, تحارير
taḥārīr2) piece of writing, record, brief,
document │ رئيس التحرير editor-in-chief;
ادارة التحرير board of editors, editorial staff
تحريري taḥrīrī liberational;
emancipational; liberal; recorded in
writing, written, in writing
حار ḥār hot; warm; ardent, glowing,
fervent, passionate
محرور maḥrūr hot-tempered, hotheaded,
fiery, passionate, furious
محرر muḥarrir pl. -ūn liberator,
emancipator; writer, clerk; editor (of a
newspaper, of a periodical)
محرر muḥarrar consecrated to God; let
down in writing, recorded in writing,
written; booked; pl. محررات booking,
entries
متحرر mutaḥarrir emancipated; an
advocate of emancipation 165
حرب ḥariba a (ḥarab) to be furious, enraged,
angry III to fight, combat ( ه s.o.) battle,
wage war ( ه against s.o.) VI to fight (one
another), be engaged in war VIII = VI
حرب (ḥarb f., pl. حروب ḥurūb war, warfare;
fight, combat, battle; enemy, enemies ( على
or ل of s.o.) │ حرب اھلية (ahlīya) civil war;
حرب صحافية (ṣiḥāfīya) press feud; الحروب
الصليبية (ṣalībīya) the Crusades; الحرب
العظمى (‘uẓmā), الحرب العالمية (‘ālamīya),
الحرب العامة (‘āmma) World War I; كشفت
الحرب عن ساقھا kašafat il-ḥarbu ‘an sāqihā
and قامت الحرب على ساق qāmat il-ḥ. ‘alā
sāqin war flared up, fierce fighting broke
out
حربي ḥarbī warlike, bellicose,
belligerent, martial, war (adj.), military;
(pl. -ūn) warrior, soldier, military man │
البوليس الحربي (būlīs) military police
حربة ḥarba pl. حراب ḥirāb lance, spear;
spearhead; bayonet, sidearm
حرباء ḥirbā’ pl. حرابى ḥarābīy
chameleon (zool.)
وا حرباه wā ḥarabāh! (exclamation of
lament) alas! goodness no! oh my!
محراب miḥrāb pl. محارب maḥārib2 a
recess in a mosque indicating the direction
of prayer, prayer niche, mihrab
محاربة muḥāraba struggle, combat,
fight, battle; warfare
احتراب iḥtirāb mutual struggle
محارب muḥārib warring, belligerent;
warrior, combatant, fighter; corporal (Eg.
1939)
المتحاربون al-mutaḥāribūn the belligerents, the
warring parties
حربوشة ḥarbūša pl. حرابش (ḥarābiš2 (tun.)
pastille, pill
حرث ḥarata i u (ḥart) to plow ( ھ the soil); to
cultivate, till ( ھ the ground)
حرث ḥart plowing, tilling, tillage,
cultivation of the soil; arable land, tilth;
plantation, culture
حرثة ḥarta (n. un.) arable land, tilth
حراثة ḥirāta cultivation of the soil,
farming, agriculture
حراث ḥarrāt plowman
محراث miḥrāt pl. محارث maḥārit2 plow
حارث ḥārit pl. حراث ḥurrāt plowman │
ابو الحارث abū l-ḥārit lion
حرج ḥarija a (ḥaraj) to be close, tight narrow;
to be straitened, be confined, get into a
strait, be cornered, be hard pressed; to be
oppressed, be anguished (heart); to be
forbidden ( على to s.o.) to narrow, tighten,
straiten ( ھ s.th.); to complicate ( ھ s.th.),
make ( ھ s.th.) difficult; to forbid ( على ھ
s.th. to s.o.); to persist (J in s.th.) IV to
narrow, straiten, confine, cramp. hamper,
impede, restrict ( ھ s.th.); to complicate,
make difficult, aggravate, jeopardize ( ھ
situation, s.o.’s position); to embarrass ( ه
s.o.); to coerce, constrain, press ( الى ه s.o.
to); to forbid ( على ھ s.th. to s.o.) V to
refrain from sin or evildoing; to abstain,
refrain ( من from), avoid ( من s.th.); to be
cornered, be forced to the wall; to become
or be oppressed, anguished, distressed; to
become critical, become complicated or
difficult, be aggravated (situation), be
jeopardized (s.o.’s position) │ تحرج صدره
من (ب ) (ṣadruhū) to feel depressed by, feel
annoyed at; تحرج به الناس this made things
difficult for people
حرج (ḥaraj closeness, tightness,
narrowness; confinement, straitness.
constriction, crampedness; restriction,
impediment; oppression, distress, anguish;
difficulty; critical situation; prohibition,
interdiction; s.th. forbidden, s.th.
interdicted, sin │ لا حرج (ḥaraja) there is
no 166 objection; لا حرج عليك nothing
stands in your way, you are at liberty
حرج ḥaraj (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt, حرج
ḥirāj, احراج aḥrāj thicket; dense forest;
woodland, timberland
حرج ḥarij narrow, close, tight,
confined, straitened; oppressed, hard
pressed, harassed; critical (situation,
position)
احرج aḥrāj2 narrower, closer, tighter,
more straitened; more critical
حراج ḥarāg (eg.) auction
حراجة ḥarāja seriousness, gravity,
difficulty, complicatedness (of a situation)
تحريج taḥrīj forestation, afforestation
حرج taḥarruj restraint, reserve,
aloofness; timidity, diffidence, faintheartedness;
critical complication, gravity,
difficulty (of a situation)
حرج muḥarrijāt: محرجات الايمان m. alaimān
binding, committing, or solemn,
oaths
محرج muḥrij disconcerting,
embarrassing
متحرج mutaḥarrij: متحرج الصدر m. aṣ-
ṣadr annoyed, vexed, anguished,
oppressed
حرد ḥarida a (ḥarad) to be annoyed,
disgruntled, angry, furious ( على at, with)
حارد ḥārid, حرد ḥarid and حردان ḥardān
annoyed, disgruntled, angry, furious
حرذون ḥardaun pl. حراذين ḥarādīn2 lizard
حرز ḥaraza u (ḥarz) to keep, guard, protect,
preserve ( ھ s.th.), take care ( ھ of); --
ḥaruza u ( حرازة ḥarāza) to be strong be
strongly fortified, be impregnable IV to
keep, preserve, guard ( ھ s.th.); to obtain,
attain, achieve, win ( ھ s.th.) │ احرز نصرا
انتصارا ) ) (naṣran) to win a victory; احرز
قصب السبق (qaṣaba s-sabq) to come
through with flying colors, carry the day,
score a great success V to be wary ( من of),
be on one’s guard ( من against) VIII to be
wary ( من of), guard, be on one’s guard ( من
against), be careful, take heed, take
precautions
حرز pl. احراز aḥrāz fortified place;
refuge, sanctuary, retreat; custody; (pl.
احراز، حروز ) amulet
حريز ḥarīz strongly fortified, guarded;
inaccessible, impregnable
احراز iḥrāz acquisition, acquirement,
obtainment, attainment, achievement,
winning, gaining
احتراز iḥtirāz pl. -āt caution, wariness,
prudence, circumspection; reservation,
reserve │ بكل الاحتراز with all reservation
O حارزة ḥāriza fuse (el.)
محرز muḥriz obtainer, acquirer, winner,
gainer; possessor, holder ( على of s.th.)
حرس ḥarasa u (ḥars, حراسة ḥirāsa) to guard,
watch, control ( ه، ھ s.th., s.o.); to oversee,
supervise, superintend ( ه، ھ s.th., s.o.); to
secure, protect, safeguard, preserve, keep (
ه، ھ s.th., s.o.); to watch ( على over) V and
VIII to beware, be wary ( من of), guard, be
on one’s guard ( من against)
حرس ḥaras watch; guard, escort;
bodyguard │ الحرس السيار (sayyār) militia,
"garde mobile" (syr.) │ حرس الشرف ḥ. aššaraf
honor guard; الحرس الملكي (malakī)
the royal guard (formerly Ir., Eg.); الحرس
الملوكي (mulūkī) (formerly) bodyguard of
the Bey (Tun.); الحرس الوطني (waṭanī) the
National Guard
حراسة ḥirāsa guarding, watching,
control; watch, guard, guard duty;
supervision, superintendence;
guardianship, tutelage, custody, care,
protection; safe conduct, escort;
administration; administration of an estate
(jur.); sequester │ حراسة السواحل coast guard
167
احتراس iḥtirās caution, wariness,
prudence; (pl. -āt) precaution,
precautionary measure │ احتراسا من for
protection from or against
حارس ḥāris pl. حرسة ḥarasa, حراس
ḥurrās vigilant, watchful; watchman;
sentry, sentinel, guard; overseer,
supervisor, superintendent; administrator;
guardian, custodian, keeper, protector,
tutelary (in compounds) │ حارس التركة ḥ.
at-tirka administrator of aD estate; حارس
الخواتم keeper of the seal; حارس المرمى ḥ. almarmā
goal keeper; حارس قضائي (qaḍā’ī)
sequestrator, receiver (in bankruptcy, in
equity); ملاك حارس (mal’ak) guardian
angel (Chr.); حارس الليل ḥ. al-lail night
watchman
محروس maḥrūs guarded, safeguarded,
secured; protected (by God; esp. used ss
an epithet after the names of cities);
المحرسون the children, the family
محترس muḥtaris cautious, wary, careful
حرش ḥaraša i (ḥarš) to scratch ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
II to instigate, prod, incite, provoke,
incense ( ه s.o.); to set ( بين people against
each other), sow discord, dissension ( بين
among) V to pick a quarrel, start a brawl (
ب with s.o.) provoke ( ب s.o.)
حرش ḥirš, ḥurš pl. احراش aḥrāš, حروش
ḥurūš forest, wood(s)
حرش ḥariš and احرش aḥraš, rough,
coarse, scabrous
حرش ḥaraš, حرشة ḥurša, حراشة ḥarāša
roughness, coarseness, scabrousness
تحريش taḥrīš instigation, prodding,
incitement, provocation, agitation,
incensement
تحرش taḥarruš provocation,
importunity, obtrusion, meddling,
uncalled-for interference
حرشف ḥaršaf pl. حراشف ḥarāšif2 scales (of fish)
حرص ḥaraṣa i and ḥariṣa a (ḥirṣ) to desire,
want, covet ( على s.th.); to be intent, be
bent ( على on); to strive ( على for), aspire (
على to)
حرص ḥirṣ greed, avidity, cupidity,
covetousness; desire; aspiration, endeavor,
wish ( على for); avarice │ حرصا على in the
desire for …, in the endeavor to …; حرصا
على الارواح danger! (on warning signs)
حريص ḥarīṣ pl. حراص ḥirāṣ, حرصاء
ḥuraṣā’2 covetous, greedy, avid, eager (
على for); bent ( على on), desirous ( على of)
احرص aḥraṣ more covetous, greedier
حرض II to goad, prod, spur on, egg on, incite,
rouse, provoke ( على ه s.o. to s.th. or to do
s.th.); to instigate, abet, stir up, agitate (
على ه s.o. to or against); O to induce (el.)
تحريض taḥrīḍ incitement, provocation;
instigation, abetment, agitation ( على to);
inflammatory propaganda ( على against
s.o.); O induction (el.) │ تحريض ذاتي selfinduction
(el.)
تحريضي taḥrīḍī inciting, instigative,
agitative, inflammatory; provocative
حارض ḥāriḍ bad, wicked, evil
محرض muḥarriḍ pl. -ūn inciter, baiter;
instigator, abettor; demagogue, rabble
rouser; agitator, provocator; O inductor
(el.)
متحرض mutaḥarriḍ O induced (el.)
حرف II to slant, incline, make oblique ( ھ
s.th.); to bend off, up, down or back, turn
up, down or back, deflect ( ھ s.th.); to
distort, corrupt, twist, pervert,
misconstrue, falsify ( ھ s.th.) │ حرفه عن
موضعه (‘an mauḍi‘ihī) to distort the sense
of 168 s.th., rob s.th. of its true meaning V
to turn off, branch off, take a turning; to
deviate, depart, digress ( عن from); to
avoid ( عن s.th.); to be or become bent off,
distorted, corrupted, perverted VII to tum
off, branch off, ta.ke a turning; to deviate,
depart, digress, turn away ( عن from); to
slope down, slant, be inclined (terrain); to
turn ( الى to, toward); to be twisted, be
distorted; to be oblique, slanting; to be
cocked, rakish (headgear); with ب to make
s.th. appear oblique, slanted, or distorted;
to be corrupted, perverted │ انحرف به عن to
dissuade s.o. from; انحرف مزاجه (mizājuhū)
to be indisposed, be ill VIII to do ( ھ s.th.)
professionally, practice ( ھ s.th.) as a
profession; to strive for success
حرف ḥarf pl. حرف ḥiraf (cutting) edge
(of a knife, of a sword); sharp edge;
border, edge, rim, brink, verge; -- (pl.
حروف ḥurūf, احرف aḥruf) letter; consonant;
particle (gram.); type (typ.) │ على حرف
irresolute, wavering, on the fence; الفاظه
بحروفھا alfāẓuhū bi-ḥurūfihā his words
literally; بالحرف or بالحرف الواحد literally,
verbatim, to the letter; حرفا بحرف ḥarfan
bi-ḥarfin literally, word for word; وقع
بالاحرف الاولى (waqqa‘a, ūlā) to initial
(e.g., معاھدة mu‘āhadatan a treaty); الحروف
الابجدية (abjadīya) the alphabetic letters,
the alphabet; حروف مجموعة matter (typ.);
الحروف الشمسية (šamsīya) the sun letters
(i.e., sibilants, dentals, r, l, n to which the
l of the article assimilates), الحروف القمرية
(qamarīya) the moon letters (to which the
l of the article does not assimilate); حرف
الجر ḥ al-jarr preposition (gram.) حرف
الخفض ḥ al-ḳafḍ do.; حرف التعريف article
(gram.); حرف العطف ḥ al-‘aṭf coordinating
conjunction (gram.); حرف الاستفھام
interrogative particle (gram.); حرف القسم ḥ.
al-qasam particle introducing oaths
(gram.)
حرفي ḥarfī literal
حرف ḥurf common garden pepper cress
(Lepidium sativum L.; bot.)
حرفة ḥirfa pl. حرف ḥiraf profession,
occupation, vocation, business, craft, trade
حريف ḥarīf pl. حرفاء ḥurafā’2 customer,
patron, client (tun.)
حريف ḥirrīf pungent, acrid (taste); حريفات
spicy food, delicacies
حرافة ḥarāfa pungency, acridity (taste)
تحريف taḥrīf pl. -āt alteration, change;
distortion; perversion, corruption, esp.
phonetic corruption of a word
انحراف inḥirāf pl. -āt deviation,
digression; obliqueness, obliquity,
inclination, slant; declination (astrom.);
ailment, indisposition, also انحراف المزاج
احتراف iḥtirāf professional pursuit (of a
trade, etc.)
محرف muḥarraf corrupted (word)
منحرف munḥarif oblique; slanted,
slanting, sloping, inclined; distorted,
perverted, corrupted, twisted; deviating,
divergent; trapezium (geom.)
محترف muḥtarif one gainfully employed
ب) in), person doing s.th. ( (ب
professionally; professional, a pro
(sports); professional (adj.), e.g., صحافي
محترف (ṣiḥāfī) professional journalist;
climber, careerist
محترف muḥtaraf pl. -āt studio, atelier
حرق ḥaraqa i (ḥarq) to burn ( ھ s.th.); to burn,
hurt, sting, smart │ حرق قلبه (qalbahū), pl.
حرق قلوبھم (qulūbahum) to vex, exasperate
s.o.; -- u (ḥarq) to rub together ( ھ s.th.) II
to burn ( ھ s.th.); حرق اسنانه (asnānahū) to
gnash one’s teeth V to burn ( ھ s.th.); to
destroy by fire ( ھ s.th.); to singe, scorch,
parch ( ھ s.th.); to scald ( ھ s.th.); to kindle,
ignite, set on fire ( ھ s.th.) │ احرق فحمة ليله
في (faḥmata lailihī) to spend the night
doing 169 (s.th.), burn the midnight oil
over… V to burn, be aflame, burn up, take
fire, he consumed hy fire, he burned; to be
consumed (by an emotion), pine away ( ھ
with), he pained ( ھ by), eat one’s heart
out │ تحرق شوقا (šauqan) to be overcome
with longing or nostalgia VIII to burn, be
aflame, burn up, take fire, be consumed by
fire, he burned
حرق ḥarq burning, incineration,
combustion; kindling, igniting, setting
afire; arson, incendiarism; pl. حروق ḥurūq
burn (med.)
حرق ḥaraq fire, conflagration
حرقة ḥurqa, ḥarqa burning, incineration,
combustion; stinging, smarting, burning
(as a physical sensation); torture, torment,
agony, pain, ordeal
حراق ḥurāq, ḥurraq tinder
حراق ḥarrāq hurning, aflame, afire; hot
حريق ḥarīq and حريقة pl. حرائق ḥarā’iq2
fire; conflagration
O حراقة ḥarrāqa torpedo
حرقان ḥaraqān burning, stinging,
smarting (as a painful sensation; e.g., of
the feet)
O محرق maḥraq pl. محارق maḥāriq2
focus (phys.)
تحاريق taḥārīq2 (Eg.) season of the Nile’s
lowest water level, hottest season of the
year
احراق burning, incineration, combustion
تحرق taḥarruq buming, combustion;
burning desire
احتراق iḥtirāq burning, combustion; fire,
conflagration │O غرفة الاحتراق gurfat al-i.
combustion chamber (techn.); قابل الاحتراق
qābil al-i. combustible
حارق ḥāriq arsonist, incendiary
محروق maḥrūq burned, charred,
scorched, parched; reddish, hronzecolored;
pl. محروقات maḥrūqāt fuel │ فخار
محروق (faḳḳār) fired clay
محرق muḥriq: قنبلة محرقة (qunbula)
incendiary bomb
O محرق muḥraq crematory
محرقة maḥraqa burnt sacrifice
حرقد ḥarqada pl. حراقد ḥarāqid2 Adam’s apple
حرقفة ḥarqafa pl. حراقف ḥarāqif2 protruding
part of the hipbone
حرك II to move, set in motion, drive, propel,
operate ( ھ s.th.); to march, move ( ه
troops); to stir ( ھ s.th.); to start, get
started, get underway ( ھ s.th.); to agitate,
excite, stimulate ( ھ s.th.); to incite,
instigate, goad, prod, provoke, actuate,
urge ( على ه s.o. to do s.th.); to awaken,
arouse, foment, stir up ( ھ s.th.); to vowel,
vowelize (gram., ھ a consonant) │ حرك
مشاعره (mašā‘irahū) to grip, excite, thrill
s.o.; حرك العواطف to affect the feelings, be
touching, moving, pathetic; لا يحرك ساكنا
(sākinan) he doesn’t budge, he doesn’t
hend his little finger, he remains
immobile, apathetic; حرك ساكنه (sākinahū)
to rouse s.o., put s.o. in a state of
excitement, commotion or agitation V to
move, be in motion, stir, hudge; to start
moving, get moving; to start out, get
underway (traveler); to depart, leave
(train); to put out, to sail (fleet); to he set
in motion, be driven, be operated; to be
agitated, be excited, be stimulated; to be
awakened, be roused, be fomented, be
provoked, be caused
حرك ḥarik lively, active, brisk, agile,
nimble
حركة ḥaraka pl. -āt movement, motion;
commotion; physical exercise; stirring,
impulse; proceeding, procedure, policy;
action, undertaking, enterprise; military
170 operation; continuation, progress;
traffic (rail, ohipplng, otreet); movement
(as a social phenomenon); vowel (gram.)
│ في حركاته وسكناته (sakanātihī) in all his
doings; in every situation; حركة المرور
(through) traffic; حركة المراكب shipplng
traffic; حركة البضائع exchange of goods;
حركة الأموال turnover (com.); الحركة النسوية
(niswīya) feminist movement; خفيف الحركة
nimble, lithe, light, quick, agile, adroit;
ثقيل الحركة slow in motion, heavy-handed,
clumsy, sluggish, lumbering, inert,
indolent
O حركي ḥarakī kinetic (phys.)
حراك ḥarāk movement, motion
محرك maḥrak path, trajectory (of a
projectile)
محراك miḥrāk poker, fire iron
تحريكي taḥrīkī dynamic
تحرك taḥarruk pl. -āt movement,
motion; forward motion; start; departure;
sailing (of a fleet)
حارك ḥārik withers
محرك muḥarrik mover, stirrer; rouser,
inciter, fomenter, awakener, agent;
instigator; -- (pl. -M) motive, springs,
incentive, spur, motivating circumstance,
causative factor; motor, engine (tech.)
متحرك mutaḥarrik moving, movable,
mobile; pronounced with following
vowel, voweled, vowelized (consonant;
gram.) │ صور متحركة (ṣuwar) movies,
motion pictures
حركث ḥarkata (and حركش ḥarkaša) to stir up,
agitate, excite, thrill
حرم ḥaruma u, ḥarima a to be forbidden,
prohibited, interdicted, unlawful,
unpermitted ( على to s.o.); -- ḥarama i
(ḥirm, حرمان ḥirmān) to deprive, bereave,
dispossess, divest ( ھ ه or من ه s.o. of s.th.)
take away, withdraw, withhold ( ھ ه or ھ
من or ه form s.o. s.th.), deny, refuse ( ھ ه or
ھ من or من ه to s.o. s.th.); to exclude,
debar, preclude, cut off ( ھ ه or من ه s.o.
from s.th.); to excommunicate ( ه s.o.) II to
declare ( ھ s.th.) sacred, sacrosanct,
inviolable, or taboo, to taboo ( ھ s.th.); to
declare ( ھ s.th.) unlawful, not permissible,
forbid, interdict, proscribe ( ھ s.th., j. to
s.o.); to render ( ه s.o.) immune or proof (
من against), immunize ( من ه s.o. against) │
حرمه على نفسه to deny o.s. s.th., abstain,
refrain from s.th. IV to excommunicate ( ه
s.o.; Chr.); to enter into the state of ritual
consecration (esp., of a Mecca pilgrim;
see احرام iḥrām) V to be forbidden,
interdicted, prohibited; to be holy, sacred,
sacrosanct, inviolable VIII to honor,
revere, venerate, esteem, respect ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.) │ احترم نفسه to be self-respecting X to
deem ( ھ s.th.) sacrosanct, sacred, holy,
inviolable; to deem ( ھ s.th.) unlawful or
unpermissible
حرم ḥirm excommunication (Chr.)
حرم ḥaram p احرام . 1 aḥrām forbidden,
prohibited, interdicted; taboo; holy,
sacred, sacrosanct; s.th. sacred, sacred
object; sacred possession; wife; sanctum,
sanctuary, sacred precinct; الحرمان the two
Holy Places, Mecca and Medina │ ثالث
الحرمين tālit al-ḥaramain the third Holy
Place, i.e., Jerusalem
حرمة ḥurma pl. -āt, ḥurumāt, ḥuramāt
holiness, sacredness, sanctity,
sacrosanctity, inviolability; reverence,
veneration, esteem, deference, respect;
that which is holy, sacred, sacrosanct,
inviolable, or taboo; -- (pl. حرم ḥuram)
woman, lady; wife
حرام ḥarām pl. حرم ḥurum forbidden,
interdicted, prohibited, unlawful; s.th.
forbidden, offense, sin; inviolable, taboo;
sacred, sacrosanct; cursed, accursed │ ابن
حرام ibn ḥ. illegitimate son, bastard; 171
الاراضي الحرام no man’s land; neutral
territory; البيت الحرام (bait) the Kaaba; الشھر
الحرام (šahr) the Holy Month Muharram;
المسجد الحرام (masjid) the Holy Mosque in
Mecca; حرام عليك you mustn’t do (say)
that! بالحرام illicitly, illegally, unlawfully
حرام ḥirām pl. -āt, احرمة aḥrima a
woolen blanket (worn as a garment around
head and body)
حريم ḥarīm pl. حرم ḥurum a sacred,
inviolable place, sanctum, sanctuary,
sacred, precinct; harem; female members
of the family, women; wife
حريمي ḥarīmī women’s (in compounds),
for women
حروم ḥurūm pl. -āt excommunication
(Chr.)
حرامي ḥarāmī pl. -īya thief, robber,
bandit
حرمان ḥirmān deprivation,
bereavement, dispossession (of s.o., من of
s.th.) debarment, exclusion, preclusion ( من
from); excommunication (CHr.);
privation │ حرمان الارث ḥ. al-irt exclusion
from inheritance, disinheritance (Isl. Law)
محرم maḥram pl. محارم maḥārim2 s.th.
forbidden. inviolable, taboo, sacrosanct,
holy, or sacred; unmarriageable, being in a
degree of consanguinity precluding
marriage (Isl. Law)
محرمة maḥrama pl. محارم maḥārim2
handkerchief
تحريم taḥrīm forbiddance, interdiction,
prohibition, ban
احرام iḥrām state of ritual consecration
of the Mecca pilgrim (during which the
pilgrim, wearing two seamless woolen or
linen sheets, usually white, neither combs
nor shaves, and observes sexual
continence); garments of the Mecca
pilgrim
احترام iḥtirām pl. -āt deference, respect,
regard, esteem, reverence; honoring (e.g.,
of a privilege); pl. honors, respects,
tributes
محروم maḥrūm deprived, bereaved,
bereft ( من of); excluded, precluded,
debarred ( من from); suffering privation (as
opposed to مرزوق ); excommunicated
(Chr.)
محرم muḥarram forbidden, interdicted;
Muharram, name of the first Islamic
month; محرم الحرام m. al-ḥarām honorific
name of this month
محرم muḥrim Mecca pilgrim who has
entered the state of ritual consecration (see
احرام iḥrām)
محترم muḥtaram honored, revered,
venerated, esteemed, respected; (in the
salutation of letters:) my dear …;
venerable, reverend; notable, remarkable,
considerable
حرمل ḥarmal African rue (Peganum harmala
L.; bot.)
حرمل ḥarmala pl. حرامل ḥarāmil2 loose
wrap worn over the shoulders (garment of
the dervishes)
حرن ḥarana, ḥaruna u ( حرن ḥiran, ḥuran) to
be obstinate, stubborn, headstrong
حرون ḥarūn pl. حرن ḥurun obstinate,
stubborn, refractory, reluctant, resistant
حارون ḥārūn brazior
حروة ḥarwa burning; wrath, rage; acridity,
pungency (of taste); pungent, disagreeable
odor
حرى V to seek, pursue ( ھ s.th.), strive ( ھ for),
asplre ( ھ to); to examine, investigate ( ھ
s.th.); to inquire ( عن or ھ into), make
inquiries ( عن or ھ about); to be intent ( ھ
on s.th.), take cars ( ھ of s.th.), attend ( ھ to
s.th., also في ), look ( ھ after s.th., also ;(في
to see to it ( ان that) 172
بالحرى bi-l-ḥarā hardly, barely
حرى ḥarīy pl. احرياء aḥriyā’ adequate,
appropriate, suitable ( ب for), worthy ( ب of
s.th.) │ حرى بالذكر (dikr) worth
mentioning, considerable; حري بالتصديق
credible, believable; او بالحري or to be
exact, or rather
احرى aḥrā more adequate, more proper,
more appropriate │ او بالاحرى or to tell the
truth, or more explicitly, or put more
exactly, or rather
تحر taḥarrin pl. تحريات taḥarriyāt
inquiry; investigation │ شرطة التحري šurṭat
at-t. or مصلحة التحري maṣlaḥat al-t. secret
police
حز ḥazza u (ḥazz) to notch, nick, incise, indent
في) s.th.), make an incision, cut ( في into
s.th.) II and VIII = I
حز ḥazz pl. حزوز ḥuzūz incision, notch,
nick; the right time, the nick of time
حزة ḥazza incision, notch, nick; tim; the
right time, the nick of time; predicament,
plight
حزاز ḥazāz head scurf, ringworm; tetter,
eruption (med.)
حزازة ḥazāza rancor, hatred, hate
محز maḥazz notch, nick │ اصاب المحز to
find the right solution, hit the nail on the
head, hit the mark, strike home
حزب ḥazaba u (ḥazb) to befall ( ه s.o.), happen,
occur ( ه to s.o.) │ حزب الامر the matter
became serious II to rally ( ه s.o.); to form
or found a party 111 to side, take sides ( ه
with), be an adherent ( ه of s.o.) V to take
sides; to form a party, make common
cause, join forces
حزب ḥizb pl. احزاب aḥzāb group, troop,
band, gang; party (pol.); the 60th part of
the Koran │ ھو من احزابه he belongs to his
clique. he is of the ...me breed
حزبي ḥizbī party (adj.), factional
حزبية ḥizbīya party activities;
partisanship, partiality; factionalism
حيزبون ḥaizabūn old hag
تحزب taḥazzub factiousness;
factionalism
حازب ḥāzib: حزبه حازب ḥazabahū ḥāzib
he met with a mishap
متحزب mutaḥazzib partial, biased;
partisan
حزر ḥazara i u (ḥazr, محزرة maḥzara) to
estimate, assess, appraise ( ھ s.th.); to
make a rough estimate ( ھ of s.th.), guess (
ھ s.th.)
حزر ḥazr estimation, assessment,
appraisal; conjecture, guess, surmise
حزورة ḥazūra riddle, puzzle
محزرة maḥzara estimation, assessment,
appraisal; conjecture, guess, surmise
حزيران ḥazīrān June (Syr., Leb., Ir., Jord.)
حزقاني ḥuzuqqānī choleric
حزوقة ḥazūqa, حازوقة ḥāzūqa hiccups
حزم ḥazama i (ḥazm) to tie up, bundle, wrap
up, pack, do up in a package or bundle ( ھ
s.th.); to girth ( ھ an animal); to make fast,
fasten, tie ( ھ s.th.) │ حزم امره (amrahū) to
take matters firmly in hand; -- ḥazuma u
(ḥazm, حزامة ḥazāma, حزومة ḥuzūma) to be
resolute, firm, stouthearted, intrepid II to
gird ( ه s.o.) V and VIII to be girded; to
gird o.s. put on a belt
حزم ḥazm packing, packaging,
wrapping; determination, resoluteness,
firmness, energy; judiciousness,
discretion, prudence
حزمة ḥuzma pl. حزم ḥuzam s.th.
wrapped up or tied up, bundle, fagot,
fascine; beam of rays, radiation beam
(phys.); bunch (of herb., etc.); sheaf;
package, parcel
حزام ḥzām pl. -āt, احزمة aḥzima, حزم
ḥuzum belt, girth; girdle; cummerbund,
173 waistband (worn over the caftan to
fasten it); sword belt │ حزام الامن ḥ. al-amn
wety belt
احزم aḥzam2 more resolute: more
judicious
حازم ḥāzim pl. حزمة ḥazama and حزيم
ḥazīm pl. حزماء ḥuzamā’ resolute,
energetic; judicious, discreet, prudent
حزن ḥazana u to make sad, sadden, grieve ( ه
s.o.); -- ḥazina a (ḥuzn, ḥazan) to be sad,
grieved ( ل or على at or because of): to
grieve. mourn ( على over) II and IV to
make sad, sadden, grieve ( ه s.o.)
حزن ḥuzn pl. احزان aḥzān sadness, grief,
sorrow, affliction
حزن ḥazn pl. حزون ḥuzūn rough, rugged,
hard ground
حزن ḥazin sad, mournful, grieved
حزين ḥazīn pl. حزناء ḥuzanā’ حزانى , 2
ḥazānā sad; mourning (for a deceased
person); sorrowing, mournful, grieved │
الجمعة الحزينة (jum‘a) Good Friday (Chr.)
حزنان ḥaznān2 very sad, very grieved,
worried; in mourning
□ حزايني ḥazāyinī ( حزائني ḥazā’inī) sad,
mournful, melancholic; mourning (in
compounds), mortuary, funereal │ قماش
حزايني (qumāš) cloth for mourning
garments
تحزن taḥazzun sadness; behavior of a
mourner
محزون maḥzūn grieved, grief-stricken,
pained, sad, saddened
محزن muḥzin grievous, saddening; sad;
melancholic; tragic: محزنات muḥzināt
grievous things │ قصة تمثيلية محزنة (qiṣṣa
tamtīlīya) and رواية محزنة (riwāya) tragedy
(theat.)
حس ḥassa (1st pers. perf. ḥasastu) u (ḥass) to
curry, currycomb ( ھ an animal); to feel,
sense ( ھ s.th.); -- ḥassa (1st pers. perf.
ḥasistu) a to feel srry, feel sympathy or
compassion ( ل for), sympathize ( ل with),
II to grope, feel IV to perceive, sense,
experience ( ھ or ب s.th.); to feel ( ھ or ب
s.th.); to notice ( ھ or ب s.th.); to hear ( ھ a
sound, a noise, etc.); to take notice ( ه of
s.o.) V to grope, probe ( ھ for s.th.), finger,
handle, touch ( ھ s.th.), run the hand ( ھ
over s.th.); to grope about, feel around: to
seek information, make inquiries ( من
about); to sense, experience, perceive (، ھ
ب s.th.); to feel ( ب s.th.); to be affected, be
deeply touched ( ب by s.th.)
حس ḥass sensation, perception, feeling,
sentiment
حس ḥiss sensory perception, sensation;
feeling, sentiment; sense; voice; sound;
noise
حسي ḥissī sensory; sensuous;
perceptible; palpable │O المذھب الحسي
(madhab) sensationalism, sensualism
حسيات ḥissīyāt sensations
حسيس ḥasīs faint noise
حساس ḥassās sensitive; sensible; readily
affected, susceptible; sensual (pleasure)
حساسة ḥassāsa sensory organ
حساسي ḥassāsī allergic │ امراض حساسية
allergic diseases, allergies (med.)
حساسية ḥassāsīya sensitivity (also
techn.); sensibility; faculty of sensory
perception; susceptibility; sensuality │
مرض الحساسية maraḍ al-ḥ. allergy (med.)
محسة miḥassa currycomb
احساس iḥsās pl. -āt, احاسيس aḥāsīs2 feel,
feeling: sensation, sense ( ب of s.th.)
perception ( ب of s.th.); sensitivity; pl.
احساسات feelings, sentiments │O احساس
بالنور sensitivity to light; O شديد الاحساس
١٧٤ highly sensitive; احساس مشترك
(muštarak) feeling of harmony, concord,
unanimity; قلة الاحساس qillat al-i.
insensitivity, dullness, obtuseness
O الطائفة الاحساسية aṭ-ṭā’ifa al-iḥsāsīya
the impressionists
حاسة ḥāssa pl. حواس ḥawāss2 senastion;
sense │ الحواس الخمس the five senses
محسوس maḥsūs felt; sensed;
perceptible, noticeable, palpable, tangible;
appreciable, considerable (e.g., loss);
المحسوس that which ill perceptible through
the senses; appearance, evidence;
المحسوسات things perceptible through the
senses
حسب ḥasaba u (ḥasb, حساب ḥisāb, حسبان
ḥisbān, ḥusbān) to compute, reckon,
calculate; to count; to charge, debit ( على ھ
s.th. to s.o., to s.o.’s account); to credit ( ل
ھ s.th. to s.o., to s.o.’s account) │ حسب
حسابه (ḥisābahū) to take s.th. or s.o. into
account or into consideration, reckon with
s.th. or s.o., count on s.th. or s.o.; حسابا ل
حسب (ḥisāban) do.; to attach importance to
s.o. or s.th.; حسب الف حساب ل (alfa) to hove
a thousand apprehensions about …; --
ḥasiba a i ( حسبان ḥisbān, محسبا maḥsaba,
maḥsiba) to regard ( ه ه s.o. as), consider,
deem ( ه ه s.o. to be …); to think, believe,
suppose, assume; to consider, regard ( من ه
s.o. as belonging to), count ( من ه s.o.
among); to see ( ھ في in s.o. s.th.); --
ḥasuba u (ḥasab, حسابة ḥasāba) to be of
noble origin, be highborn; to be highly
esteemed, be valued III to settle an
account, get even (with s.o.); to call ( ه
s.o.) to account, ask ( ه s.o.) for an
accounting; to hold ( ه s.o.) responsible,
make ( ه s.o.) answerable │ حاسب على نفسه
to be careful, be on one’s guard V to be
careful, be on one’s guard; to take
precautions; to seek to know, try to find
out ( ھ s.th.) VI to settle a mutual account
VIII to debit or credit; to take into
account, take into consideration ( ب or ھ
s.th.); to reckon ( ب or ھ with); (to
anticipate a reward in the hereafter by
adding a pious deed to one’s account with
God -- such as resigning in God’s will at
the death of a relative; hence:) احتسب ولدا
waladan) to give a son, be bereaved of a
son; احتسب عند لله الشيء to sacrifice s.th. in
anticipation of God’s reward in the
hereafter; to charge ( على ھ s.th. for); to
think, believe, suppose; to take ( ه ه s.o. for
or to be …); to be content, content o.s.( ب
with); to disapprove ( على ھ s.th. in s.o.),
take exception ( على ھ to s.th. in s.o.),
reject ( على ھ s.th. in s.o.); to call ( على s.o.)
to account, ask ( على s.o.) for an accounting
حسب ḥasb reckoning, computing,
calculation; thinking, opinion, view;
sufficiency │ حسبك (بحسبك) درھم ḥasbuka
(bi-ḥasbika) dirhamun one dirham is
enough for you; حسبك ان it suffices to say
that …; you know enough when you hear
that …; you need only ... ; بحسبك مقنعا ان
(muqni‘an) it will be enough to convince
you if …; وحسبك بھذا كله شرا (bi-hādā
kullihī šarran) but enough of all these
negative aspect! فحسب fa-ḥasb and that’s
all, and no more, only (interchangeable
with (فقط
حسبي ḥasbī مجلس حسبي (majlis) pl. مجالس
حسبية guardianship court, probate court
(Eg.)
حسب ḥasab pl. احساب aḥsāb measure,
extent, degree, quantity, amount; value;
esteem, high regard enjoyed by s.o.; noble
descent; ḥasaba (prep.), بحسب bi-ḥasabi
and على حسب ‘alā ḥasabi according to, in
accordance with, commensurate with,
depending on
حسبما ḥasbamā (conj.) according to
what ... , as, depending on how … │ حسبما
اتفق (ttafaqa) as chance will have it
حسبة arithmetical problem, sum 175
حسيب ḥasīb pl. حسباء ḥusabā’2
respected, esteemed; noble, of noble birth,
highborn
حسبان ḥusbān calculation, reckoning,
accounnting; computation │ كان في الحسبان
to be taken into account, be taken into
consideration; to be expected, be
anticipated; كان في الحسبان ان it was
expected that ... ; حسباني ان I expect that …
حساب ḥisāb arithmetic, reckoning,
calculus; computation; calculation,
estimation, appraisal; accounting,
settlement; consideration,
consideratedness; caution; -- (pl. -āt) bill,
invoice; statement of costs (bank)
account; pl. حسابات bookkeeping │ حساب
الجمل ḥ. al-jummal (al-jumal) use of the
alphabetic letters according to their
numerical value; علم الحساب ‘ilm al-ḥ.
arithmetic; حساب التفاضل ḥ. al-tafāḍul
differential calculus; حساب التكامل ḥ. attakāmul
integral calculus; كان في حسابه he
reckoned with it, he expected it, he was
prepared for it; عمل حسابا له to take s.o. or
s.th. into consideration; to reckon with s.o.
or s.th.; الحساب الختامي (ḳitāmī) and حساب
نھائي (nihā’ī) final statement of account,
final accounting; دعاه الى الحساب (da‘āhū) he
called him to account; يوم الحساب yaum al-
ḥ. the Day of Reckoning, Judgment Day;
اقام حسابا ل to render account to s.o.; بلا
حساب without limit or bounds, to excess, to
an unlimited extent; من غير حساب blindly,
without forethought, at random; لحساب فلان
to s.o.’s credit, to s.o.’s advantage; على
حساب فلان to s.o.’s debit, at s.o.’s expense,
to s.o.’s disadvantage; لقي سوء الحساب
laqiya sū’a 1-ḥ. he got a raw deal, he was
in for it; حساب جار (jārin) current account;
حسابات صندوق التوفير ḥ. ṣundūq at-taufīr
savings-bank accounts; حساب موقوف
blocked account; حسابات دوبية double-entry
bookkeeping; الحساب الشرقي (šarqī) the
Julian calendar; الحساب الغربي (garbī) the
Gregorian calendar
حسابي ḥisābī arithmetical, mathematical,
computational
محاسبة muḥāsaba pl. -āt accounting;
clearing (com.); bookkeeping; request for
accounting; examination of conscience
(theol.) │ قسم المحاسبة qism al-m. accounting
department, comptroller’s office; clearing
house
احتساب iḥtisāb computation; calculation,
consideration, reflection; debiting;
crediting; valuation; contentedness,
satisfaction
حاسب ḥāsib counter, reckoner,
arithmetician, calculator, computer
محسوب maḥsūb pl. -ūn, محاسب maḥāsib2
protégé, pet, favorite; obedient,
subservient ( على to s.o.)
محسوبية maḥsūbīya esteem enjoyed by
s.o., position of distinction; patronage,
favored position, favoritism
محاسب muḥāsib, محاسبجي muḥāsibgī
(eg.) accountant, bookkeeper; comptroller,
auditor
محتسب muḥtasab that for which one can
expect reward in the hereafter (e.g.,
suffering, loss, etc.)
حسد ḥasada u (ḥasad) to envy, grudge ( ه s.o.,
على or ھ s.th.), be envious ( ه of s.o., على or
ھ because of s.th.) VI to envy each other
حسد ḥasad envy
حسود pl. حسد ḥusud envious
تحاسد taḥāsud mutual envy
حاسد pl. حساد ḥussād, حسدة ḥasada
envious; envier, grudger
محسود maḥsūd envied; smitten by the
evil eye
حسر ḥasara u i (ḥasr) to pull away or off,
remove ( عن ھ s.th., a cover, a veil, from);
to uncover, lay bare, unveil ( عن s.th.); --
(ḥusūr) to become dim (sight); -- ḥasira a
((ḥasar, حسرة ḥasra) to regret ( على s.th.),
be grieved, be pained ( على by 176 s.th.); to
sigh ( على over s.th.); -- ḥasara i, ḥasira a
(ḥasar) to become tired, fatigued II to
fatigue, tire, weaken, sap ( ه s.o.); to
grieve, sadden ( ه s.o.), cause pain or grief
ه) to s.o.); to remove ( ھ a cover, عن from),
lay bare, unveil ( عن s.th.) V to be
distressed, be pained, be grieved ( على by);
to sigh ( على over) VII to be pulled away or
off, be removed ( عن from); to be rolled up.
be turned back (sleeve, عن from the arm);
to disappear suddenly ( عن from)
حسر ḥasar fatigue, debility, weakness
│ حسر البصر ḥ. al-baṣar nearsightedness,
myopia
حسر ḥasir grieved, sad; fatigued,
languid, weary, tired
حسر ḥasra pl. ḥasarāt grief, sorrow,
pain, distress, affliction; sigh │ يا للحسرة yā
la-l-ḥasrati alas! Unfortunately! يا حسرتي
yā ḥasratī and وا حسرتاه wā ḥasratāh what
a pity! too bad!
حسير ḥasīr pl. حسرى ḥasrā tired, weary,
fatigued, exhausted; dim, dull (eye),
nearsighted │ حسير البصر ḥ. al-baṣar
nearsighted, myopic
حسور ḥasūr nearsightedness, myopia
حسران ḥasrān regretful, sorry, sad,
distressed, grieved
تحسر taḥassur sighing; regret
حاسر ḥāsir pl. حواسر ḥawāsir2 bared,
denuded │ حاسر البصر ḥ. al-baṣar
nearsighted, myopic; حاسر الرأس ḥ. ar-ra’s
bareheaded, hatless
حسك ḥasak (coll.; n. un. ة) thorns, spines;
spikes, pricks; fish bones; awns, beard
(bot.); name of several prickly herbs, esp.
of the genus Tribulus
حسكي ḥasakī thorny, prickly, spiny
حسم ḥasama i (ḥasm) to cut, sever, cut off ( ھ
s.th.); to finish, complete, terminate ( ھ
s.th.); to decide ( ھ a question); to settle ( ھ
an argument); to deduct, discount ( ھ an
amount from a sum of money) VII to be
severed, be cut off; to be finished, be
completed, be terminated; to be settled
(argument)
حسم ḥasm finishing, completion,
termination; decision; settling, settlement
(of an argument); discontinuance,
shutdown, closing down; deduction,
discounting (of an amount)
حسام ḥusām sword, sword edge
حسوم ḥasūm fatal, trying, grueling (pl.;
days, nights, also years)
حاسم ḥāsim decisive; final, peremptory,
conclusive, definite, definitive
حسن ḥasana u (ḥusn) to be handsome,
beautiful, lovely, nice, fine, good; to be
expedient, advisable, suitable, proper,
fitting; to be in a proper state, be in a
desirable condition │ ان حسن لديك in ḥ.
ladaika if you like it, if it seems all right
to you; يحسن بك ان it is to your advantage
that you ... ; you ought to …; حسن استعداده ل
he was all willing to … II to beautify,
embellish ( ھ s.th.); to adorn, decorate ( ھ
s.th.); to improve, put into better form,
ameliorate, better ( ھ s.th.); to make a
better presentation ( ھ of s.th.); to present
in a favorable light, depict as nice or
desirable ( ل ھ s.th. to s.o.; to sugar-coat,
make more palatable ( ھ s.th. unpleasant,
s.th. disadvantageous) III to treat ( ه s.o.)
with kindliness IV to do right, act well; to
do ( ھ s.th), well, expertly, nicely; to know
ھ) how to do s.th.), be able ( ھ to do s.th.);
to master ( ھ s.th.), have command ( ھ of
s.th.), be proficient ( ھ in s.th.; a language,
an art, a handicraft, etc.), be conversant ( ھ
with s.th.); to do good, be charitable; to do
favors, do good ( الى or ب to s.o.), do ( ب or
ب s.o.) a good turn, be nice, friendly ( الى
or ب to s.o.); to give 177 alms, give charity
الى) to s.o.) │ ما احسنه mā aḥsanahū how
good he is! how handsome he is! احسنت
aḥsanta well done! bravo! احسن الالمانية
(almānīya) to master the German language,
know German well; احسن التسديد to aim well
or accurately; احسن مشورته (mašūratahū) to
give good advice; احسن الظن ب (ẓanna) to
have a good opinion of ... , judge s.th.
favorably; احسن معاملته (mu‘āmalatahū) to
treat s.o. well V to become nicer, more
handsome, more beautiful; to improve,
ameliorate, get better X to deem ( ھ s.th.)
nice, etc., or good; to regard ( ھ s.th.) as
right, advisable or appropriate; to approve (
ھ of s.th.), sanction, condone ( ھ s.th.); to
come to like, to appreciate ( ھ s.th.), find
pleasure ( ھ in s.th.); also = IV: استحسن
الانجليزية (ingilīzīya) to know English well;
pass. ustuḥsina to be good, commendable,
advisable
حسن ḥusn beauty, handsomeness,
prettiness, loveliness; excellence,
superiority, perfection │ لحسن الحظ
fortunately; حسن السلوك good manners, good
behavior; good conduct; حسن السير والسلوك (ḥ.
as-sair) an irreproachable life; حسن التصرف
ḥ. al-taṣarruf discretion, individual
judgment; حسن الظن good opinion, favorable
judgment; حسن التعبير euphemism; حسن القصد
النية ) ) ḥ. al-qaṣd (an-nīya) good intention,
good will, good faith; حسن يوسف ḥ. yūsuf
beauty spot, patch; ست الحسن a kind of
bindweed (Convolvulus cairicus L.; bot.);
deadly nightshade, belladonna
حسن ḥasan pl. حسان ḥisān beautiful,
handsome, lovely; pretty, nice; good,
agreeable; excellent, superior, exquisite;
حسنا ḥasanan well, splendidly, excellently,
beautifully; الحسان the ladies; -- high sandhill
الحسنيون al-ḥasanīyūn the Hasanides, the
descendants of ḥasan, son of ‘Alī and
Fāṭima
احسن aḥsan2 pl. احاسن aḥāsin2 better;
nicer, lovelier, more beautiful; more
excellent, more splendid, more admirable│
    he is better off than
they are;    (bi-llatī) in a
friendly manner, amicably, with kindness
حسناء ḥasnā’2 pl. حسان ḥisān (of a woman)
beautiful, a beauty, a belle
الحسنى al-ḥusnā pl. -āt (f. of الاحسن alaḥsan)
the best outcome, the happy ending;
fair means, amicable manner │ بالحسنى
amicably, by fair means, in a friendly
manner; الاسماء الحسنى (asmā’) the 99
attributes of God
حسنة ḥasana pl. -āt good deed,
benefaction; charity, alms; pl. حسنات
advantages, merits
حسون ḥassūn pl. حساسين ḥasāsīn2 goldfinch
محسنة maḥsana s.th. nice, s.th. good;
advantage; pl. محاسن maḥāsin2 beauties,
charms, attractions, merits, advantages,
good qualities
تحسين taḥsīn beautification,
embellishment; improvement, amelioration,
betterment; processing, refining, finishing;
(pl. تحاسين taḥāsīn) ornament, decoration
│O تحسين النسل t. an-nasl eugenics
محاسنة muḥāsana friendly treatment,
kindliness amicability
احسان iḥsān beneficence. charity,
almsgiving, performance of good deeds
تحسن taḥassun improvement,
amelioration │ في التحسن on the way to
recovery
استحسان istiḥsān approval, consent;
acclaim; discretion; application of discretion
in a legal decision (Isl. Law)
محسن muḥassin embellisher, beautifier,
improver; pl. محسنات muḥassināt cosmetics
محسن muḥsin beneficent, charitable
مستحسن mustaḥsan approved,
commendable; pleasant, agreeable 178
حسو) حسا) ḥasā u (ḥasw), V and VIII to drink, sip
ھ) s.th.)
حسو ḥasw and حساء ḥasā’ soup, broth
حسوة ḥaswa pl. ḥasawāt a sip
حسوة ḥuswa pl. ḥusuwāt, ḥusawāt, احسية
aḥasiya a sip, small quantity of liquid; soup,
broth; bouillon
حش ḥašša u (ḥašš) to mow, cut ( ھ s.th.) II to
smoke hashish
حشيش ḥašīš (coll.) pl. حشائش hāšā’iš2
herbs, grasses; weeds; hay; hemp (Cannabis
sativa L.; bot.), hashish, Cannabis; stillborn
child │ حشيش الدينار ḥ. ad-dīnār hops
حشيشة ḥašīša (n. un.) herb
حشاش ḥaššāš pl. -ūn smoker or chewer of
hashish. hashish addict
حشاش ḥuššāš, حشاشة ḥušāša last breath,
last spark of life
حشيشي ḥašīšī (eg.) sap-green, resedacolored
محش miḥašš, محشة miḥašša pl. محاش
maḥāšš2 sickle, scythe; fire iron, poker
محشة miḥašša pl. -āt (eg.) tool for
weeding, weeder
محشش maḥšaš, محشش خانة m. ḳāna hashish
den
محششة pl. محاشش maḳāšiš2 hashish den
حشد ḥašada i u (ḥašd) to gather, concentrate,
mass ( ه esp. troops), call up, mobilize ( ه an
army); to pile up, store up, accumulate ( ھ
s.th., الى at a place) II to amass, accumulate (
ھ s.th.), mass, concentrate ( ه esp. troops) V
and VIII to rally, come together, assemble,
gather, crowd together, throng together; to
be concentrated, be massed (troops); to fall
into line (troops)
حشد ḥašd pl. حشود ḥušūd assembling, rallying;
gathering, assembly, crowd, throng;
concentration, massing (esp. of troops);
mobilization. calling up (of an army)
حشد taḥaššud pl. -āt concentration (of
troops)
احتشاد iḥtišād pl. -āt gathering, crowd;
concentration (of troops)
حشيد numerous (of an assembly),
crowded (of a public demonstration)
O حاشدة ḥāšida battery (el.)
حشر ḥašara i u (ḥašr) to gather, assemble, rally (
ه people); to cram, crowd, pack, jam
(together); to squeeze. press, force, stuff,
tuck ( بين or في ھ s.th. into)
يوم الحشر yaum al-ḥašr the day of
congregation (of the dead), the Day of
resurrection
حشرة ḥašara pl. -āt insect; pl. vermin,
insect pests │ علم الحشرات ‘ilm al-ḥ.
entomology
حشري ḥašarī insectile, insectival, insect-
(in compounds); entomologic(al)
حشرج ḥašraja and II taḥašraja to rattle in the
throat
حشرجة ḥašraja rattling, rattle in the throat
حشف V to be dressed shabbily, dress slovenly
حشف ḥašaf dates of inferior quality
حشفة ḥašafa glans (penis; anat.)
حشك ḥašaka i (ḥašk) to cram, jam, squeeze, stuff
في ھ) s.th. into)
حشم ḥašama i (ḥašm) to shame, put to shame ( ه
s.o.) 11 and IV do. V and VIII to be
ashamed to face s.o. ( من or عن ); to be
reticent, modest, shy, bashful, diffident
حشم ḥašam servants, retinue, entourage,
suite
حشمة ḥišma shame, bashfulness, timidity,
diffidence; modesty; decency, decorum 179
حشيم ḥašīm pl. حشماء ḥušamā’2 modest,
timid, bashful, shy, diffident
محاشم maḥāšim2 pubes, genitals
تحشم taḥaššum and احتشام iḥtišām shame,
shyness, modesty, reticent, decency,
decorum
محتشم muḥtašim shy, bashful; modest,
reticent, decent, decorous
حشا (حشو ) ḥaša u (ḥašw) to stuff, fill, dress ( ب ھ
s.th. with; esp. fowl, etc.); to fill in ( ھ s.th.);
to load ( ھ a firearm; ھ ھ s.th. with, e.g., a
camera); to fill ( ھ a tooth); to insert ( ھ s.th.)
11 to interpalate ( ھ s.th.); to insert ( ھ s.th.);
to provide ( ھ s.th.) with a margin; to hem (
ھ a dress); to supply ( ھ a book) with
marginal notes or glosses III to except,
exclude ( من ه s.o. from) V to keep away,
stand aloof, abstain ( من ه from), avoid, shun
من) s.th.), beware ( من of), be on one’s guard
من) against) VI to keep away, abstain ( عن or
من from), beware ( ھ or عن or من of), avoid,
shun ( ھ or عن or من s.th.)
حشو ḥašw that with which s.th. is stuffed
or filled; dressing, stuffing (of fowl, .to.);
filling (of tooth); insertion; (gram.)
parenthesis; interpolation
حشو ḥašwa pl. -āt filling, stuffing
(cushion, cookery, etc.); load (of a
cartridge), charge (of a min.); panel, inlay,
inserted piece (in paneling, in a door)
حشا ḥašan pl. احشاء aḥšā’ bowels,
intestines; interior, inside │ في احشاء in the
interior of, within, in
حشى ḥašan = حشا ḥašan
حشية ḥašīya pl. –āt, حشايا ḥašāyā cushion,
pillow; mattress
حاشا ḥāšā (with genit., acc. or ل) except,
save │􀍿 ، حاشا 􀍿 حاشى God forbid! حاشا لك ان
far be it from you that you ...; ، حاش لك 􀍿 حاش
(ḥāša) = ، حاشا لك ١٨٠ 􀍿 حاشا
تحشية taḥšya insertion; interpolation
تحاش taḥāšin avoidance
حاشية ḥāšiya pl. حواش ḥawāšin border;
seam, hem; edge; margin (of a book);
marginal gives; marginal notes;
commentary on certain words and passages
of a book, supercommentary; footnote;
postscript; retinue, entourage, suite,
servants; dependents; pl. حواش critical
apparatus │ رقيق الحاشية and رقيق الحواشي nice,
polite, courteous, gracious, amiable, kindly,
friendly; رقة الحھشية riqqat al-ḥāš. niceness,
amiability, graciousness
محشو maḥšūw filled, dressed; stuffed;
loaded (firearm); pl. محشوات maḥšūwāt
filled, or stuffed, dishes
محشي maḥšīy filled, stuffed (esp. food);
s.th. filled or stuffed
حص ḥaṣṣa u to fall as a share ( ه to s.o.) III to
share ( ه ھ s.th. with s.o.) IV to allot s.o. ( (ه
his share
حص ḥuṣṣ saffron
حصة ḥiṣṣa pl. حصص ḥiṣaṣ share, portion,
allotment; share (fin.); contingent, quota;
span of time; lesson, class period │ حصة في
الربح ḥ. fī r-rabḥ dividend (fin.); O حصة
التأسيس founders’ share; O نظام الحصص quota
system, apportionment; في حصة وجيزة in a
short time
تحصيص taḥṣīṣ quota system,
apportionment
محاصة muḥāṣṣa allotment; sharing (with
s.o.), partaking, participation
حصالبان see حصى
حصب ḥaṣaba i u to cover or strew with pebbles
or gravel ( ھ ground); to macadamize ( ھ
ground), metal ( ھ a road); -- ḥaṣiba a and
pass. ḥuṣiba to have the measle II to cover
or strew with pebbles or gravel ( ھ ground);
to macadamize ( ھ ground), metal ( ھ a road)
180
حصب ḥaṣab road metal, crushed rock,
ballast
حصب ḥaṣbā’2 (coll.) pebbles; gravel
حصب ḥaṣba measles (med.)
حاصبة ḥāṣiba storm, hurricane
حصحص ḥaṣḥaṣa to be or become clear, plain,
manifest; to come to light (truth)
حصد ḥaṣada i u (ḥaṣd, حصاد ḥaṣad, ḥiṣad) to
harvest, reap ( ھ s.th.); to mow ( ھ s.th.) IV,
VIII and X to be ripe
حصد ḥaṣd and حصاد ḥiṣād harvesting,
reaping, harvest; حصاد harvest time
حصيد ḥaṣid, حصيدة ḥaṣīda pl. حصائد
ḥaṣā’id2 crop, harvest yield │ قائم وحصيد
everything without exception
حصاد ḥaṣṣād reaper; harvester
محصد miḥṣad pl. محاصد maḥāṣid2 sickle
O حصادة ḥaṣṣāda and O محصدة miḥṣada
mowing machine, mower │ O حصادة دراسة
(darrāsa) combine
حاصد ḥāṣid reaper
O حاصدة ḥāṣid mowing machine, mower
محصود maḥṣūd harvested, reaped, mown
محصد muḥṣid and mustaḥṣid ripe
حصر ḥaṣara i u (ḥaṣr) to surround, encircle,
encompass, ring ( ھ s.th.); to enclose ( ھ
s.th.); to parenthesize ( ھ a word); to
blockade ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to besiege,
beleaguer ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to detain, deter,
restrain, contain, hold back ( ه s.o.); to limit,
restrict ( في ھ or ب s.th. to); to condense,
reduce in scope ( ھ s.th.); to narrow down,
confine ( في ھ s.th. to, also a suspicion to
s.o.); to bring together, compile, arrange ( في
ھ s.th. under a rubric); to enter ( في ھ s.th. in
a list); to put together, set up, list, enumerate
ھ) s.th.); to comprise, contain, include,
involve ( ھ s.th.); -- ḥaṣira a (ḥaṣar) to be in
a fix, be in a dilemma III to encircle,
surround ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to shut off,
seclude ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to block ( ھ s.th.); to
beleaguer, besiege ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
blockade ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to detain, deter,
restrain ( ه s.o.) VII to be straitened,
confined, narrowed in; to be or become
restricted, limited ( ب or في to); to limit o.s. (
ب or في to); to be condensed ( في to), be
concentrated ( في in); to be or become united
(e.g., تحت حكمه under s.o.’s rule); to be
reducible ( في to), be expressible ( في in terms
of), consist ( في in)
حصر ḥaṣr encirclement, encompassment,
enclosure, corralling; parenthesizing;
blocking, blockading, beleaguering, siege;
detention, determent; restraint, retention,
containment, check; limitation, restriction,
confinement ~ narrowing; gathering,
collecting (of s.th. scattered), compilation;
enumeration, listing, counting, computing;
centralization, concentration; (tobacco)
monopoly │ بالحصر strictly speaking; على
سبيل الحصرحصر exhaustively; حصر التموين ḥ.
al-tamwīn rationing; علامة الحصر ‘alāmat al-
ḥ. parentheses, brackets (typ.); لا يدخل تحت
الحصر (yadḳulu) or لا حصر له (ḥaṣra)
boundless, infinite, immeasurable,
innumerable; يفوق الحصر yafūqu al-ḥaṣra
do.; O اجازة الحصر ijāzat al-ḥ. patent on an
invention; ادارة حصر التبغ والتنباك idārat ḥ. attibg
wa-t-tumbāk Government Tobacco
Monopoly (Syr.)
حصر ḥuṣr retention (of urine);
constipation
حصر ḥaṣar dyslogia, inability to express
o.s. effectively
حصير ḥaṣīr pl. حصر ḥuṣur mat
حصيرة ḥaṣīra pl. حصائر ḥaṣā’ir2 mat
حصار ḥiṣār block, blockage, barrier;
blockade; siege 181
محاصرة muḥāṣara block, blockage,
barrier; blockade; siege
انحصار inḥiṣār restrictedness, limitation,
confinement; (tobacco) monopoly
محصور maḥṣūr blocked, blockaded;
beleaguered, besieged; limited, restricted,
confined ( في to); narrow
حصرم ḥiṣrim (coll.; n. un. ة) unripe and sour
grapes (syr.)
حصف ḥaṣufa u ( حصف ḥaṣāfa) to have sound
judgment, be judicious, discriminating
حصف ḥaṣif endowed with sound
judgment, judicious, discriminating
حصيف ḥaṣīf endowed with sound
judgment, judicious, discriminating
حصافة ḥaṣāfa sound judgment,
judiciousness
حصل ḥaṣala u ( حصول ḥuṣūl) to set in; to be
there, be existent, extant; to arise, come
about; to result, come out; to happen, occur,
transpire, come to pass, take place; to
happen, occur ( ل to s.o.), come ( ل upon
s.o.), befall, overtake ( ل s.o.); to originate,
emanate, derive, stem ( من from), be caused,
be produced ( من by); to attain, obtain, get,
receive, achieve ( على s.th.), win ( على s.o. or
s.th.); to come into possession ( على of s.th.);
to seek ( على a permit), apply ( على for a
permit); to collect, recover ( على a debt), call
in ( على funds); to receive. take in ( على s.th.)
II to cause s.th. ( ھ ) to happen or set in; to
attain. obtain ( ھ s.th.); to acquire ( ھ s.th.,
also knowledge); to infer, deduce ( ھ s.th.);
to collect ( ھ a fee, fare, etc.), levy ( ھ taxes,
fees, etc.), call in ( ھ money); to summarize,
sum up ( ھ s.th.) V to result ( من from), come
out (sum); to be obtained, be attained; to be
raised, be levied, be required. be demanded;
to be taken in, come in (fees, taxes, funds);
to be collected (taxes); to procure for o.s.,
get ( على s.th.); to attain, receive, obtain ( على
s.th.); to acquire ( على s.th.); to collect ( على
fees) X to procure for o.s., get ( على s.th.); to
attain. Receive, obtain ( على s.th.); to acquire
على) s.th.)
حصول ḥuṣūl setting in, occurrence,
incidence. happening (of an event or
process); obtainment. attainment ( على of
s.th.); achievement ( على of s.th.); acquisition
على) of s.th.)
حصيلة ḥaṣīla pl. حصائل ḥaṣā’il2 rest,
remainder; amount collected, proceeds,
returns; revenue, receipts, yield, income,
takings
حوصل، حوصلة and حويصلة look up
alphabetically
حصالة ḥaṣāla collection box, alms box
محصل maḥṣal result, outcome, upshot,
issue
تحصيل taḥṣīl pl. -āt attainment,
obtainment, gain; acquisition (also of
knowledge); learning, studying, scientific
studies; collection, raising, levy(ing), calling
in (of funds, taxes); income, revenue,
receipts, returns, proceeds; résumé,
summary, gist (of a speech or opinion); من
تحصيل الحاصل ان يقال in summary, it may be
said ...
تحصيلجي taḥṣīlgī (eg.) = محصل muḥaṣṣil
حاصل ḥāṣil pl. حواصل 􀀀 ḥawāsil2 setting
in, occurring, taking place, happening;
result, outcome, sum, total, product (also
math.); revenues, receipts, proceeds, gain;
income, returns; crop, harvest; warehouse,
storehouse, granary, depot, magazine; main
content, purport, gist, essence, substance (of
a speech); الحاصل briefly, in short; pl.
حاصلات product(s), yield. produce.
production (econ.)
محصول maḥsūl pl. -āt, محاصل maḥāṣīl2
result, outcome, issue; yield, gain; product,
produce; crop, harvest; production 182
محصل muḥaṣṣil collector; tax collector;
cashier; (bus, streetcar) conductor
متحصل mutaḥaṣṣil yield, revenue,
proceeds, receipts, returns ( من from)
حصن ḥaṣuna u ( حصانة ḥaṣāna) to be
inaccessible, be well fortified; to be chaste
(woman) II to make inaccessible ( ھ s.th.);
to strengthen ( ھ s.th.); to fortify, entrench
ھ) s.th.); to immunize, make proof ( ضد
ḍidda against) IV to make inaccessible ( ھ
s.th.); to fortify, entrench ( ھ s.th.); to be
chaste, pure (woman); to remain chaste,
be of unblemished reputation (woman) V
to strengthen one’s position, protect o.s.;
to be fortified; to be secure, be protected
حصن ḥiṣn pl. حصون ḥuṣūn fortress, fort,
castle, citadel, stronghold; fortification,
entrenchment; protection │ حصن طائر
Flying Fortress
حصان ḥiṣān pl. حصن ḥuṣun, احصنة
aḥsina horse; stallion │ حصان البحر ḥ. albaḥr
hippopotamus; حصان بخاري (buḳārī)
iron horse; قوة حصن qūwat ḥ., or حصان
alone, horse power
حصين ḥaṣīn inaccessible, strong,
fortified, firm, secure(d), protected;
immune, proof, invulnerable ( ضد ḍidda
against) │ الحصن الحصين (ḥiṣn) stronghold
(fig.; e.g., of radicalism)
ابو الحصين abū l-ḥuṣain fox
حصانة ḥaṣāna strength, ruggedness,
forbiddingness, impregnability,
inaccessibility; shelteredness, chastity (of
a woman); invulnerability, inviolability;
immunity (of deputies, diplomats; against
illness)
تحصين taḥṣīn pl. -āt fortification,
entrenchment; strengthening, cementing,
solidification; immunization
احصان iḥṣān blamelessness,
unblemished reputation, integrity (Isl.
Law)
تحصن taḥaṣṣun securing, safeguarding,
protection, protectedness
محصن muḥaṣṣan fortified; entrenched;
immune, proof ( ضد ḍidda against)
محصنة muḥṣina, muḥṣana sheltered,
well-protected, chaste; of unblemished
reputation (woman; Isl. Law)
حصى IV to oount, enumerate ( ھ s.th.); to
calculate, compute ( ھ s.th. من from); to
debit, charge ( على ھ s.th. to s.o.’s
account), hold ( ھ s.th. على against s.o.) │ لا
يحصى (yuḥṣā) innumerable
حصى ḥaṣan (coll.) pebbles, little stones
حصاة ḥaṣāh, حصوة ḥaṣwa pl. حصيات
ḥaṣayāt little stone; pebble; calculus,
stone (med.) │ حصاة بولية (baulīya) cystic
calculus; حصاة صفراوية (ṣafrāwīya)
gallstone, biliary calculus
حصى لبان ḥaṣā lubān, حصالبان rosemary
(bot.)
حصوي ḥaṣawī stony, pebbly, gravelly
احصاء iḥṣā’ pl. -āt count, counting;
enumeration; calculation, computation;
statistics │ احصاء السكان i. as-sukkān
census
احصائي iḥṣā’ī statistic(al); (pl. -ūn)
statistician
احصائية iḥṣā’īya pl. -āt statistics
حض ḥaḍḍa u (ḥaḍḍ) and II to spur on, incite ( ه
s.o., على to), goad, prod ( ه s.o.• على to do
s.th.)
حض ḥaḍḍ incitement, inducement,
prodding, prompting, instigation
حضيض ḥaḍīḍ, pl. حضض ḥuḍuḍ, احضة
aḥiḍḍa foot of a mountain; lowland;
perigee (astron.); depth; state of decay │
نزل الى الحضيض to sink low (fig.); دكه الى
الحضيض (dakkahū) to ruin s.th.
completely, run s.th. into the ground
حضر ḥaḍara u ( حضور ḥuḍūr) to be present ( ھ
at), be in the presence ( ه of s.o.); to 183
attend ( ھ s.th.); to be present ( ھ in s.o.’s
mind), be readily recalled ( ه by s.o.); to
take part, participate ( مجلسا majlisan in a
meeting); to come, get ( الى or ھ، ه to s.o.,
to a place), arrive ( الى or ھ at a place); to
visit ( ھ a place), attend ( ھ a public event),
go ( ھ to a performance, etc.); to appear (
امام before a judge, etc., الى in, at), show up
الى) in, at); to betake o.s., go ( الى من
from ... to); ( حضارة ḥaḍāra) to be settled,
sedentary (in a civilized region, as
opposed to nomadic existence)
II to ready, make ready, prepare ( ھ s.th., also,
e.g., as medicine = to compound), make,
produce, manufacture ( ھ s.th.); to study,
prepare ( ھ a lesson); to fetch, get, bring ( ه
s.o., ھ s.th.), procure, supply ( ھ s.th.); to
settle ( ه s.o), make s.o. ( ه) sedentary; to
civilize ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.) III to give a lecture,
present s.th. in a lecture ( ه to s.o.); to
lecture, give a course of lectures IV to
fetch, get, bring ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), procure,
supply ( ھ s.th.); to take ( ه s.o., ھ s.th., الى
to a place) │ احضره معه to have s.th. with
one, bring s.th. along V to prepare o.s.,
ready o.s., get ready ( ل for); to be ready,
prepared; to become settled, be sedentary
in a civilized region; to be civilized, be in
a state of civilization; to become
urbanized, become a town dweller VIII to
come ( ه to s.o.), be in the presence ( ه of
s.o.); to live in a civilized region; pass.
ustuḥḍira to die X to have s.th. ( (ھ
brought, to call, send ( ھ، ه for s.o., for
s.th.), have s.o. ( ه) come; to summon ( ه
s.o.); to fetch, procure, supply, get, bring (
ھ s.th.); to conjure, call up, evoke ( ھ a
spirit); to visualize, envision, call to mind
ھ) s.th.); to carry with o.s., bring along ( ھ
s.th.); to prepare ( ھ، ه e.g., a medicinal
preparation)
حضر ḥaḍar a civilized region with
towns and villages and a settled
population (as opposed to desert, steppe);
settled population, town dwellers (as
opposed to nomads)
حضري ḥaḍarī settled, sedentary,
resident, not nomadic, non-Bedouin, like
urbanites; civilized; urban; town dweller
حضرة ḥaḍra presence │ في حضرة in the
presence of ...; الحضرة العالية (‘āliya) His
Highness (formerly, title of the Bey of
Tunis); حضرتكم a respectful form of
address, esp. in letters; حضرة الدكتور cf. Fr.
Monsieur le docteur
حضور ḥuḍūr presence; visit,
participation, attendance; (as one pl. of
حاضر ) those present │ بحضوره in his
presence; حضور الحفلة ḥ. al-ḥafla
attendance of the celebration حضور الذھن
ḥ. ad-dihn presence of mind; ورقة حضور
waraqat ḥ. summons (jur.)
حضوري ḥuḍūrī: احكام حضورية (aḥkām)
judgments delivered in the presence of the
litigant parties after oral proceedings
(jur.); حضوريا ḥuḍūrīyan contradictorily
(jur.)
حضارة ḥaḍāra civilization; culture;
settledness, sedentariness
حضيرة ḥaḍīra pl. حضائر ḥaḍā’ir2 a small
group of 6 to 12 people (specif., the
smallest unit of boy scouts = patrol);
section, squad (mil.; Syr.)
محضر maḥḍar presence; attendance,
coming, appearance (of s.o.); assembly,
meeting, gathering, convention; (pl. محاضر
maḥāḍir2) minutes, official report,
process-verbal, record of the factual
findings │ محضر الجرد m. al-jard inventory
list; بمحضر منه bi-maḥḍarin minhu in s.o.’s
presence
تحضير taḥḍīr preparing, readying,
making ready; (pl. -āt) preparation ( ل for;
also e.g., for an examination); making,
preparation, cooking (of food, etc.),
production, manufacture
تحضيري taḥdīrī preparatory, preparative
│ المدارس التحضيرية للمعلمين (mu‘allimīn)
184 preparatory institutes for teachers,
teachers’ colleges (Eg.)
محاضرة muḥāḍara pl. -āt lecture
احضار iḥḍār procurement, supply,
fetching, bringing
تحضر taḥaḍḍur civilized way of life
احتضار iḥtiḍār demise, death
استحضار istiḥḍār making, production,
manufacture; preparation; summoning │
استحضار الارواح istiḥḍār al-arwāḥ evocation
of spirits, spiritism
حاضر ḥāḍir pl. حضر ḥuḍḍar, حضور
ḥuḍūr present; attending; الحاضر the
present (time); prepared ( ل for); ready; (pl.
حضار ḥuḍḍār, حضرة ḥaḍara) settled,
sedentary, resident, village or town
dweller, not nomadic │ في الحاضر or في
الوقت الحاضر at present, now; حاضر الفكر ḥ.
al-fikr quick-witted, quick at repartee; نقد
حاضر (naqd) cash, ready money
حاضرة ḥāḍira pl. حواضر ḥawāḍir2
capital city, metropolis; city (as a center of
civilization)
محضور maḥḍūr possessed, haunted or
inhabited by a jinni; demoniac
محضر muḥaḍḍir maker, producer,
manufacturer; dissector (med.)
محاضر muḥāḍir lecturer, speaker
محضر muḥḍir court usher
متحضر mutaḥaḍḍir civilized
محتضر muḥtaḍar dying, in the throes of
death, on the brink of death; a dying
person; haunted or inhatbited by a jinni;
demoniac
مستحضر mustaḥḍar pl. -āt preparation
(chem., pharm.) │ مستحضر دوائي (dawā’ī)
medicinal preparation
حضرموت ḥaḍramaut2 Hadhramaut
حضرمي ḥaḍramī pl. حضارم ḥaḍārim2
man from Hadhramaut; Hadhramautian
(adj.)
حضن ḥaḍana u (ḥaḍn, حضانة ḥiḍāna) to clasp
in one’s arms, embrace, hug ( ه s.o.);
to nurse, bring up, raise ( ه a child); (ḥaḍn,
حضان ḥidān, حضانة ḥiḍāna, حضون ḥuḍūn)
to hatch, brood, incubate ( ھ an egg; of a
bird) VI to embrace one another, cling to
one another, nestle against each other VII
to clasp in one’s arms, embrace, hug ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to harbor in one,s bosom ( ھ
feeling); to hatch, concoct, contrive ( ھ
s.th.); to bring up, raise ( ھ a child)
حضن ḥaḍn pl. احضان aḥḍān breast,
bosom (between the outstretched arms);
armful, that which can be carried in one's
arms │ قبله بالحضن (qabilahū) he received
him with open arms; بين احضان and في
احضان amid, among; with, in the presence
of (s.o.); في احضان الصحراء (saḥrā’) in the
heart (or folds) of the desert; اخذتني بين
احضانھا she took me in her arms
حضانة ḥiḍāna, ḥaḍāna raising, bringing
up, nursing (of a child); hatching (of an
egg), incubation │ دار الحضانة children’s
home, day nursery, crèche
حضين in embraced, bugged, resting in
s.o.’s arms
محضن maḥḍan pl. محاضن maḥādin2
children’s home, day nursery, crèche
احتضان iḥtiḍān embrace, hug(ging),
accolade
حاضنة ḥāḍina pl. حواضن ḥawāḍin2
nurse-maid, dry nurse
محتضن muḥtaḍin embracing, hugging;
tender, affectionate
حط ḥaṭṭa u (ḥaṭṭ) to put, place, put down, set
down ( ھ s.th.); to take down ( ھ a load,
burden); to lower, decrease, diminish,
reduce ( ھ or من s.th.); to depreciate ( من
قدره min qadrihī or من قيمته min qudratihī
the value of s.th.) │ حط الرحال (riḥāla) to
halt, make a stop, dismount, encamp
(while traveling on horseback, 185
camelback. etc.); -- u (ḥaṭṭ, حطوط ḥuṭūṭ) to
sink, descend, go down; to alight (bird); to
land (airplane); to drop (price) II to put
down, set down, take off, unload ( ھ a
load) VII to sink, descend, go down; to
decrease, diminish; to decline, decay,
wane VIII to put down, set down, take
down ( ھ s.th.)
حط ḥaṭṭ (act of) putting or setting down;
depreciation, belittling, derogation,
disparagement ( من of s.th.); reduction,
diminution, decrease ( من of s.th.)
حطة ḥiṭṭa alleviation, relief, mitigation;
abasement, debasement, demotion,
degradation (in rank, dignity, prestige);
humiliation, insult, indignity
احط aḥaṭṭ lower
حطيطة ḥaṭīṭa price reduction
محط maḥaṭṭ place at which s.th. is put
down or deposited; stopping place, stop;
pause fermata, hold, concluding strain,
cadence (mus.) │ محط الآمال object of hope,
that on which one's hopes are pinned; كان
محط الأنظار to attract the glances, draw
attention to o.s.; محط الكلام m. al-kalām
sense, or meaning, of one’s words
محطة maḥaṭṭa pl. -āt stopping place,
stop (also of public conveyances); station,
post; railroad station; broadcasting station,
radio station │ محطة تحويل التيار m. taḥwīl
at-tayyār transformer station; محطة الاذاعة
اللاسلكية )) m. al-idā‘a (al-lāsi1kīya)
broadcasting station, radio station;
transmitter (station); محطة رئيسية (ra’īsīya)
(railroad) main station; O محطة الاشارات m.
al-išārāt signal post; O محطة الارسال m. alirsāl
transmitter (station; radio); محطة
للارصاد الجوية (li-l-arṣād al-jawwīya)
meteorological station, weather station;
محطة الصرف m. aṣ-ṣarf (Eg.) pump station
(for drainage); power plant; O محطة
الاستقبال receiving station (radio); O محطة
لاسلكية قصيرة الأمواج (lā-silkīya qaṣīrat alamwāj)
short-wave transmitter station;
محطة توليد الكھرباء m. taulīd al-kahrabā’ and
محطة كھربائية power plant
انحطاط inḥiṭāṭ decline, fall, decay,
decadence; inferiority │ احساس الانحطاط
iḥsās al-inḥ. sense of inferiority
انحطاطي inḥiṭāṭ postclassical writer
منحط munḥaṭṭ low, base, low-level, lowgrade;
fallen, degraded (woman); mean,
vile, vulgar; inferior
حطب ḥaṭaba i to gather firewood │ حطب في
حبله (fī ḥablihī) to support s.o., stand by
s.o., back s.o. up VIII to gather firewood
حطب ḥaṭab pl. احطاب aḥṭāb firewood
حطاب ḥaṭṭāb wood gatherer; woodcutter,
lumberjack; vendor of firewood
تحطيب taḥṭīb singlestick fencing (a
popular game, esp. in rural areas; eg.)
حاطب taḥṭīb wood gatherer; woodcutter,
lumberjack; vendor of firewood │ كحاطب
ليل ka-ḥāṭibi lailin lit.: like one who
gathers wood at night, i.e., blindly, at
random, heedlessly (said of s.o. who does
not realize, or think about, what he is
doing)
حطم ḥaṭama i (ḥaṭm) to break, shatter, smash,
wreck, demolish ( ھ s.th.) II = I; V to
break. go to pieces; to be broken, b.
smashed, be shattered; to crash (e.g.,
airplane, structure, etc.); to be wrecked
(ship) VII = V
حطمة ḥiṭma pl. حطم ḥiṭam particle, small
piece, shred, bit, morsel; s.th. broken
حطام ḥuṭām debris, rubble; fragments,
shards, broken pieces; wreckage, wreck
(of a ship) │ حطام الدنيا ad-dunyā the
ephemeral things of this world, the
vanities of the world
حطيم ḥaṭīm smashed, shattered, wrecked
186
تحطيم taḥṭīm smashing, shattering,
wrecking, breaking, demolition,
destruction, disruption │O سفينة تحطيم الجليد
icebreaker
تحطم taḥaṭṭum crumbling,
disintegration; crash (of an airplane);
collapse, breakdown
حاطمة ḥāṭima: O حاطمة الجليد icebreaker
(naut.)
محطم muḥaṭṭim crashing, thundering,
roaring (of an explosion. etc.) – muḥaṭṭam
broken (language)
محطمة muḥaṭṭima: محطمة ثلجية (taljīya)
icebreaker (naut.)
حظ ḥaẓẓa a (ḥaẓẓ) to be lucky, Fortunate IV=I
حظ ḥaẓẓ pl. حظوظ ḥuẓūẓ part, portion,
share, allotment; lot, fate, destiny; good
luck, good fortune; affluence, wealth,
fortune; prosperity; pleasure │ ذو حظ من
endowed with; لحسن الحظ li-ḥusni l-ḥ. and
من حسن الحظ fortunately, luckily; سوء الحظ
sū’ al-ḥ. bad luck, misfortune; سيء الحظ
sayyi’ al-ḥ. unlucky, unfortunate; لسوء
الحظ unfortunately; من حسن حظي luckily for
me, fortunately; كان من حسن حظه ان he was
lucky in that he ...; ليس احسن منھا حظا he is
no better off than she is
حظيظ ḥaẓīẓ lucky, fortunate
محظوظ lucky, fortunate; content(ed),
happy, glad
حظر ḥaẓara u (ḥaẓr) to fence in, hedge in ( ھ
s.th.); to forbid ( ھ على to s.o. s.th.),
prohibit ( ھ على s.o. from doing s.th.)
حظر ḥaẓr forbiddance, interdiction,
prohibition, ban; embargo
حظار ḥiẓār, ḥaẓār wall, partition,
screen; fence, palisade, railing
حظيرة ḥaẓīra pl. حظائر ḥaẓā’ir2
enclosure, railing, fence, palisade, hedge;
compound, yard, pound, pinfold; corral,
pen, paddock, coop; hangar, shed; field,
domain, realm (fig.) │ في حظيرة (with foll.
genit.) inside of, within; جذبه الى حظيرته
(jadabahū) to bring s.o. under one’s
influence; حظائر الطائرات aircraft hangars;
حظيرة القدس ḥ. al-quds Paradise
محظور maḥẓūr interdicted, prohibited,
forbidden ( على to s.o.); embargoed; pl.
محظورات forbidden things, restrictions
حظو) and حظي) حظي ḥaẓiya a ( حظوة
ḥuẓwa, ḥiẓwa) to enjoy the favor or good
graces of s.o. ( عند ), be in s.o.’s ( عند ) favor
or good graces; to acquire, obtain, attain,
gain, win ( ب s.th.)
حظوة ḥuẓwa, ḥiẓwa favored position,
role of favorite; precedence; favor, grace;
good will, benevolence; prestige, credit,
standing, respect, esteem │ نال حظوة عند
لدى )) to find favor with s.o.
حظية ḥaẓīya pl. حظايا ḥaẓāyā paramour,
mistress, concubine
محظية maḥẓīya pl. -āt paramour.
mistress, concubine
حف ḥaffa u (ḥaff) to surround ( ب ھ، ه s.o., s.th.
with, also ب and حول s.o., s.th.), enclose,
encompass, border ( ب، ھ s.th.); to depilate
ھ) a part of the body), unhair ( ھ the skin);
to trim, clip ( ھ the beard); to chafe, rub
off, abrade ( ھ s.th.) │ تحف به العين he is the
object of admiring glances, he is the
center of attention, all eyes are upon him;
-- i ( حفيف ḥafīf) to rustle II and VIII to
surround, ( حول، ب، ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), enclose,
encompass, border ( حول ،ب، ھ s.th.)
حفاف ḥifāf side
حفيف ḥafīf rustle, rustling
محفة miḥaffa (also maḥaffa) pl. -āt
litter, stretcher; roller stretcher; sedan
حاف ḥaff: خبز حاف (ḳubz) plain bread
(without anything to go with it; eg.)187
حافة ḥāffa pl. -āt enclosure, edge,
margin; brim of a vessel; border, brink,
verge; fringe, hem │ على حافة الخراب ’alā ḥ.
al-ḳarāb on the brink of ruin
حفيد ḥafīd pl. احفاد aḥfād, حفدة ḥafada grandson;
descendant, offspring, scion
حفيدة ḥafīda granddaughter
حفر ḥafara i (ḥafr) to dig ( ھ s.th.): to drill (for
oil): to excavate (archeol.): to carve ( ھ
s.th.): to engrave, etch ( ھ metal) │ حفر
خنادق to dig trenches; حفر حفرة (ḥufratan) to
prepare a pitfall, prepare an ambush VII
pass. of I; VIII to dig
حفر ḥafr digging, earthwork, excavation
(also archeol.); unearthing; drilling (for
oil): carving, inscribing (e.g., of letters);
engraving, etching; graphic arts (etching,
wood engraving); scurvy (syr.) │ جھاز
الحفر jahāz al-ḥ. oil rig; oil derrick
حفرة ḥufra pl. حفر ḥufar pit; hollow,
cavity, excavation; hole
حفرية ḥafrīya digging, excavation; O
gravure; pl. حفريات excavations (archeol.)
حفار ḥaffār digger; engraver; driller;
stone mason │ حفار القبور gravedigger
حفير ḥafīr dug, dug out, excavated,
unearthed
حفيرة ḥafīra pl. حفائر ḥafā’ir2 s.th.
excavated or unearthed; pl. excavations
(archeol.)
احفور uḥfūr pl. احافير aḥāfīr2 s.th.
excavated; fossil; pl. excavations
(archeol.)
محفر miḥfar pl. محافر maḥāfir2 spade
حافر ḥāfir pl. حوافر ḥawāfir2 hoof │ وقع
الحافر على الحافر to coincide, happen to
correspond exactly; على الحافر on the spot,
right away, at once
حافري ḥāfirī ungular, ungulate
حافرة ḥāfira original condition,
beginning │ عند الحافرة on the spot, right
away, at once; رجع الى حافرته to revert to its
original state or origin
محفور maḥfūr dug; inscribed, engraved;
carved
حفز ḥafaza i (ḥafz) to pierce, stab ( ه s.o., ب
with the spear); to incite, instigate, urge,
prompt, induce ( على or الى ه s.o. to s.th.) V
to prepare o.s. get ready, be ready, be
about to do s.th. ( ل or الى ). set out to do
s.th. ( ل or الى ); to get ready to jump, make
a running start; to listen, pay attention
VIII to be about to do s.th., be ready ( ل
for)
تحفز taḥaffuz preparedness, readiness;
vim, dash, verve, sweep, élan
حافز ḥāfiz pl. حوافز ḥawāfiz2 spur, drive (
على to do s.th.), incentive ( على to),
initiative
مستحفز mutaḥfiz ready, prepared ( ل for)
حفظ ḥafiẓa a (ḥifẓ) to preserve ( ھ s.th.); to
protect, guard, defend ( ه s.o.): to observe,
bear in mind ( ھ s.th.), comply ( ھ with
s.th.), be mindful, be heedful ( ھ of s.th.);
to keep up, maintain, sustain, retain,
uphold ( ھ s.th.); to hold, have in
safekeeping ( ھ s.th.), take care ( ھ of
s.th.); to keep, put away, save, store ( ھ
s.th); to conserve, preserve ( ھ s.th.); to
retain in one’s memory, remember, know
by heart ( ھ s.th.); to memorize, learn by
heart, commit to memory ( ھ s.th., esp. the
Koran); to reserve ( ھ لنفسه for o.s. s.th.): to
stay, discontinue, suspend ( التحقيق a
judicial investigation; jur.) │ حفظه لله may
God protect him! حفظ بالبريد to hold in care
of general delivery ( ھ s.th.); يحفظ في
البوسطة (yuḥfaẓu) in care of general
delivery, poste restante; حفظ الوفاء ل
(wafā’a) to be loyal to s.o., keep faith with
s.o. II to have s.o. ( ه) memorize ( ھ s.th.)
III to preserve, keep up, maintain, uphold,
sustain ( على s.th.); 188 to supervise,
control ( على s.th.), watch ( على over s.th.);
to watch out ( على for), take care, be
heedful, be mindful ( على of), look ( على
after), attend, pay attention ( على to); to
keep, follow, observe, bear in mind ( على
s.th.), comply ( على with), conform ( على to)
; to protect, guard, defend ( ھ and على , also
عن s.th.) IV to vex, annoy, gall, irritate,
hurt, offend ( ه s.o.) V to keep up,
maintain, preserve ( ب s.th.); to observe,
keep in mind ( ب s.th.), be mindful, be
heedful, take care ( ب of s.th.), be
concerned ( ب with); to be cautious, be
wary, be on one’s guard; to be reserved,
aloof; to have reservations VIII to
maintain, uphold ( ب or ھ s.th., e.g., بحقوقه
one’s rights); to keep up, maintain, retain (
ب or ھ s.th., e.g., a posture, a
characteristic); to take care, take over
custody ( ب of s.o.), protect, guard ( ب s.o.);
to defend (against encroachment), hold,
maintain ( ب a possession); to preserve,
sustain, continue, keep up ( ب s.th.); to
hold, possess ( ب s.th.); to put away, hold,
have in safekeeping ( ب s.th.), take care ( ب
of s.th.); to keep, retain ( ب s.th.); احتفظ لنفسه
to keep for o.s., appropriate, reserve for
o.s. ( ب or ھ s.th.), take complete
possession ( ھ of) X to ask s.o. ( ه) to guard
or protect ( ھ or على s.th.); to entrust ( على
or ھ ه to s.o. s.th.), commit s.th. ( على or (ھ
to the charge of s.o. ( (ه
حفظ ḥifẓ preservation; maintenance,
sustentation, conservation, upholding;
protection, defense, guarding; custody,
safekeeping. keeping, storage; retention;
observance, compliance (with);
memorizing, memorization; memory;
(jur.) discontinuance, stay, suspension (of
legal action, of a judicial investigation) │
حفظ الآثار preservation of ancient
monuments (Eg.); حفظ الصحة ḥ. aṣ-ṣiḥḥa
hygiene, sanitation; رجال الحفظ police
حفظة ḥifẓa anger, indignation,
resentment, rancor
حفاظ ḥifāẓ pl. -āt dressing, ligature,
bandage │ حفاظ الحيض ḥ. al-ḥaiḍ sanitary
napkin
حفيظ ḥafīẓ attentive, heedful, mindful;
preserving, keeping, guarding ( على s.th.)
حفيظة ḥafīẓa pl. حفائظ ḥafā’iẓ2 grudge,
resentment, rancor
محفظة maḥfaẓa, miḥfaẓa pl. -āt, محافظ
maḥāfiẓ2 folder, bag, satchel, briefcase
dispatch case, portfolio; wallet, pocket,
book
محفظة miḥfaẓa capsule
تحفيظ taḥfīẓ memorization drill,
inculcation (esp. of the Koran)
حفاظ ḥifāẓ defense, protection, guarding
(esp. of cherished, sacred things);
preservation, maintenance ( على of
interests); keeping, upholding (of loyalty),
adherence (to a commitment)
محافظة muḥāfaẓa guarding;
safeguarding; preservation; protection,
defense; conservation, sustaining,
upholding; retention, maintenance ( على of
s.th.) conservativism (pol.), conservative
attitude; following, observance ( على of
s.th.), compliance ( على with s.th.),
adherence ( على to); guarding ( من against
misfortune), saving ( من from
misadventure); garrison (mil.); (pl. -āt)
governorate (one of five administrative
divisions of Egypt, in addition to a
mudīrīyāt); office of the muḥāfiẓ (head of
a governorate); province, anyone of the
larger administrative districts (Syr.) │
المحافظة على النفس self-preservation; مذھب
المحافظة madhab al-m. conservative
movement, conserativism, Toryism
تحفظ taḥaffuẓ caution, wariness,
restraint, reticence, reserve, aloofness; --
189 (pl. -āt) precaution, precautionary
measure; reservation, limiting condition,
conditional stipulation, proviso │ مع التحفظ
with full reservation
تحفظي taḥaffuẓī precautionary,
preventive │ اجراءات تحفظية (ijrā’āt)
precautionary measures; صلح تحفظي (ṣulḥ)
settlement before action, preventive
settlement (jur.)
احتفاظ iḥtifāẓ guarding, safeguarding;
preservation; retention, maintenance,
continuation, conservation, defense,
protection, vindication, sustaining,
upholding; keeping, holding, safekeeping,
custody ( ب of s.th.)
حافظ ḥāfiẓ keeper, guarder, guardian,
custodian, caretaker; (pl. حفاظ القرآن ḥuffāẓ,
حفظة ḥafaẓa) one who knows the Koran by
heart (formerly an honorific epithet)
حافظة ḥāfiẓa memory; -- (pl. حوافظ
ḥawāfiẓ) wallet, pocketbook, money order
(Eg.)
محفوظ maḥfūẓ kept, held in safekeeping,
deposited, guarded, preserved;
memorized, committed to memory, etc.;
conserved, preserved (food); reserved;
ensured, secured, safeguarded; -- pl.
محفوظات canned goods, concerves;
archives; memorized material, what s.o.
knows by heart │ دار المحفوظات المصرية the
Egyptian Public Record Office; مأكولات
محفوظة concerves, canned goods; جميع
الحقوق محفوظة all rights reserved
محافظ muḥāfiẓ supervisory, controlling;
observing ( على s.th.), complying ( على
with), etc.; conservative (pol.), المحافظون
the Conservatives, the Tories; keeper,
guarder, guardian, custodian, caretaker,
supervisor, superintendent; mayor;
governor (Eg.: title of the chief officer of
a governorate; Syr.: chief officer of a
province); director general, president (=
Brit. governor)
متحفظ mutaḥaffiẓ vigilant, alert, wary,
cautious; reticent, reserved, aloof; staid,
sedate
مستحفظ mustaḥfaẓ pl. -āt reserve (mil.)
حفل ḥafala i (ḥafl) to gather, assemble,
congregate; to flow copiously; to be
replete, teem, superabound ( ب with); to
pay attention, attend, give one’s mind ( ب
or ل to s.th.), concern o.s. ( ب with), make
much ( ب of), set great store ( ب by) │ لا
حفل به (lā ḥafla) indifferent, of no
consequence II to adorn, decorate,
ornament ( ب ه s.th. with) VIII to gather,
rally, throng together; to celebrate ( ب s.th.,
s.o.); to concern o.s. ( ب or ل with), attend,
pay attention. give one’s mind ( ب or ل to
s.th.); to honor, welcome, receive kindly (
ب s.o.)
حفل ḥafl gathering, meeting,
assembling; assembly, congregation,
throng, crowd; performance, show, public
event; celebrations; feast, festival
حفلة ḥafla pl. -āt assembly, gathering,
meeting, congregation; party; (social or
public) event; show, performance (theater,
cinema); concert; festivity, ceremony,
festival, festive event, celebration │ حفلة
التأبين commemoration. Commemorative,
ceremony for a deceased person; الحفلة
الأولى (ūlā) premiere; حفلة حافلة numerous
assembly; حفلة خيرية (ḳairīya) charity
performance, charity event; حفلة الدفن addfn
funeral ceremony, obsequies; حفلة دينية
(dīnīya) religious ceremony, Divine
Service; حفلة ساھرة and حفلة سمر ḥ. samar
evening party, soirée; حفلة سينمائية motionpicture
show; حفلة الشاي tea party; حفلة العرس
ḥ. al-‘urs wedding; حفلة الاستقبال (public)
reception; حفلة موسيقية concert
حفيل ḥafīl eager, assiduous, diligent
محفل maḥfil pl. محافل maḥāfil2 assembly,
congregation, meeting, gathering; party;
190 body, collective whole; circle, quarter
│ محفل ماسوني Masonic lodge; المحافل الرسمية
السياسية )) (rasmīya, siyāsīya) the official
(political) circles or quarters
احتفال iḥtifāl pl. -āt celebration,
ceremony, festival, festivities
حافل ḥāfil pl. حفل ḥuffal, حوافل ḥawāfil2
full ( ب of), filled, replete ( ب with);
abundant, copious, lavish; much
frequented, well attended (by visitors,
participants, etc.), numerous (of
attendance); solemn, ceremonial, festive
حافلة hāfila pl. -āt, حوافل ḥawāfil 2 O
autobus
محتفل muḥtafil: المحتفلون the participants
in a festive event, the celebrators
محتفل muḥtafal assembly place,
gathering place; party; محتفل به celebrated
حفن ḥafana u to scoop up with both hands ( ھ
s.th.); to give a little ( ل to s.o.)
حفنة ḥafna pl. ḥafanāt handful
حفو) 1 and حفى) حفي ḥafiya a ( حفاوة ḥafāwa) to
receive kindly and hospitably, to
welcome, receive with honors, honor ( ب
s.o.) V to behave with affection, be
affectionate ( ب toward) VIII do.; to
celebrate ( ب an occasion, a festival)
حفي ḥafīy welcoming, receiving kindly,
greeting ( ب s.o., s.th.)
حفاوة ḥafāwa friendly reception,
welcoming, welcome, salutation ( ب of
s.o.)
احتفاء iḥtifā’ reception, welcome,
salutation ( ب of s.o.); celebration, festivity
حفي 2 ḥafiya a ( حفاء ḥafā’) to go barefoot; to
have sore feet
حاف ḥāfin pl. حفاة ḥufāh barefoot(ed)
حق ḥaqqa i u to be true, turn out to be true, be
confirmed; to be right, correct; (also pass.
ḥuqqa) to be necessary, obligatory,
requisite, imperative ( على for s.o.), be
incumbent ( على upon s.o.); to be adequate,
suitable, fitting, appropriate ( على for s.o.);
to be due ( ل s.o.); يحق له he is entitled to it,
he has a right to it; حق عليه he deserved it
(punishment); -- u to ascertain ( ھ s.th.),
make sure, be sure ( ھ of s.th.); to
recognize. identify ( ه s.o.) II to make s.th.
ھ) ) come true; to realize ( ھ s.th., e.g., a
hope), carry out ( ھ e.g., a wish), carry into
effect, fulfill, put into action,
consummate, effect, actualize ( ھ s.th.); to
implement ( ھ e.g., an agreement); to
produce, bring on, yield ( ھ results); to
determine, ascertain, find out, pinpoint,
identify ( ھ s.th.); to prove s.th. ( ھ ) to be
true, verify, establish, substantiate ( ھ
s.th.); to confirm, assert, aver, avouch,
affirm ( ھ s.th.); to be exact, painstaking,
meticulous, careful ( ھ in doing s.th.), e.g.,
حقق النظر (naẓara) to look closely; to
study, examine, investigate, explore ( ھ
s.th.), look, inquire ( ھ into s.th.); to verify,
check ( ھ or في s.th.); to investigate ( في
s.th., police); to make an official inquiry (
ھ into s.th.), institute an investigation ( ھ
of or into; court; jur.); to interrogate ( مع
s.o.), conduct a hearing ( مع of s.o.; jur.) III
to contend for a right ( ه with s.o.), contest
or litigate a right ( ه against s.o.) IV to tell
the truth; to be right ( في in s.th.); to
enforce ( ھ s.th., e.g., a legal claim) V to
prove true. turn out to be true, be
confirmed, prove to be correct; to
materialize, become a fact; to be realized,
be effected, come into effect; to be
examined, be explored; to ascertain ( ھ
s.th., also من ), make sure, reassure o.s.,
gain proof, convince o.s., be convinced,
be sure, be certain ( ھ of s.th.); to check,
verify ( ھ or من . s.th.); to be serious ( ب
about s.th.) X to be entitled, have a claim (
ھ to s.th.); to claim ( ھ s.th.), lay claim ( ھ
to); to deserve, merit ( ھ s.th.), be worthy (
ھ of); to require, demand, 191 necessitate,
make requisite ( ھ s.th.); to fall due.
become payable (sum of money), mature.
become due (note); to be due ( ل s.o.) │
يستحق الذكر (dikra) worth mentioning,
noteworthy; لا يستحق عليه الرسم (rasmu) not
subject to a fee. free of charge
حق ḥaqq truth; correctness, rightness;
rightful possession. property; one’s due;
duty; proper manner; true, authentic, real;
right, fair and reasonable; correct, sound,
valid; الحق an attribute of God; (pl. حقوق
ḥuqūq) right, title, claim, legal claim ( في
to); الحقوق law, jurisprudence, legal
science; حقا ḥaqqan really, in reality, in
effect, actually, in fact, indeed, truly, in
truth; justly, rightly, by rights │؟ احقا ذلك is
that (really) so? really? بحق justly, rightly,
by rights; بالحق truly, in reality, actually;
properly, appropriately, in a suitable
manner; بحق bi-haqqi and في حق as to ..., as
for ..., with respect to, concerning,
regarding; ھو على حق he is in the right; الحق
معن you are right; الحق عليك you are wrong;
ھو حق عليك it is your duty; ھذا حقي عليكم you
owe this to me; عرفانا لحقھا عليه (‘irfānan) in
recognition of what he owed her; من حقه he
is entitled to it, it is his due; كان من حقه ان
he should have ..., he ought to have …; له
الحق في he is entitled to ...; والحق يقال
(yuqāl) one may say, it must be admitted,
it’s only fair to say, say what you
will ..., ... though (as a parenthetical
phrase); عرف حق المعرفة (ḥaqqa l-ma‘rifa)
to know exactly, know for certain, know
very well, also علم حق العلم (ḥaqqa l-‘ilm);
فھم حق الفھم fahima ḥaqqa l-fahm to
understand precisely, comprehend
thoroughly, be fully aware; السعادة الحقة
(sa‘āda) true happiness; كلية الحقوق kullīyat
al-ḥ. law school, faculty of law
حق ḥuqq hollow, cavity; socket of a
joint (anat.); also = حقة ḥuqqa
حقة ḥuqqa pl. حقق ḥuqaq, حقاق ḥiqāq,
احقاق aḥqāq small box, case, pot or jar;
receptacle, container; -- (pl. -āt, حقق
ḥuqaq) a weight (Syr., Pal.) = اقة uqqa; حقة
استانبولية = ١.٢٨٠ kg (Ir.)
احق aḥaqq2 worthier, more deserving (
ب of s.th.); more entitled ( ب to s.th.)
حقيق ḥaqīq pl. احقاء aḥiqqā’2 worthy,
deserving ( ب of s.th.), fit, competent,
qualified; entitled ( ب to)
حقيقة ḥaqīqa pl. حقائق ḥaqā’iq2 truth,
reality (also philos.); fact; the true state of
affairs, the facts; true nature, essence; real
meaning, true sense; ḥaqīqatan really, in
reality, in effect, actually, in fact, indeed,
truly, in truth │ رأيته على حقيقته I saw its
true nature, as it really is; في حقيقة الأمر in
reality, really, actually; ليس له حقيقة it does
not really exist, it is not real
حقيقي ḥaqīqī real, true; actual; proper,
intrinsic, essential; genuine; authentic;
positive
حقوقي ḥuqūqī juristic(al); (pl. -ūn) jurist,
jurisprudent, lawyer
احقية aḥaqqīya legal claim, title, right
حقاني ḥaqqānī correct, right, proper,
sound, valid, legitimate, legal
حقانية ḥaqqānīya justice, law │ وزارة
الحقانية Ministry of Justice (formerly Eg.)
تحقيق taḥqīq realization, actualization,
effectuation, implementation; fulfillment
(of a claim, of a wish, etc.); achievement,
accomplishment, execution;
ascertainment, determination,
identification, verification; substantiation;
assertion, affirmation, confirmation;
pinpointing, precise determination;
exactness, accurateness, precision; (= تحقيق
النطق t. an-nuṭq) precise pronunciation; --
(pl. -āt) verification, check, checkup,
investigation; official or judicial inquiry,
192 inquest │ التحقيق ان it is a matter of fact
that ..., it is certain that ...; على التحقيق
properly speaking, strictly speaking,
actually; exactly, precisely; positively,
definitely; عند التحقيق properly speaking,
strictly speaking, actually; تحقيق الشخصية t.
aš-šaḳšīya identification (of a person),
proof of identity; شھادة تحقيق الشخصية
šahādat t. aš-šaḳšīya identity card; قلم تحقيق
الشخصية qalam t. aš-š. bureau of
identification; تحقيق الذاتية t. ad-dātīya
identification; قاضي التحقيق examining
magistrate; تحقيق الأرباح realization of
profits (stock market)
احقاق iḥqāq: احقاقا للحق iḥqāqan li-l-ḥaqq
(so) that truth may prevail
تحقق taḥaqquq ascertainment, making
sure; conviction, certainty, certitude;
verification, check, checkup
استحقاق istiḥqāq pl. -āt worthiness,
deservingness, merit; one’s due or desert;
maturity, payability, falling due (of a sum
of money); reclaiming or calling in of s.th.
due, demand of a right; vindication (1.1.
Law), replevin, detinue│ عن استحقاق
deservedly, justly, by rights; بدون استحقاق
undeservedly; تاريخ الاستحقاق date of
maturity (e.g., of a bond); الاستحقاق اللبناني
(lubnānī) name of a Lebanese order
محقوق maḥqūq worthy, deserving ( ب، ل
of), fit, competent, qualifying ( ب، ل for);
wrong, at fault, on the wrong track
محقق muḥaqqiq investigator; inquirer;
examining magistrate
محقق muḥaqqaq sure, certain, beyond
doubt, unquestionable, indubitable;
assured, established, accepted, recognized
│ من المحقق ان it is certain that ..., it is a fact
that …
محق muḥiqq telling the truth, in the
right, being right
محقق mutaḥaqqiq convinced, sure,
certain, positive
مستحق mustaḥiqq entitled; claiming;
beneficiary (of a wakf); deserving, worthy
│ مستحق الدفع m. ad-daf‘ due, payable (sum)
حقب VITI to put into one's bag, to bag ( ھ s.th.)
حقب ḥuqb pl. احقاب aḥqāb, حقاب ḥiqāb
long stretch of time, long period
حقبة ḥiqba pl. حقب ḥiqab long time,
stretch of time; period, age │ حقبة من الزمان
ḥiqbatan min az-zamān for quite a time,
for some time
حقب ḥaqab pl. احقاب aḥqāb a kind of
ornamental belt
حقاب ḥiqāb pl. حقب ḥuqub a kind of
ornamental belt
حقيبة ḥaqība pl. حقائب ḥaqā’ib2 valise,
suitcase, traveling bag; leather bag │ حقيبة
دبلوماسية diplomatic pouch; حقيبة النقود
portemonnaie, change purse; حقيبة اليد ḥ.
al-yad ladies’ purse, handbag
حقد ḥaqida a, ḥaqada i (ḥaqd, ḥiqd) to harbor
feelings of hatred ( على against) IV to incite
to hatred or resentment, embitter,
envenom ( ه s.o.) V = I; VI to hate one
another
حقد ḥiqd pl. احقاد aḥqād, حقود ḥuqūd
hatred, malice, spite, resentment, rancor
حقيدة ḥaqida pl. حقائد ḥaqā’id2 hatred,
malice, spite, resentment, rancor
حقود ḥaqūd full of hatred, spiteful,
resentful, malicious, malevolent,
rancorous
حاقد ḥāqid full of hatred, spiteful,
resentful, malicious, malevolent,
rancorous; pl. حقدة ḥaqada malevolent
people
حقر ḥaqara i (ḥaqr) to despise, scorn,
disdain ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to look down ( ھ، ه
on), have a low opinion ( ھ، ه of); --
ḥaqura u 193 to below, base,
contemptible, despicable; to be despised,
degraded, humiliated II to disparage,
decry, depreciate ( ه s.o.), detract, derogate
ه) from s.o.); to degrade, debase, humble,
humiliate; to regard with contempt,
despise, scorn, disdain ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.) VIII
to despise, scorn, disdain ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.),
look down ( ھ، ه on) X to regard as
contemptible or despicable, disdain,
despise ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.), look down ( ھ، ه
on)
حقير ḥaqīr pl. حقراء ḥuqarā’2 low, base,
mean, vulgar, vile; little, small, paltry,
inconsiderable, poor, wretched, miserable;
despised; despicable, contemptible
احقر aḥqar2 lower, baser, more
contemptible
حقارة ḥaqāra lowness, vulgarity,
baseness, vileness, meanness; smallness,
paltriness, insignificance, poorness,
wretchedness, miserableness;
despicability, contemptibleness;
ignominy, infamy
تحقتر taḥqīr contempt, disdain, scorn;
degradation, humiliation, abasement
احتقار iḥtiqār contempt, disdain, scorn │
نظر اليه بعين الاحتقار (bi-‘aini l-iḥt.) to regard
s.o. with contempt, look down one’s nose
at s.o.
محتقر muḥtaqar despised; contemptible,
despicable
حقل ḥaql pl. حقول ḥuqūl field (also fig. =
domain); column │ حقول البترول oil fields;
حقل الزيت ḥ. az-zait, حقل النفط ḥ. an-nafṭ oil
field; oil area; حقول التجارب experimental
fields; حقل كھربائي (kahrabā’ī) electric field
حقلي ḥaqlī field- (in compounds)
محاقلة muḥāqala sale of grain while still
in growth, dealing in grain futures (Isl.
Law)
حقن ḥaqana u (ḥaqn) to hold back, withhold,
keep back, detain, retain ( ھ s.th.); to
suppress, repress, restrain ( ھ s.th.); to
keep to o.s. ( السر as-sirra the secret); to
spare ( دمه damahū s.o.’s blood or life); to
give ( ه s.o.) an injection (med.) VIII to
become congested (esp. blood); to suffer
from strangury; to take an enema, a
clyster; to be injected │ احتقن وجھه
(wajhahū) his face was flushed, his face
turned red
حقن ḥaqn retention, withholding;
sparing; injecting. injection (med.) │ حقنا
لدمائھم ḥaqnan li-dimā’ihim in order to
spare their blood; حقن في حبل الوريد
intravenous injection (med.)
حقنة ḥuqna pl. حقن ḥuqan injection
(med.); hypodermic; clyster; enema
محقنة miḥqana pl. محاقن maḥāqin2
syringe (med.)
احتقان iḥtiqān congestion │ احتقان الدم iḥt.
ad-dam vascular congestion
محتقن muḥtaqan reddened by blood
congestion, flushed, red (face)
حقو ḥaqw pl. حقاء ḥiqā’, احقاء aḥqā’ loin, groin
│ شدد حقويه šaddada ḥaqwaihi to gird one’s
loins
حك 1 ḥakka u (ḥakk) to rub, chafe; to scrape; to
scratch; to rub off, scrape off, scratch off,
abrade ( ھ s.th.) │ حك في صدره (ṣadrihī) it
impressed him, affected him, touched s.th.
inside him IV to itch V to rub o.s., scrape,
chafe ( ب against); to pick a quarrel ( ب
with s.o.) VI to rub or scrape against each
other VIII to rub o.s. scrape, chafe ( ب
against); to be in contact, in touch ( ب
with) │ احتك في صدره (ṣadrihī) it impressed
him, affected him, touched s.th. inside him
حك ḥakk rubbing, chafing; friction;
scratching
حك ḥakka itching; scabies, itch (med.)
حكاك ḥakkāk lapidary 194
محك miḥakk touchstone; test │ ثبت على
محك النظر tabata ‘alā m. in-naẓar to stand a
critical test
محكة miḥakka currycomb
تحاك taḥākk (reciprocal) friction
احتكاك iḥtikāk pl. -āt (reciprocal)
friction; close touch or contact; friction
(fig., = dissension, controversy) │ من غير
احتكاك min gair ḥt. frictionless
محكك muḥakkak chafed, worn away
حكة 2 ḥukka (tun., = ḥuqqa) pl. حكك ḥukak small
box, case, pot or jar
حكر VIII to buy up, hoard and withhold, corner
ھ) a commodity); to monopolize ( ھ a
commercial article); to have exclusive
possession ( ھ of s.th.), hold a monopoly (
ھ over s.th.)
حكر ḥikr, ḥukr and اجرة الحكر ujrat al-ḥ.
ground rent, quitrent
حكر ḥakar, ḥukar hoarded
حكرة ḥukra hoarding (of goods);
monopoly
حاكورة ḥākūra small vegetable garden
احتكار iḥtikār pl. -āt cornering, buying
up; monopoly; preferential position;
supremacy, hegemony │ احتكار تجارة البن albunn
coffee-trade monopoly; احتكار السكر
iḥ. as-sukkar sugar monopoly
احتكاري iḥtikārī rapacious, grasping,
greedy
حكم ḥakama u (ḥukm) to pass judgment,
express an opinion ( على، في on s.th.), judge
على) s.th., ب by, from); to decide, give a
decision, pass a verdict, pass sentence ( على
on); to sentence ( على s.o., ب to a penalty;
said of the judge), impose, inflict ( ب a
penalty) on s.o. ( على ); to pronounce a
verdict or judgment, deliver judgment,
rule ( ل in s.o.’s favor); to adjudicate,
adjudge, award ( ب ل to s.o. s.th.); to take (
ب s.th.) as a standard or norm; to have
judicial power, have jurisdiction, have
authority ( على and ه over), govern, rule,
dominate, control ( على or ه s.o.); to order,
command ( ب s.th.); to bridle, check, curb (
ه، ھ s.th., s.o.) │ حكم عليه بالاعدام (ḥukima,
i‘dām) he was sentenced to death; حكم
بإدانته (bi-idānatihī) to convict s.o., find
s.o. guilty (jur.); حكم ببراءته (bi-barā’atihi)
to acquit s.o. (jur.) II to appoint ( ه s.o.) as
ruler; to choose ( ه s.o.) as arbitrator, make
ه) s.o.) the judge ( في over or in s.th., بين
between) III to prosecute ( ه s.o.); to
arraign, bring to trial, hale into court ( ه
s.o.); to interrogate, hear ( ه s.o.) IV to
make ( ھ s.th.) firm, strong, sturdy, solid;
to fortify ( ھ s.th.); to strengthen,
consolidate ( ھ s.th.); to do well, do
expertly, master ( ھ field, work), be
proficient ( ھ in) │ احكم امره (amrahu) to do
s.th. thoroughly, carefully, properly; احكم
قفل الباب (qafla l-bāb) to lock the door
firmly; احكم لغة (lugatan) to master a
language V to have one's own way ( في in),
proceed ( في with) at random, at will,
handle ( في s.th.) arbitrarily; to pass
arbitrary judgment ( في on); to make o.s.
the judge ( على of), pass judgment ( على on);
to decide ( ب on); to rule, reign, hold sway
في) over); to dominate, control ( في s.th.),
be in control, be in command ( في of) VI to
bring one another before the judge ( الى
الحاكم ); to appeal ( الى to) for a legal
decision; to be interrogated, be heard (in
court) VIII to have one’s own way ( في in),
proceed ( في with, in s.th.) at will, at
random, handle ( في s.th.) arbitrarily, judge
arbitrarily; to rule, reign, hold sway (، على
في over); to be in control, be in possession
على) of); to appeal ( الى to) for a legal
decision, seek a decision ( الى from), have
s.o. ( الى ) decide X to be strong, sturdy,
solid, firm; to become stronger, be
strengthened, be 195 consolidated; to take
root, be or become deep-rooted, deepseated,
ingrained, inveterate, marked,
pronounced (feeling, trait)
حكم ḥukm pl. احكام aḥkām judgment,
valuation, opinion; decision, (legal)
judgment, verdict, sentence;
condemnation, conviction; administration
of justice; jurisdiction, legal consequence
of the facts of a case (Isl. Law);
regulation, rule, provision, order,
ordinance, decree; judiciousness, wisdom,
judgeship, command, authority, control,
dominion, power; government, regime; pl.
احكام statutes, by-laws, regulations, rules,
provisions, stipulations, principles,
precepts; حكما ḥukman virtually; legally │
بحكم bi-ḥukmi by virtue of, on the strength
of, pursuant to, by force of; في حكم as good
as, all but, e.g., ھو في حكم (fī ḥukm l-‘adam)
it is as good as nothing, it is practically
nonexistent; اصبح في حكم المقرر aṣbaḥa fī
ḥukmi l-muqarrar it is all but decided, كان
في حكم الشيء also: to be subject to s.th.; نزل
على حكمه to give in, yield to s.o., حكم البراءة
ḥ. al-barā’a acquittal, حكم حضوري (ḥuḍūrī)
judgment delivered in the presence of the
litigant parties, after oral proceedings
(jur.), الحكم بالاعدام (i‘dām) death sentence;
حكم غيابي (giyābī) judgment by default
(jur.); الحكم الذاتي (dātī) self-determination,
autonomy (pol.); الحكم الجمھوري (jumhūrī)
the republican form of government, the
republican regime; الحكم المطلق (muṭlaq) the
absolute, i.e., authoritarian, regime, الحكم
النھائي (niyābī) the parliamentary regime,
parliamentarianism; لجنة الحكم lajna al-ḥ.
board of examiners, review board; الاحكام
العرفية (‘urfīya) martial law; احكام انتقالية
(intiqālīya) provisional regulations (jur.);
احكام ختامية (ḳitāmīya) final regulations
(jur.); احكام خاصة (ḳāṣṣa) special
regulations; لكل سن حكمه (sinn) every age
has its own set of rules, must be judged by
its own standards, للضرورة احكام (li-ḍ-
ḍarūra) necessity has its (own) rules,
(approx.: necessity knows no law)
حكمي ḥukmī legal
حكمدار (eg.; pronounced ḥikimdār)
commandant; chief of police
حكمدارية (eg.; pronounced ḥikimdārīya)
commandant’s office
حكم ḥakam pl. حكام ḥukkām arbitrator,
arbiter; umpire, referee
حكمة ḥikma pl. حكم ḥikam wisdom;
sagacity; philosophy, maxim, rationale,
underlying reason │ لحكمة (with foll.
genit.) on account of, because of
حكمي ḥikmī gnomic, aphoristic,
expressing maxims │ الشعر الحكمي (ši'r)
gnomic poetry
حكمة ḥakama pl. -āt bit (of a horse’s
bridle)
حكيم ḥakīm pl. حكماء ḥukamā’2 wise,
judicious; wise man, sage; philosopher;
physician, doctor
حكيمباشي ḥakīmbāšī senior physician,
chief surgeon
حكومة ḥukūma pl. -āt government
حكومي ḥukūmī of government,
governmental; official, state-owned, statecontrolled
of the state, state- (in
compounds)
احكم aḥkam2 wiser
محكمة maḥkama pl. محاكم maḥākim2
court, tribunal │ محكمة الاستئناف m. alisti’nāf
court of appeal, appellate court;
محكمة اھلية (ahlīya) indigenous court (Eg.;
jurisdiction limited to Egyptian nationals),
محكمة ابتدائية (ibtidā’īya) court of first
instance, محكمة ابتدائية كلية (kullīya) civil
court with jurisdiction in cases of major
importance, at the same time appellate
instance of محاكم جزئية (Eg.); محكمة 196
جزئية (juz’īya) in Eg., lowest court of both
محاكم اھلية (approx.: district courts) and of
محاكم شرعية canonical courts (with
jurisdiction in marital and family matters);
summary court; محكمة الجنايات m. al-jinīyāt
criminal court; محاكم الأحوال الشخصية
(šaḳṣīya) courts dealing with vital
statistics; محكمة مختلطة (muḳtaliṭa) mixed
court (with jurisdiction over residents of
foreign nationality); محكمة شرعية (šar’īya)
canonical court (administering justice on
the basis of the Sharia), court dealing with
family matters of Muslims; محكمة مركزية
(markazīya) county court, dealing with
minor offenses, esp. misdemeanors (Eg.);
محكمة القضاء الاداري m. al-qaḍā’ al-idārī
administrative court; محكمة النقض والابرام m.
an-naqḍ wa-l-ibrām Court of Cassation,
the highest court of appeal in Egypt;
محكمة التمييز Court of Cassation (Syr., Leb.
محكمة النقض والابرام = in Eg.); ساحة المحاكم
tribunals
تحكيم taḥkīm appointment of an
arbitrator; arbitration; arbitral decision,
award; pl. تحكيمات fortifications │ تحكيم
الحال starting from the present state of a
court’s findings (Isl. Law); ھيئة التحكيم
hai’at at-t. board of arbitration; jury,
committee of judges, committee of
umpires (in sports), committee of referees
(in mil. maneuvers); لجنة تحكيمية (lajna) do.
محاكمة muḥākama judicial proceeding;
trial, hearing (in court); legal prosecution
احكام iḥkām perfection; accuracy,
exactness, exactitude, precision; exact
performance, precise execution │
بالاحكام accurately, exactly, precisely; بالغ في
الاحكام of highest perfection
تحكم taḥakkum arbitrariness, arbitrary
powers or action; despotism; domination,
dominion, rule, sway, power; control ( في
of, over)
تحكمي taḥakkumī arbitrary; despotic
استحكام istiḥkām intensification,
increase, strengthening; consolidation,
stabilization; fortification; pl. استحكامات
fortifications
حاكم ḥākim ruling, governing; decisive;
--(pl. -ūn, حكام ḥukkām) ruIer, sovereign;
governor; judge │ حاكم (bi-amrihī)
autocratic; autocrat, dictator; حاكم عام
(‘āmm) governor general; حاكم المباراة almubārāh
umpire, referee (athlet.); حاكم
الصلح ḥ. aṣ-ṣulḥ (Syr.) justice of the peace;
حاكم الناحية ḥ. an-nāḥiya (Tun.) district
magistrate
حاكمية ḥākimīya domination, dominion,
rule, sovereignty; judgeship, judicature,
jurisdiction (ir.)
محكوم عليه maḥkūm ‘alaih sentenced ( ب
to) │ محكوم عليھم بالاعدام (i‘dām) those
sentenced to death; محكوم عليه بالفشل (fašal)
doomed to fail
محكم muḥakkam pl. -ūn arbitrator,
arbiter; umpire, referee ( في in, over)
محكم muḥkam strengthened, reinforced;
firm, solid, sturdy; tight, taut; perfect,
masterly, masterful; well-aimed (blow,
hit); accurate, precise, exact │ محكم التدبير
well-planned, well-contrived
مستحكم mustaḥkam reinforced, fortified;
strengthened, consolidated, strong;
inveterate, deep-seated, deep-rooted,
ingrained (custom, trait, etc.); pl. مستحكمات
defenses, fortifications
حكمدار، حكمدارية see حكم
حكى ḥakā i ( حكاية ḥikāya) to tell, relate (
ھ s.th.), report, give an account ( ھ of); to
speak, talk (syr., leb.); to imitate, copy ( ھ
s.th.); to resemble ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) III to
imitate, copy ( ھ s.th.), assimilate o.s. ( ھ
to); to be similar ( ھ to), be like s.th. ( ,(ھ
resemble ( ھ s.th.), be attuned, adjusted,
adapted ( ھ to), be in harmony ( ھ with)
حكاية 197 ḥikāya pl. -āt story, tale,
narrative, accountj (gram.) literal
quotation (of the words of others)
محاكاة muḥākāh imitation; similarity,
resemblance; harmony
حاك ḥākin narrator, storyteller;
phonograph; O loudspeaker, radio
محكي maḥkīy imitated, imitation (adj.)
حكيمباشي see حكم
حل 1 ḥalla u (ḥall) to untie ( ھ a knot),
unbind, unfasten, unravel, undo ( ھ s.th.);
to solve ( ھ a problem, a puzzle); to
decipher, decode ( ھ s.th.): to dissolve in
water ( ھ s.th.; chem.); to resolve ( ھ s.th.
into its components), analyze ( ھ s.th.); to
melt ( ھ s.th.); to decompose, disintegrate (
ھ s.th.); to disband, break up, dissolve ( ھ
an organization or party, parliament); to
open, unpack ( ھ a package, and the like);
to loosen, relax ( ھ s.th.); to release, set
free, let go ( ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to clear,
exonerate, exculpate ( من ه s.o. from),
absolve ( ه s.o., من from his sins; Ch,.);
pass. ḥulla to be free; to be relaxed; -- i u (
حلول ḥulūl) to dismount, alight, stop, halt;
to settle down, stay ( ب at a place, also في
and ھ؛ على with s.o., at s.o.’s house), come
(for a visit, على to); to take up residence ( ھ
in a place or country); to descend, come
down; to descend ( على upon s.o.; wrath);
to overcome, overwhelm ( على s.o.; sleep);
to befall ( ب and على s.o.; punishment,
suffering), occur, happen ( ب to s.o.); to
become incarnate ( في in s.o.; God); to set
in, arrive, begin (time, season); -- i to pass
into solution, dissolve: to fade (color); -- i
(ḥill) to be allowed, permitted,
permissible, lawful; to be due, payable
(debt) │ حل في منصب (manṣib) to take over
or hold an office; حل محله (maḥallahū) to
be in the right place; حل محل فلان، حل محل
الشيء (maḥalla) to take the place of s.o. or
s.th., replace, supersede s.o. or s.th.,
substitute for s.o. or s.th.; حلت في قلبه محلا
(qalbihī) she held a place in his heart; حل
محل التقدير لديه (maḥalla t-taqdīri ladaihi) to
enjoy s.o.’s. high esteem; حل من نفوس القراء
محل (min nufūsi l-qurrā’i maḥalla listiḥsān)
to appeal to the readers, meet
with the readers' approval II to dissolve,
resolve (into its component parts), break
up, decompose, analyze ( ھ s.th.): to make
a chemical analysis ( ھ of s.th.): to be
dissolvent, act as a solvent ( ھ on; med.):
to discharge, absolve, clear, exonerate,
exculpate ( ه s.o.); ( تحلة taḥilla) to expiate
an oath: to make permissible or lawful,
legitimate, sanction, justify, warrant ( ھ
s.th.); to declare permissible or lawful,
allow, permit ( ھ s.th.) IV to discharge,
release, absolve, disengage ( من ه s.o.
from); to declare ( ھ s.th.) lawful, legally
permissible, permit, allow ( ھ s.th.); to
cause to set in or occur, bring about,
produce, cause to take root, establish,
stabilize ( ھ s.th.): to cause ( ھ s.th.) to take
or occupy the place ( ھ of), shift, move,
translocate ( ھ ھ s.th., e.g., a tribe, to a
place); to settle ( بين ھ s.th. among) │ احله
محل (maḥallahū) to cause s.o. or s.th. to
take the place of s.o. or s.th. else, replace
s.o. or s.th. by, substitute s.o. or s.th. for,
take s.o. or s.th. as substitute for; أحل الشيء
محل العناية (maḥalla l-‘ināya) to pay
attention to s.th., make s.th. one’s concern
V to dissolve, melt, disintegrate; to
disengage o.s., disassociate o.s., extricate
o.s., free o.s. ( من from) VII to be untied
(knot); to be solved, be unraveled
(problem); to be dissolved, be broken up,
be disbanded (also, of an organization, a
party, etc.); to dissolve, melt; to become
.lock, limp, weak, loose, relaxed; to
disintegrate; to melt away VIII to settle
down ( ھ at a place); to occupy (mil., ھ a
territory); to assume, take over, occupy,
hold, have ( ھ a place, 198 a rank, an
office) │ احتل المكان الأول (al-makāna lawwala)
to occupy the foremost place;
احتل أعماله (a‘mālahū) to take over s.o.’s
functions X to regard ( ھ s.th.) as
permissible or lawful, think that one may
do s.th. ( ھ ); to regard as fair game, as easy
prey, seize unlawfully, misappropriate,
usurp ( ھ s.th.)
حل ḥall pl. حلول ḥulūl untying,
unfastening, undoing (of a knot); solution
(of a problem, of a puzzle, etc.);
unriddling, unraveling, explanation;
solution (chem.); dissolution,
disbandment, breaking up (of all
organization, etc.), abolition, cancellation,
annulment; release, freeing, liberation;
decontrol, release, unblocking (e.g., of a
blocked sum); discharge. clearing,
exoneration, exculpation; absolution
(Chr.) │ قابل للحل soluble, solvable; O الحل
الطيفي (ṭaifī) spectral analysis; اھل الحل والعقد
ahl al-ḥ. wa-l-‘aqd or اھل الحل والربط (rabṭ)
influential people, those in power; في حله
وترحاله (tarḥālihī) in all his doings, in
everything he did
حل ḥill: ( عن) كان في حل من (ḥillin) he was
free to …, he was at liberty to ...; he had
free disposal of ...; انت في حل من you’re free
to ..., you may readily ...
حلة ḥalla pl. حلل ḥilal low copper
vessel; cooking pot (eg.)
حلة ḥilla way station, stopping place,
stop, stopover; encampment; absolution
(Chr.); dispensation (Chr.)
حلة ḥulla pl. حلل ḥulal clothing, dress,
garb; vestments (ecclesiastic; Chr.);
(complete) suit of clothes; (Western) suit
│ حلة رسمية (rasmīya) uniform; حلة السھرة ḥ.
as-suhra formal dress
حلال ḥalāl that which is allowed,
permitted or permissible; allowed,
permitted, permissible, allowable,
admissible, lawful, legal, licit, legitimate;
lawful possession │ ابن حلال ibn ḥ.
legitimate son; respectable man, decent
fellow
حلول ḥulūl stopping, putting up, staying;
descending, coming on, befalling,
overtaking; incarnation; setting in, advent,
arrival (of a time, of a deadline),
beginning, dawn; substitution (for s.o.)
حليل ḥalīl pl. احلاء aḥillā’2 husband
حليلة ḥalīla pl. حلائل ḥalā’il2 iI' wife
احليل iḥlīl outer opening of the urethra;
urethra (anat.)
محل maḥall pl. -āt, محال maḥāll2 place,
location, spot, site, locale, locality, center;
(place of) residence; business; business
house, firm, commercial house; store,
shop; object, cause (e.g., of dispute,
admiration, etc.); gear (automobile) │ حل
محله and احله محله see حل I and IV; محله
(maḥallahū) in his (its) place; في محله in
his (its) place, in his (its) stead, instead of
him; كان في محله to be in the right place; to
be appropriate, expedient, advisable; to be
justified, warranted; في غير محله improper,
misplaced, unsuitable, ill-suited; out of
place; inappropriate, inexpedient,
inopportune; صادف محله ṣādafa maḥallahū
to be convenient, be most opportune; لا
محل له (maḥalla) there is no room for ... ; it
is out of place, quite déplacé; محل العمل m.
al-‘amal place of employment; محل الاقامة
m. al-iqāma (place of) residence, address;
محل نجاري (tijārī) business house,
commercial house; المحلات العمومية
(‘umūmīya, tijārīya) public utilities and
commercial houses; اسم المحل ism al-m.
firm; محل رھونات m. ruhūnāt pawnshop;
محلالات السياحة m. as-siyāḥfa travel
agencies; محل مرطبات m. muraṭṭibāt
refreshment parlor; محل اللھو m. al-lahw
and محل الملاھي m. al-malāhī (pl. (محال
amusement center; محل نزاع m. nizā‘ object
199 of controversy, controversial matter;
لا ارى محلا لعجب lā arā m. li-‘ajabin I don’t
see any reason for amazement, there is
nothing to be astonished about; محل m.
naẓar s.th. deserving attention, a striking,
remarkable thing
محلي maḥallī local; native, indigenous;
parochial; pl. محليات local news, local page
(of a newspaper)
محل maḥill due date; date of delivery
محلة maḥalla pl. -āt way station,
stopping place, stop, stopover,
encampment; camp; section, part, quarter
(of a city) │ المحلة الكبرى (kubrā) Mahalla el
Kubra (city in N Egypt)
تحليل taḥlīl dissolution, resolution,
breaking up, decomposition, specification,
detailing, analyzation; (pl. تحاليل taḥālīl2)
analysis (chem.); absolution (Chr.) │
بالتحليل in detail; معمل تحليل ma‘mal t.
laboratory for chemical analyses; تحليل
كھربائي (kahrabā’ī) electrolysis; التحليل
النفسي (النفساني ) (nafsī) psychoanalysis
تحليلي taḥlīlī analytic(al)
تحلل taḥallul dissolution, breakup;
separation, disengagement, disassociation
انحلال inḥilāl dissolution, breakup,
decomposition; disintegration; decay,
putrefaction; slackening, exhaustion,
prostration, weakness, impotence
احتلال iḥtilāl occupation (mil.) │ جيوش
الاحتلال occupation forces
احتلالي iḥtilālī occupying, occupation
(used attributively); advocate of foreign
occupation
محلول maḥlūl solved; dissolved,
resolved, broken up; loose; untied,
unfastened, unfettered, free, at large;
weakened, prostrate, exhausted, languid;
solution (liquid; chem.) │ محلول الشعر m.
aš-ša‘ar with loose, disheveled hair
محلل muḥallil analyzer
منحل munḥall solved; dissolved,
resolved, broken up; disbanded; languid,
prostrate, weak; permitted, allowed
جيوش محتلة juyūš muḥtalla occupation
forces
حيلولة 2 see حول
حلب 2 ḥālaba i u (ḥalb) to milk ( ھ an animal) │
حلب الدھر اشطره ḥalaba d-dahra ašṭurahū
he has seen good and bad days V to run,
drip, trickle, ooze, seep, leak; to water.
drool (mouth, with appetite) │ تتحلب له
الأفواه (afwāh) making the mouth water,
appetizing; تحلب اللعاب في فمي (al-lu‘ābu fī
famī) my mouth was watering VIII to milk
ھ) an animal) X do.; to squeeze juice ( ھ
from)
حلب ḥalb milking
حلب ḥalab milk
حلبة ḥalba pl. ḥalabāt race track; arena;
dance floor; race horses │ حلبة الرقص ḥ. arraqṣ
dance floor; انه ليس من تلك الحلبة he is
not made for that, he doesn’t belong there,
it is not in his line; فارس حلبة ب a master of,
excelling or outstanding in
حلبة ḥulba fenugreek (Trigonella
foenum-graecum; bot.); tonic, prepared of
yellowish grains, for women in childbed
(eg., syr.)
حليب ḥalīb milk │ لبن حليب laban ḥ.
cow’s milk (eg.)
حلوب ḥalūb lactiferous │ بقرة حلوب
(baqara) milk cow; الماشية الحلوب (māšiya)
dairy cattle
حلاب ḥallāb milker
حلابة ḥallāba milkmaid, dairymaid;
dairywoman; milk cow 200
محلب maḥlab mahaleb (Prunus mahaleb;
bot.)
حالب ḥālib ureter
مستحلب mustaḥlab emulsion│ مستحلب اللوز
m. al-lauz almond milk
حلب 2 ḥalab2 Aleppo
حلتيت ḥiltīt, ḥaltīt asafetida (Ferula assafoetida;
bot.)
حلج ḥalaja i u (ḥalj, حليج ḥalīj) to gin ( ھ
cotton)
حلج ḥalj ginning (of cotton)
حليج ḥalīj ginning (of cotton); ginned
(cotton)
حلاجة ḥilāja cotton ginner’s work or
trade
حلاج ḥallāj cotton ginner
محلج miḥlaj, محلجة miḥlaja pl. محالج
maḥālij2 cotton gin
محلج maḥlaj pl. محالج maḥālij2 cotton
ginnery
حلحل ḥalḥala to remove, drive away, shove
away II taḥalḥala to stir from one’s place;
to move, stir, budge
حلزون ḥalazūn snail; spiral
حلزونة ḥalazūna (n. un.) snail; spiral
حلزونى ḥalazūnī spiral, helical, volute,
winding
حلس ḥalisa a to remain, stay permanently ( ب at
a place), stick ( ب to a place)
حلس ḥi1s pl. احلاس aḥlās (with foll.
genit.) one addicted or given to s.th., one
adhering to s.th.│ احلاس اللھو a. al-lahw
people given to pleasure and amusement,
bons vivants, playboys
حلس ḥils pl. احلاس aḥlās, حلوس ḥulūs
saddle blanket
احلس aḥlas2, f. حلساء ḥulasā’2 bay,
chestnut (horse)
حلف ḥalafa i (ḥalf, ḥilf) to swear (􀍿 با by God)│
حلف يمينا (yamīnan) to take an oath II to
make ( ه s.o.) swear; to put to oath, swear
in ( ه s.o.); to adjure, entreat earnestly ( ه
s.o.) III to enter into a confederation, into
an alliance ( ه with s.o.), become an ally ( ه
of s.o.) VI to commit one another by oath
على) to do s.th.), join in alliance; to ally,
makc an alliance ( مع with) X to make ( ه
s.o.) swear, exact an oath ( ه from s.o.); to
adjure, entreat earllestly ( ه s.o.)
حلف ḥalf, ḥilf swearing, oath│ حلف اليمين
taking the oath
حلف ḥilf sworn alliance, confederacy,
league; federation; (pl. احلاف aḥlāf) ally│
حلف عسكرى (‘aakarī) military alliancc;
الحلف الاطلنطى (aṯlanṯī) the Atlantic Pact
حليف ḥaīf pl. حلفاء ḥulafā’2 confederate;
ally; allied │ الحلفاء the Allies (pol.)
حليفة ḥalīfa pl. -āt f. of حليف
حلوف ḥallūf pl. حلاليف ḥalālīf2 (magr.,
eg.) wild boar; pig, swine
حلفاء ḥulafā’ and حلفة ḥalfa (bot.) alfa,
esparto
تحليف taḥlīf swearing in │ لجنة التحليف
lajnat at-t. the jury (in court)
محالفة muḥālafa alliance
تحالف taḥāluf state of alliance; alliance,
treaty of alliance
محلف muḥallaf sworn, bound by oath;
(pl. -ūn) juror (in court)
متحالف mutaḥālif interallied, allied
حلق ḥalaqa i (ḥalq) to shave ( ھ the head, the
face); to shave off ( ھ the beard) II to
circle in the air, hover; to fly, soar (bird;
airplane; على and فوق ) over or above s.th.);
to round, make round, circular or ringshaped
( ھ Sotho); to 201 ring, surround,
encircle ( على s.o., s.th.); to clothe V to
form a circle, sit in a circle; to gather in a
circle ( على around s.o.)
حلق ḥalq shaving, shave; (pl. حلوق ḥulūq,
احلاق aḥlāq) throat, gullet, pharynx
حلقى ḥalqī guttural, pharyngeal
حلق ḥalaq rings, earrings
حلقة ḥalqa, ḥalaqa pl. حلق ḥalaq, حلقات
ḥalaqāt ring (also earring, etc.); link (of a
chain); circle (also of people); group of
students studying under a professor,
hence: lecture, course (e.g., at Al Azhar
University); part of a sequence or series;
ringlet; disk; decade; market│ حلقة النجاة ḥ.
an-najāh life buoy, life preserver; Jl- حلقة
الاتصال ḥ. al-ittiṣāl and حلقة الوصل ḥ. alwaṣl
connecting link ( بين between; fig.);
الحلقة المفقودة the missing link, the
intermediate form; فى الحلقة السادسة من عمره
(‘umrihī) in the sixth decade of his life, in
his fifties; حلقة الاسماك fish market; حلقة القطن
ḥ. al-quṯn cotton market
حلقي ḥalaqī annular, ring-shaped,
circular
حلاق ḥallāq pl. -ūn barber │ حلاق صحي
(ṣiḥḥī), حلاق الصحة ḥ. aṣ-ṣiḥḥa barbersurgeon
حليق ḥalīq shaved, shaven, shorn
حلاقة ḥallāqa shaving, shave; barber’s
trade │ صابون الحلاقة ṣābūn al-ḥ. shaving
soap; صالون الحلاقة barbershop; قاعة الحلاقة
qā‘at al-ḥ. do.; O ماكينة حلاقة and O آلة حلاقة
safety razor
محلق miḥlaq pl. محالق maḥāliq2 straight
razor
تحليق taḥlīq flying, flight (of all aircraft;
على and فوق over a country); take-off (of
an airplane)
من حالق min ḥāliq from above
حلقوم ḥulqūm pl. حلاقم ḥalāqim2 throat, gullet │
راحة الحلقوم rāḥat al-ḥ. a kind of sweet
made of cornstarch, sugar, mastic and
pistachios (eg.)
حلك ḥalika a (ḥalak) to be pitch-black, deepblack
XII احلولك iḥlaulaka do.
حلك ḥalak intense blackness
حلكة ḥulka intense blackness
حلك ḥalik pitch-black, deep-black;
gloomy, murky
حلوكة ḥulūka gloominess, darkness;
blackness
حالك ḥālik pitch-black, deep-black;
gloomy, murky
حلم ḥalama u to dream ( ب or عن of; فى ان of
being, becoming, doing, etc., in the
future); to muse, reflect, meditate ( ب on
s.th.); to attain puberty; -- ḥaluma u to be
gentle, mild-tempered VIII to attain
puberty
حلم ḥulm, pl. احلام aḥlām, dream; pl.
irreality, utopia
حلمي ḥulmī dream- (in compounds), of
or pertaining to dreams
حلم ḥulum sexual maturity, puberty │ بلغ
الحلم to attain puberty
حلم ḥilm, pl. حلوم ḥulūm, احلام aḥlām
gentleness, clemency, mildness;
forbearance, indulgence; patience; insight,
discernment, understanding, intelligence,
reason │ صغار الاحلام simpleminded
people, simple souls
حلم ḥalam (coll.; n. un. ة) tick; mite;
nipple, teat, mammilla (of the female
breast)
حلمي ḥalamī parasitic; mammillary,
nipple-shaped
حليم ḥalīm, pl. حلماء ḥulamā’ 2 mild, mildtempered,
gentle; patient 202
حلوم ḥālūm, حالوم ḥālūm a kind of
Egyptian cheese
حالم ḥālim pl. -ūn dreamer
محتلم muḥtalim sexually mature,
pubescent, marriageable
حلو) and حلى ) ḥaluwa u, ḥaliya a, حلا ḥalā u (
حلاوة ḥalāwa, حلوان ḥulwān) to be sweet; to
be pleasant, agreeable ( ل to s.o.) │ حلا له
الشيء he enjoyed the thing; حلا له ان it
pleased him that ..., he was delighted
that ...; حسبما يحلو له (ḥasabamā) at his
discretion, as he pleases; -- حلى ḥalā i to
adorn, grace; -- حلى ḥaliya a to be adorned
ب) with) II to sweeten (II s.th., e.g., a
beverage with sugar); to adorn, bedeck,
embellish, attire, furnish, provide ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th., ب with) V to adorn o.s., be
adorned, decked out, embellished, graced,
endowed, furnished, provided ( ب with) X
to find sweet or pleasant, like ( ھ s.th.), be
delighted ( ھ by)
حلا ḥalan sweetness, pleasantness
حلو ḥulw sweet; pleasant, nice,
charming, delightful, pretty │ حلو الحديث a
gifted raconteur, amusing, entertaining;
الغدة الحلوة (gudda) pancreas (anat.)
حلي ḥaly pl. حلي ḥulīy piece of jewelry,
trinket
حلية ḥilya pl. حلى ḥilan, ḥulan
decoration, embellishment, finery;
ornament
حلوى ḥalwa pl. حلاوى ḥalāwa candy,
confection, confectionery, sweetmeats
حلواء fi.alwa'2 candy, confection, con·
fectionery, sweetmeats
حلويات ḥalwayāt (and eg. ḥalawīyāt)
sweets (in general); sweet pastry; candies,
confectionery, sweetmeats
حلاوة ḥalāwa sweetness; candies,
confectionery, sweetmeats; grace,
gracefulness, charm, refinement,
wittiness, wit; present of money; ransom
│ حلاوة حمصية (ḥummuṣīya) a sweet made
of roasted chick-peas; حلاوة طحينية
(ṭahīnīya) a sweet made of sesame-seed
meal; حلاوة لوزية (lauzīya) a sweet made of
almonds
حلوان ḥulwān present of money,
gratuity, tip
حلواني ḥalwānī and حلوائي ḥalwā’ī
confectioner, candy dealer; pastry cook,
fancy baker
ما احيلى mā uḥailā oh, how sweet is ...,
ما احيلاه oh, how sweet he is!
تحلية taḥliya decoration, embellishment,
ornamentation
محلى muḥallan sweetened; decorated,
embellished, adorned, ornamented ( ب
with)
حم 1 ḥam pl. احماء aḥmā’ father-in-law; pl.
relatives of the wife by marriage, in-laws
of the wife
حماة ḥamāh pl. حموات ḥamawāt motherin-
law; see also حمى 1 and حمى 2
حم 2 ḥuma see حمو 2
حم 3 ḥamma u (ḥamm) to heat, make hot ( ھ
s.th.); pass. ḥumma to be feverish, have a
fever │ حم له ذلك (ḥumma) that was decreed
to him, that is his lot, his destiny II to
heat, make hot ( ھ s.th.); to bathe, wash ( ھ
or ه s.o. or s.th.) IV to heat, make hot ( ھ
s.th.) X to bathe, take a bath
حمة ḥamma hot spring
حمة ḥumma blackness, swarthiness,
dark coloration; fever
حمم ḥumam (n. un. ة) charcoal; anything
charred or carbonized; ashes, cinder; lava
حمى ḥumma f., pl. حميات ḥummayāt
fever, fever heat │ الحمى التيفودية and الحمى
التيفية (tīfīya) typhoid fever, typhus fever;
حمى الدق ḥ. d-diqq hectic fever; حمى الربع ḥ.
r-rib‘ quartan fever; الحمى الراجعة relapsing
fever; الحمى الصفراء or الحمى الصفراوية
(ṣafrā’, ṣafrāwīya) yellow fever; حمى الغب
ḥ. l-gibb tertian fever; الحمى الفحمية
(faḥmīya) anthrax; الحمى القرمزية
(qirmizīya) scarlet fever; حمى القش ḥ. lqašš
hayfever; الحمى القلاعية (qulā‘īya) footand-
mouth disease; الحمى المخية الشوكية
(mukkīya, šaukīya) cerebrospinal
meningitis; الحمى المتموجة (mutamawwija)
undulant fever, Malta fever, brucellosis;
الحمى النفاسية (nifāsīya) puerperal fever,
childbed fever; O الحمى النمشية (namašīya)
spotted fever
حمي ḥummī feverish, febrile, fever- (in
compounds)
حمام ḥamām (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt, حمائم
ḥamā’im2 dove, pigeon │ حمام الزاجل carrier
pigeon; ساق الحمام bugloss, oxtongue
(Anchusa officinalis; bot.)
حمام ḥimām (fate of) death
حمام ḥammām pl. -āt bath; swimming
pool; spa, watering place │ حمام شمس ḥ.
šams sunbath; حمامات بحرية (baḥrīya)
seaside resorts
حميم ḥamīm pl. احماء aḥimmā’2 close
friend; close, intimate; -- hot water
احم aḥamm2, f. حماء ḥammā’2, pl. حم
ḥumm black
محم miḥamm hot-water kettle, caldron,
boiler
استحمام istiḥmām bathing, bath
محموم maḥmūm feverish, having a
fever; frantic, hectic
حمأ 1 ḥama’a a to clean out, dredge ( ھ a well)
حمأ ḥama’, حمأة ḥam’a mud, mire, sludge
حمئ 2 ḥami’a to be or become angry, furious,
mad ( على at s.o.)
حمحم ḥamḥama ( حمحمة ḥamḥama) to neigh,
whinny (horse)
حمحمة ḥamḥama neigh(ing), whinnying,
whinnies
حمحم ḥimḥim oxtongue, bugloss
(Anchusa officinalis; bot.)
حمد ḥamida a (ḥamd) to praise, commend,
laud, extol ( على ه s.o. for, ھ s.th.) II to
praise highly ( ه s.o.)
حمد ḥamd commendation, praise,
laudation │􀍿 الحمد al-ḥamdu lillāh thank
God! praise be to God! praised be the
Lord!
حميد ḥamīd praiseworthy, laudable,
commendable; benign, harmless (disease)
حمود ḥamūd praiseworthy, laudable,
commendable, praised
احمد aḥmad2 more laudable, more
commendable
الشريعة الأحمدية aš-šarī‘a al-aḥmadīya
Mohammedan Law
محمدة maḥmada pl. محامد maḥāmid2
commendable act; pl. محامد praises,
encomiums
محمود maḥmūd praised; commendable,
laudable, praiseworthy
محمد muḥammad praised;
commendable, laudable
محمدي muḥammadī pertaining or
attributable to Mohammed
حمدل ḥamdala to pronounce the formula 􀍿 الحمد
"Praise be to God!”
حمدلة ḥamdala the formula 􀍿 الحمد (see
above)
حمر II to redden, color or dye red ( ھ s.th.); to
roast ( ھ s.th.); to fry ( ھ s.th.); to brown ( ھ
flour in preparing a roux) IX to turn red,
take on a reddish color, redden, blush 204
حمر ḥumar asphalt
حمري ḥumarī asphaltic, asphalt, tar,
tarry
حمرة ḥumra redness, red color(ation),
red; rouge (cosm.); brick dust, brick
rubble; erysipelas, St. Anthony's fire
(med.)
حمار ḥimār pl. حمير ḥamīr, حمر ḥumur,
احمرة aḥmira donkey, ass │ حمار الوحش ḥ.
al-waḥš and حمار وحشي (waḥšī) wild ass,
onager; سم الحمار samm al-ḥ. oleander
(Nerium oleander; bot.)
حمارة ḥimāra pl. حمائر ḥamā’ir2 she-ass,
female donkey
حمور ḥumūr red, red color(ation),
redness
حميرة ḥumaira redstart (zool.)
حمار ḥammār pl. ة donkey driver
احمر aḥmar2, f. حمراء ḥamrā’2, pl. حمر
ḥumr red, red-colored, ruddy; rosy, pink │
تحت الأحمر، دون الأحمر infrared; البحر الأحمر
the Red Sea; الصليب الأحمر the Red Cross;
الموت الأحمر (maut) violent death; الھوى
الأحمر (hawā) sexual intercourse; الأحمران
(“the two red ones”, i.e.) wine and meat;
الاسود والاحمر (“the black and the red”, i.e.)
all mankind; احمر الشفاه lipstick
حمراء ḥamrā’2 smut, rust (disease
affecting cereals); الحمراء Alhambra, the
Citadel of Granada
يحمور yaḥmūr red; deer, roe, roebuck;
wild ass; hemoglobin (physiol.)
احمرار iḥmirār reddening, blush(ing),
redness, red coloration; erythema (med.)
محمر muḥammar roasted │ بطاطس محمرة
(baṭāṭis) fried potatoes
حمز ḥamaza i (ḥamz) to bite, or burn, the
tongue (taste)
حمس ḥamisa a to work with zeal, be zealous,
eager, ardent, be or become enthusiastic,
get all worked up, get excited, be filled
with fanatic enthusiasm V = I; to be
overzealous or over-enthusiastic ( في in
s.th.); to advocate fervently ( ل s.th.),
throw o.s. wholeheartedly behind s.th. ( (ل
حمس ḥamis and احمس aḥmas2
unflinching, staunch, steadfast, ardent,
eager, zealous, stout, hearty; fiery,
enthusiastic, full of enthusiasm
حماس ḥamās, and حماسة ḥamāsa
enthusiasm, fire, ardor, fervor, zeal,
fanaticism
حماسي ḥamāsī enthusiastic, ardent,
fiery, zealous, fanatic; stirring, rousing,
thrilling, electrifying
تحمس taḥammus unflinching zeal,
enthusiasm ( ل for), fanaticism
متحمس mutaḥammis enthusiastic,
ardent, fiery, zealous, fanatic; an ardent
follower, a fanatic adherent, a fanatic
حمش ḥamaša u to excite, irritate, infuriate,
enrage ( ه s.o.)
حمشة ḥamša catgut (med.)
حمص 1 II to roast; to fry, broil (A s.th.)
حمص ḥimmiṣ, ḥimmmaṣ; (colloq.)
ḥummuṣ (coll.; n. un. ة) chick-pea
حمص 2 Mm,' Homs (the ancient Emesa, city in
oentral Syria)
حمض ḥamuḍa u ( حموضة ḥumūḍa) to be or
become sour II to make sour, sour,
acidify, acidulate ( ھ s.th.); to develop ( ھ a
photographic plate, a film; phot.); to cause
ھ) s.th.) to oxidize
حمض ḥamaḍa pl. احماض aḥmāḍ acid
(chem.) │ حمض بولي (baulī) uric acid
شجر حمضي šajar ḥamḍī citrus trees
حمضية ḥamḍīya pl. -āt citrus fruit 205
حموضة hummūḍa sourness, acidity │
مولد الحموضة muwallid al-ḥ. oxygen
(chem.)
حماض ḥammāḍ, حميض ḥummaiḍ sorrel
(bot.)
تحميض taḥmīḍ souring, acidification;
development (phot.)
احماض iḥmāḍ jocular language, joking
remark
حامض sour, acid; acidulous; (pl. حوامض
ḥawāmiḍ) acid (chem.) │ حامض الفحم ḥ. alfaḥm
carbonic acid: حامض كبريتي (kibrītī)
sulphuric acid
حمق ḥamiqa a and ḥamuqa u (ḥumq, حماقة
ḥamāqa) to be stupid, silly, foolish,
fatuous; to become angry or furious II and
IV to regard ( ه s.o.) as a fool, consider ( ه
s.o.) dumb, stupid, idiotic n pretend to be
stupid VII to become angry or furious X
to consider ( ه s.o.) dumb, stupid, idiotic
حمق ḥumq stupidity, silliness,
foolishness, folly
حماقة ḥamāqa stupidity, silliness,
foolishness, folly; anger, wrath حماق
ḥumāq, ḥamāq smallpox, variola (med.)
حمق aḥmaq2, f. حمقاء ḥamqā’2, pl. حمق
ḥum(u)q, حمقى ḥamqā, حماقى ḥamāqā
dumb, stupid, silly, foolish, fatuous; fool,
simpleton, imbecile
حمق ḥamqān dumb, stupid, silly,
foolish; angry, furious
حمل ḥamala i (ḥaml) to carry, bear ( ھ s.th.); to
lift, pick up ( ھ s.th. in order to carry it),
load up and take along ( ھ s.th.): to hold ( ھ
s.th., in one’s hand); to carry on or with
one. take or bring along ( ھ s.th.); to
transport, carry, convey ( ھ s.th.); to bring,
take ( الى or ل ھ s.th. to s.o.); to take upon
o.s. ( عن instead of or for s.o., ھ a burden),
carry, assume ( ھ the burden, عن of s.o.
else), relieve ( ھ عن s.o. from s.th.), take (
ھ a burden, a grievance, etc.) from s.o. (
عن ); to extend, show, evince, cherish,
ha.rbor ( ھ a feeling, ل toward s.o.); to
become or be pregnant ( من by s.o.): to
bear fruit (tree); to induce, cause, prompt,
get ( على ه s.o. to do s.th.), make s.o. ( ه) do
s.th. ( على ); to convert, bring around, win
over ( على رأيه ه s.o. to one’s opinion),
convince ( على رأيه ه s.o. of one’s opinion);
to attack ( على s.o.), also حمل حملة على
(ḥamlatan) to launch or make an attack
on; to know by beart ( ھ a book); to relate,
refer ( على ھ s.th. to). bring ( ھ s. th.) to
bear ( على upon s.th.), link, correlate, bring
into relation ( ھ s.th., على with); to trace,
trace back ( على ھ s.th. to); to ascribe,
attribute, impute ( على ھ s.th. to s.o.); to
make ( ھ a word) agree grammatically ( على
with another) │ حمل في نفسه to feel
annoyed, be in a melancholy mood, feel
blue; حمل على نفسه to pull o.s. together,
brace o.s.; حمله على محمل (maḥmali) to take
s.th. to mean …, interpret or construe s.th.
in the sense of …, as if it were ...; حمله على
غير محمل to misinterpret, misconstrue s.th.;
حمله محمل الجد (maḥmala l-jidd) to take s.th.
seriously, take s.th. at face value II to have
or make ( ه s.o.) carry or bear ( ھ s.th.),
load, burden, charge, task ( ھ، ه s.o. or s.th.
ھ with), impose ( ھ ه on s.o. s.th.) V to
hear, assume, take upon o.s. ( ھ s.th., e.g.,
النفقات an-nafaqāt the expenses, المسؤولية almas’ūlīya
the responsibility); to bear up (
ھ under), bear, stand, sustain, endure,
tolerate, stomach ( ھ s.th.); to undergo,
suffer ( ھ s.th.); to be able to stand ( ه s.o.)
or put up ( ه with s.o.); to set out, get on
one’s way; to depart VI to maltreat, treat
unjustly ( على s.o.), be prejudiced, be
biased, take sides ( على against s.o.); to
struggle to 206 one’s feet, rise with great
effort │ تحامل على نفسه (nafsihi) to brace
o.s.; to pull o.s. together, take heart, pluck
up courage VIII to carry, bring ( ھ s.th.);
to carry away, take away, haul off, lug off
ھ) s.th.); to suffer, undergo, bear, stand,
endure, sustain ( ھ s.th.); to allow, permit,
suffer, tolerate, brook, stomach ( ھ s.th.),
acquiesce ( ھ in), put up, bear ( ھ with
s.th.); to hold ( ھ s.th.), have capacity ( ھ
for); to imply that s.th. ( ھ ) is possible,
permissible, or conceivable; يحتمل
yaḥtamilu and (pass.) yuḥtamalu (it is)
bearable, tolerable; (it is) conceivable,
possible, probable, likely
حمل ḥaml carrying, bearing;
inducement, prompting, encouragement
(of s.o., على to); delivery; transport,
transportation, conveyance; portage,
carrying charges; -- (pl. احمال aḥmāl, حمال
ḥimāl) foetus; pregnancy │ عدم الحمل
‘adam al-ḥ. sterility (of a woman)
حمل ḥiml, ḥaml pl. احمال aḥmāl cargo,
load, burden │ حمل حي ḥaml ḥayy pay load,
commercial load, live load; حمل ميت
mayyit) dead load; dead weight (arch.);
حمل موازن (muwāzin) counterpoise,
counterweight
حمل ḥamal pl. حملان ḥumlān, احمال
aḥmāl lamb; (unconsecrated) Host
(Chr.Copt.); Aries, Ram (astron.)
حملة ḥamla pl. ḥamalāt attack ( على on);
offensive; campaign; military expedition;
expeditionary force │ حملة تأديبية (ta’dībīya)
punitive expedition; m حملة صحافيي
(ṣiḥāfīya) press campaign; حملة استكشافية
(istikšāfīya) reconnaissance raid (mil.);
حملة ميكانيكية motorized detachment (mil.);
حملة انتخابية (intikābīya) election campaign
حملي ḥamalī pl. -īya ambulant water
vendor
حميل ḥamīl foundling; guarantor,
warrantor
حميلة على ḥamīla ‘alā a burden to,
completely dependent upon
حمول ḥamūl long-suffering; gentle,
mild-tempered
حمال ḥamnāl pl. -ūn, ة porter, carrier
حمالة ḥimāla work and trade of a porter
or carrier
حمالة ḥammāla (carrier) beam, girder,
support, base, post, pier, pillar; suspenders
│ حمالة الصدر (ṣadr) brassiere
حمولة ḥumūla pl. -āt load capacity, load
limit, capacity; tonnage (of a vessel);
portage, freightage, transport charges; (pl.
حمائل ḥamā’il2) family (Ir.)
محمل maḥmal see حمل ḥamala; also أخذ
شيئا على محمل الجد (m. il-jidd) to take s.th.
seriously
محمل maḥmil (colloq. maḥmal) pl. محامل
maḥāmil2 camel-borne litter; mahmal, a
richly decorated litter sent by Islamic
rulers to Mecca as an emblem of their
independence, at the time of the hadj
تحميل taḥmīl burdening; encumbrance;
imposition; loading, shipping, shipment
تحميلة taḥmīla pl. تحامل taḥāmil2
suppository (med.)
تحمل taḥammul taking over, assumption
(of burdens); bearing, standing,
sufferance, endurance; durability;
strength,hardiness, sturdiness, solidity (of
a material)
تحامل taḥāmul prejudice, bias, partiality;
intolerance
احتمال iḥtimāl bearing, standing,
suffering, sufferance, toleration;
probability, likelihood, potentiality │ صعب
الاحتمال (ṣa‘b) hard to bear, oppressive
حامل ḥāmil pl. حملة ḥamala porter,
carrier; bearer (of a note, of a check, etc.;
of an order or decoration); holder (of an
identification paper, of a diploma, of a
207 certificate); holding device, holder,
clamp, fastener, hold, support (tech.);
fighter ( على against), (pl. حوامل ḥawāmil2)
pregnant │ حامل البريد courier, حملة الأسھم ḥ.
al-ashum shareholders; حملة الأقلام the
publicists, the writers; حامل كلام لله ḥ.
kalām allāh one who knows the Koran by
heart; تيار حامل (tayyār) carrier current
(el.), موجات حاملة (maujāt) carrier waves
(el.)
حاملة ḥāmila pl. -āt device for carrying,
carrier │ حاملة خريطة map case; حاملة طائرات
ḥ. ṭā’irāt aircraft carrier
محمول maḥmūl carried, borne, bearable,
tolerable; load weight, service weight,
cargo; tonnage (of a vessel); predicate,
attribute (logic), محمول عليه subject (logic)
│ مشاة محمولة (mušāh) motorized infantry
(mil.); جنود محمولون جوا airborne troops
(mil.)
محمل muḥammal loaded, laden, heavily
charged, burdened ( ب with), encumbered (
ب by)
محتمل muḥtamal bearable, tolerable;
probable, likely
حملق ḥamlaqa ( حملقة ḥamlaqa) to stare, gaze (
في or ب at)
حملايا ḥimalāyā Himalaya
حمو 1 ḥamū (construct state of حم ḥam) and حماة
ḥamāh see حم 1
حمو 2 ) and حمى) حمي ḥamiya a to be or become
hot; to glow (metal); to flare up; to fly into a
rage, become furious ( على at) │ حمى
الوطيس fierce fighting broke out II to make hot,
heat ( ھ s.th.), to heat to glowing ( ھ metal); to
fire up ( ھ a stove); to kindle, inflame, stir up,
excite ( ھ s.th.); to bathe (= حم 3 II) IV to make
hot, heat ( ھ s.th.)
حمو ḥamw heat │ حمو النيل ḥ. an-nīl
prickly heat, heat rash, lichen tropicus
(eg.)
حمو ḥumūw heat
حمة ḥuma pl. -āt, حمى ḥuman sting,
stinger (of insects); prick, spine (of plants)
حمي ḥamīy hot, glowing; heated, exited
حمى ḥummā see حم 3
حمية ḥamīya zeal, ardor, fervor;
enthusiasm, ardent zeal, fanaticism;
violence, vehemence; passion, rage, fury;
heat of excitement; temper, temperament
│ الحمية القومية (qaumīya) chauvinism
حميا ḥumayyā heat; excitement,
agitation; enthusiasm; fire, passion,
impetuosity, vehemence; fury, rage; wine
حماوة ḥamāwa heat
محمى maḥman fire chamber, furnace (of
a stove, oven, etc.)
حام ḥāmin hot; heated, violent, fierce
(e.g., a battle); glowing, passionate, fiery;
burning
حمى 1 ḥamā i (ḥamy, حماية ḥimāya) to defend,
guard ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th., من against), protect,
shelter, shield ( من ھ، ه s.o., s.th. from); to
deny ( المريض the patient) harmful food ( ;ھ
= to put him on diet); to forbid ( ان ه s.o. to
do s.th.) III to defend ( من s.o. or s.th., also,
of a lawyer in court); to shield, protect,
support ( عن s.o. or s.th.), take up the cause
of ( عن ), stand up for ( عن ) VI to keep away
ھ) from), shun, avoid ( ھ s.th.) VIII to
protect o.s. ( ه، ھ from s.th., from s.o.),
defend o.s., cover o.s. ( ب with s.th.), seek
protection, seek shelter or refuge ( ب with
s.o., also عند؛ من from)
حمى ḥiman protection; defense;
sanctuary
حمية ḥimya that which is defended; diet
208
حماية ḥimāya pl. -āt protection,
patronage, sponsorship, auspices;
protectorate (pol.)
محاماة muḥāmāh defense (jur.); legal
profession, practicing of law │ ھيأة المحاماة
ḥai’at al-m. the bar
احتماء iḥtimā’ seeking cover, seeking
protection; cover, shelter, protection
حام ḥāmin pl. حماة ḥumāh protector,
defender, guardian; patron │ الدولة الحامية
(daula) protecting power (of a
protectorate)
حامية ḥāmiya pl. -āt patroness,
protectress; garrison (mil.)
محمي maḥmīy protected ( ب by); being
under a protectorate, having the status of a
protectorate │ منطقة محمية (minṭaqa)
protectorate (country)
محمية maḥmīya pl. -āt protectorate
(country; pol.)
محام muḥāmin pl. محاميون muḥāmūn
defense counsel, counselor-at-law, lawyer,
barrister, attorney (at law), advocate
محامية muḥāmiya woman lawyer
محتم muḥtamin one who seeks
protection; protégé; being under a
protectorate, having the status of a
protectorate
حماة، حماه 2 ḥamāh Hama (city in W Syria)
حن ḥanna i ( حنين ḥanīn) to long, yearn, hanker
الى) for), crave ( الى s.th.); -- ( حنة ḥanna,
حنان ḥanān) to feel tenderness, affection,
sympathy ( على for s.o.); to sympathize,
commiserate ( على with), feel compassion (
على for); to pity ( على s.o.), have mercy ( على
on) II to move, touch, fill with tenderness,
soften, fill with compassion ( قلبه qalbahū
s.o.’s heart); to blossom, flower, be in
bloom (tree) V to feel sympathy, feel pity,
feel compassion ( على for s.o.),
commiserate ( على with s.o.); to be tender,
affectionate
حنة ḥanna sympathy; commiseration,
compassion, pity; favorable aspect,
advantage
حنان ḥanān sympathy, love, affection,
tenderness; commiseration, compassion,
pity; حنانيك ḥanānaika have pity! have
mercy!
حنانة ḥanāna compassion, pity,
commiseration
حنين ḥanīn longing, yearning,
hankering, nostalgia, craving, desire
حنون ḥanūn affectionate, loving, softhearted,
tenderhearted, compassionate,
merciful; tender, soft, gentle, kind,
moving, touching (voice)
حنان ḥannān affectionate, loving,
tender; compassionate, sympathetic
تحنان tiḥnān attachment, devotion,
loyalty
تحنن taḥannun tenderness, affection,
sympathy
حنأ II to dye red ( ھ s.th., with henna)
حناء ḥinnā’ henna (a reddish-orange
cosmetic gained from leaves and stalks of
the henna plant) │ ابو الحناء abū l-ḥ. robin
(redbreast); تمر الحناء (colloq. tamr el-
ḥinna) henna plant (Lawsonia inermis;
bot.)
حانبة look up alphabetically
حنبلي ḥanbalī Hanbalitic, of or pertaining to the
madhab of Aḥmad ibn ḥanbal; puritanical,
strict in religious matters; (pl. حنابلة
ḥanābila) Hanbalite
حانوت، حانوتي see حنو
حنث ḥanita a (ḥint) with في يمينه or بيمينه : to
break one’s oath V to practice piety,
perform works of devotion; to seek
religious purification; to scorn sin, not
yield to sin
حنث ḥint pl. احناث aḥnāt perjury; sin 209
حنجرة ḥanjara pl. حناجر ḥanājir2 larynx, throat
حنجور ḥunjūr pl. حناجير ḥanājīr 2 larynx,
throat
حنجل ḥanjala to prance (horse); to caper,
gambol II taḥanjala to dance, caper,
gambol, frisk
حندس ḥindis pl. حنادس ḥanādis2 dark night
حندقوق ḥandaqūq (bot.) melilot, (yellow) sweet
clover (Melilotus)
حنش ḥanaš pl. احناش aḥnāš snake
حنط II to embalm ( ه a corpse); to stuff ( ھ a
carcass)
حنطة ḥinṭa wheat
حناطة ḥināṭa embalming
تحنط taḥannuṭ mummification
محنط muḥannaṭ mummified
عربة الحنطور ‘arabat al-ḥanṭūr, victoria, light
carriage. designed for two passengers
حنظل ḥanẓal (coll.; n. un. ة) colocynth
(Citrullue colocynthis; bot.)
حنف ḥanafa i to turn or bend sideways
حنيف ḥanīf pl. حنفاء ḥunafā’2 true
believer, orthodox; one who scorns the
false creeds surrounding him and
professes the true religion; true (religion)
│ الدين الحنيف (din) the True (i.e., Islamic)
Religion, also الحنيفة السمحاء (samḥā’)
حنفي ḥanafī pagan, heathen, idolater
(Chr.); Hanafitic (see حنيفة ); (pl. -ūn)
Hanafi
حنفية ḥanafīya paganism, heathendom
(Chr.); Hanafitic madhab (an orthodox
school of theology founded by Abu
Hanifah); -- (pl. -āt) faucet, tap; hydrant
الحنيفية al-ḥanīfīya the True (i.e.,
Islamic) Religion
احنف aḥnaf2 afflicted with a distortion
of the foot
حنق ḥaniqa a (ḥanaq) to be furious, mad,
angry; to be annoyed, exasperated,
peeved, irritated ( على or من at, by), be
resentful ( على or من of) IV to infuriate,
enrage, embitter, exasperate, irritate ( ه
s.o.)
حنق ḥanaq fury, rage, ire, wrath, anger,
exasperation, resentment, rancor
حنق ḥaniq furious, mad, angry;
resentful, bitter, embittered, annoyed,
exasperated, peeved
حانق ḥāniq furious, mad, angry;
resentful, bitter, embittered, annoyed,
exasperated, peeved │ حانق على الحياة
(ḥayāh) weary of life, dispirited, dejected;
حانق على النساء (nisā’) misogynist
محنق muḥannaq infuriated, enraged;
embittered, bitter, angry, exasperated,
resentful
حنك ḥanaka i u, II and IV to sophisticate, make
experienced or worldly-wise through
severe trials (said of fate, time, age)
حنك ḥanak pl. احناك aḥnāk palate
حنكي ḥanakī palatal
حنك ḥunk, ḥink and حنكة ḥunka worldly
experience, worldly wisdom gained
through experience, sophistication
محنك muḥannak experienced, worldly wise,
sophisticated │ محنك مبنك (mubannak)
shrewd, smart, sharp
حنو) and حنى) حنا ḥanā u and حنى ḥanā i to
bend, curve, twist, turn; to lean, incline (
على or الى toward s.o.); to feel for s.o. (
على ), sympathize ( على with s.o.),
commiserate, pity ( على s.o.), feel
compassion, feel pity ( على for s.o.); to
bend, bow, flex, curve, crook ( ھ s.th.) IV
to bend, bow, tilt, incline ( ھ s.th.; e.g.,
رأسه ra’sahū one’s head); to sympathize (
على ٢١٠ with s.o.), feel compassion, feel
pity ( على for s.o.), commiserate, pity ( على
s.o.) VII to bend, curve, twist, turn; to be
winding, be tortuous, wind, meander (e.g.,
a road); to turn, deviate, digress ( عن
from); to bow ( ل to s.o.); to lean, incline (
على or فوق ; over s.th., الى toward s.o.,
toward s.th.); to devote o.s. eagerly ( على to
s.th.); to contain, harbor ( على s.th.) │ ان
ضلوعي لا تنحني على ضغن (ḍulū‘ī, ḍign) I
harbor no grudge, I feel no resentment
حنو ḥanw bending, deflection, flexing,
flexure, curving, curvature, twisting,
turning
حنو ḥinw pl. احناء aḥnā’ bend, bow, turn,
twist, curved line, curve, contour; pl. ribs
│ بين احنائھا in her bosom
حنو ḥunuw sympathy, compassion,
tenderness, affection
حني ḥanīy bending, deflection, flexing,
flexure, curving, ourvature, twisting,
turning
حنية ḥanya bend, turn, curve
حنية ḥanīya pl. حنايا ḥanāyā arc; camber,
curvature │ في حنايا صدره in his bosom; في
حنايا نفسه in his heart, deep inside him
حناية ḥināya curving, curvature,
twisting, turning, bending
حانوت see below
محنى maḥnan pl. محان maḥānin
curvature, bend, flexure, bow, turn, curve
انحناء inḥinā’ bend, deflection,
curvature; curve; arc; inclination, tilt;
how, curtsy
انحناءة inḥinā’a (n. vic.) bow, curtsy
الحواني al-ḥawānī the longest ribs; (fig.)
breast, bosom │ بملء حوانيھم bi-mil’i ḥ.
(they shouted) at the top of their lungs,
with all their might
محنى maḥnīy bowed, inclined (head);
bent, curved, crooked
منحن munḥanin bent, curved, crooked,
twisted; inclined, bowed
منحنى munḥanan pl. منحنيات munḥanayāt
bend, flexure, deflection, curvature; turn,
twist, break, angle; curve (of a road, end
math.); slope
حانوت ḥānūt pl. حوانيت ḥawānīt2 store, shop;
wineshop, tavern
حانوتي ḥānūtī pl. -īya (eg.) corpse
washer; undertaker, mortician,
gravedigger
حواء ḥawwā’2 Eve
حوب V to abstain from sin; to lead ش pious
life; to refrain, abstain ( من from s.th.)
حوبة ḥauba sin, offense, misdeed,
outrage
حوباء ḥaubā’2 soul
حوت pl. حيتان ḥītān, احوات aḥwāt fish; whale;
Pisces, Fishes (astron.) │ حوت سليمان ḥ.
sulaimān salmon
حوج IV aḥwaja to have need, stand in need, be
in went ( الى of s.th.), need, require, went (
الى s.th.); to put ( ه s.o.) in need of ( ,(الى
make necessary ( الى ه for s.o. s.th.), require
الى ه) of s.o. s.th.), compel, oblige ( الى ه s.o.
to); to impoverish, reduce to poverty ( ه
s.o.) │ ما احوجه الى (aḥwajahū) how much
he .tends in need of ...! how urgently he
needs ...! VIII to have need, stand in need,
be in went ( الى of; also ل), need, want,
require ( الى s.th. s.o.)
حوج ḥauj need, want, lack, deficiency,
destitution
حاجة ḥāja pl. -āt need ( الى or ب of);
necessity, requirement, prerequisite;
natural, bodily need; pressing need,
neediness, poverty, indigence, destitution;
object of need or desire; desire, wish,
request; necessary article, requisite;
matter, concern, business, job, work;
thing, object; -- pl. حوائج ḥawā’ij2 needs
211 necessities, necessaries; everyday
objects, effects, belongings, possessions,
stuff; clothes, clothing │ (كان في حاجة الى (ل
to stand in need, be in want of (s.th.),
need, require (s.th.); لا حاجة الى ( ل ) (ḥājata)
… is not necessary, not required, there is
no need of ...; لا حاجة لي به I don’t need it;
عند الحاجة if (or when) necessary, if need
be, in case of need; في غير حاجة (gairi
ḥājatin) unnecessarily; ما به الحاجة the
essentials; محل الحاجة maḥall al-ḥ. the
essential passage, the gist, the substance,
the crux, the interesting part (of an
exposition); سد حاجته sadda ḥājatahū to
meet s.o.’s needs, provide for s.o.’s needs;
قضى حاجته qaḍā ḥājatahū to fulfill s.o.’s
wish; قضى الحاجة to relieve nature
حاجيات ḥājīyyāt everyday commodities,
utensils, utilities, necessaries, necessities
احوج in greater need ( الى of s.th.); more
necessary
احتياج iḥtiyāj want, need, requirement,
(pre)requisite, necessity; pl. -āt needs,
necessities, necessaries
محاويج maḥāwīj2 (pl. of محوج muḥwij)
needy, poor, destitute people
محتاج muḥtāj in need, in want ( الى of
s.th.), requiring ( الى s.th.); poor, destitute,
indigent
حوجلة ḥaujala pl. حواجل ḥawājil2 phial (chem.)
حاد (حود ) ḥāda u (ḥaud) to turn aside, turn
away ( عن from), turn ( عن off) II to turn
off, take a turning
حودة (ḥauda) turn, turning
حاذ (حوذ ) ḥāda u (ḥaud) to urge on, spur on ( ھ
animals) IV do. X استحوذ istaḥwada to
overwhelm, overcome, overpower ( على
s.o.; esp. emotions), get the better of (
على ), gain mastery ( على over); to seize ( على
on), take possession ( على of), usurp ( على
s.th.)
حوذي ḥūdī coachman, cabman, driver
حوذية ḥūdīya coachman’s work or trade
حار (حور ) ḥāra u to return ( الى to); to recede,
decrease, diminish, be reduced ( الى to) II
to change, alter, amend, transform,
reorganize, remodel, modify ( ھ or من
s.th.); to roll out ( ھ dough); to make
white, whiten ( ھ s.th.); to bleach ( ھ a
fabric) III to talk, convene, have a
conversation ( ه with s.o.); to discuss,
debate, argue IV (with جوابا jawāban) to
answer, reply (with negations only) V to
be altered, changed, amended,
transformed, reorganized, remodeled,
modified VI to carry on & discussion
حور ḥawar white poplar (also
pronounced ḥaur); bark-tanned sheepskin,
basil; marked contrast between the white
of the cornea and the black of the iris
حارة hāra pl. -āt quarter, part, section
(of & city); (Tun.) ghetto; lane, alley, side
street (with occasional pl. حواري ḥawārī │
حارة السد ḥ. as-sadd blind alley, dead-end
street
احوار aḥwār2, f. حوراء ḥaurā’2, pl. حور
ḥūr having eyes with a marked contrast of
white and black, (also, said of the eye:)
intensely white and deep-black
حوارة ḥawāra (ḥawarāt) cretaceous
rook; chalk
حواري ḥawārī pl. -ūn disciple, apostle
(of Jesus Christ); disciple, follower
حوارى ḥawārā cretaceous rock; chalk
حورية ḥūrīya pl. -āt, حور ḥūr houri,
virgin of paradise; nymph; (pl. -āt) young
locust │ حورية الماء water nymph, nixie
حوران ḥaurān2 the Hauran, a
mountainous plateau in SW Syria and N
Jordan 212
محور miḥwar pl. محاور maḥāwir2 rolling
pin; pivot, core, heart, center; axis; axle,
axletree
محار maḥār (coll.; n. un. ة) oysters;
shellfish, mussels; mother-of-pearl, nacre
محارة maḥāra (n. un.) oyster; oyster
shell, mussel; trowel
تحوير taḥwīr alteration, change,
transformation, reorganization, reshuffle,
remodeling, modification
حوار ḥiwār talk, conversation, dialogue;
argument, dispute; text (of a play); script,
scenario (of a motion picture)
محاورة muḥāwara talk, conversation,
dialogue; argument, dispute
تحاور taḥāwur discussion
حوز) and حيز) حاز ḥāza u (ḥauz, حيازة ḥiyāza) to
possess, own, have ( ھ s.th.); to gain, win,
get, receive, obtain, achieve, attain ( ھ
s.th., e.g., success, victory, etc.); to gain
pos....ion. gain control ( ھ of s.th.), seize,
monopolize ( ھ s.th.); -- ḥāza i ( حيز ḥaiz)
to drive on, urge on ( ھ camels) V
taḥawwaza and taḥayyaza to writhe, twist,
coil; -- taḥayyaza to stay away, keep
away, seclude o.s., isolate o.s. ( عن from);
to be disposed, incline, tend, lean ( الى
toward); to join ( الى s.o. or s.th.); to side (
ل، الى with), take sides ( ل، الى in favor of)
VII to isolate o.s., seclude o.s. separate,
segregate,· disengage o.s., dissociate o.s.,
stay away, keep away, retire, withdraw (
عن or من from); to join ( الى S.o. or s.th.); to
unite ( الى with); to side ( الى or ل with),
take sides ( الى or J in favor of) VIII to
possess, own, have ( ھ s.th.); to take
possession ( ھ of s.th.); to keep, prevent,
hinder ( عن ه s.o. from)
حوز ḥauz possession, holding, tenure;
obtainment, attainment, acquisition;
taking possession, occupation, occupancy;
(jur.) tenancy; -- (pl. احواز aḥwāz)
enclosed area, enclosure; precinct(s),
boundary, city limits
حوزي ḥauzī possessor, tenurial
حوزة ḥauza possession, holding, tenure;
property; area, territory │ في حوزه or في
حوزة يده fī ḥ. yadihī in his possession; الدفاع
عن حوزة مصر the defense of Egyptian
territory
حيز ḥayyiz, ḥaiz pl. احياز aḥyāz scope,
range, reach, extent, compass, confines,
field, domain, realm; sphere │ لا يدخل في
حيز المعقول (yadkul) it is not within the
bounds of reason; برز الى حيز المعقول (to
advance to the realm of fact, i.e.) to
become a reality; في حيز الامكان fī ḥ. ilimkān
within the realm of possibility,
quite possible
حيازة ḥiyāza possession, holding,
tenure; taking possession, occupation,
occupancy; acquisition of title, acquisition
of the right of possession; obtainment,
attainment, acquisition
تحيز taḥayyuz partiality; prejudice, bias
انحياز inḥiyāz isolation, seclusion,
retirement; partiality; prejudice, bias
حائز ḥā’iz possessor, holder, tenant
متحيز mutaḥayyiz partial, prejudiced,
biased
منحاز munḥāz secluded, retired,
withdrawn, removed ( عن from); an
outsider, a stranger ( عن to)
حوس VIII (eg.) to be in a quandary, waver,
hesitate
حاش ( حوش 1 ) ḥāša u (ḥauš) to round up, drive
into a trap ( ھ game); to stop, check,
prevent, hinder ( ھ s.th.), stand in the way
ھ) of); to hold back, stem, stave off ( ھ
s.th.) II to gather, collect, amass,
accumulate, pile up, hoard ( ھ s.th.); to
save, put by ( ھ money); to find ( ھ s.th.)
213
حوش ḥauš p احواش . 1 aḥwāš, حيشان ḥīšān
enclosure, enclosed area; courtyard
حوش ḥawaš mob, rabble, riffraff
حوشي ḥūšī wild; unusual, odd, queer,
strange
اسبوع الحاش usbū‘ al-ḥāš Passion Week
(Chr.)
حاشا، حاشى 2 see 􀍿 حشو، حاش ḥāša lillāh = حاشى
􀍿
حوص ḥawaṣ squinting of the eye (caused by
constant exposure to glaring light)
احوص aḥwaṣ2 f. حوصاء ḥauṣā’2, pl.
حوص ḥūṣ having narrow, squinting eyes
حياصة ḥiyāṣa girth
حوصل ḥauṣa, حوصلة ḥauṣala craw (of a bird);
bladder; pelican │ الحوصلة المرارية
(marārīya) gall bladder, bile (anat.)
حويصل ḥuwaisil blister, bleb, vesicle;
water blister
حويصلة ḥuwaisila pl. -āt blister, bleb,
vesicle
حوض ḥauḍ pl. احواض aḥwāḍ, حياض ḥiyāḍ
basin; water basin; trough, tank, cistern,
reservoir, container; basin of a river or
sea; pool; (in the Egyptian irrigation
system) a patch of land surrounded by
dikes, flooded by high water of the Nile;
pond; pelvis (anat.); (garden) bed; dock;
pl. حياض (ḥiyāḍ) ground, area, domain (to
be protected), sanctum │ حوض جاف (jāff)
dry dock; حوض حمام ḥammām bathtub;
حوض عوام (‘awwām) floating dock; ذاد عن
حياضه to assume the defense of s.o., make
o.s. the champion of s.o.; to defend o.s.;
ذب حن حياض الدين (dabba) to defend the
faith; احواض الفم والحديد coal and iron
deposits
O حويضة ḥuwaiḍa renal pelvis (anat.)
حاط (حوط ) ḥāṭa u (ḥauṭ, حيطة ḥaiṭa, حياطة
ḥiyāṭa) to guard, protect ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.),
watch ( ھ، ه over s.o., over s.th.), have the
custody ( ھ، ه of); to attend ( ھ to), take
care ( ھ of), look after s.th. ( ھ ); to
surround, encircle, enclose, encompass ( ب
s.o., s.th.) II to build a wall ( ھ around
s.th.), wall in ( ھ s.th.); to encircle,
surround ( ھ s.th.), close in from all sides (
ھ on s.th.) III to try to outwit, dupe, or
outsmart ( ه s.o.); to mislead, lead astray,
seduce ( ه s.o.) IV to surround ( ب s.o., s.th.,
also ھ، ه s.o., s.th., y with); to encompass,
enclose, embrace, comprise, contain ( ب
s.th., also ھ ); to ring, encircle ( ب s.o.,
s.th., also ھ، ه s.o., s.th., ب with s.th.),
close in from all sides ( ب on); to know
thoroughly, comprehend, grasp
completely, understand fully ( ب s.th.), be
familiar, be thoroughly acquainted ( ب
with) │ احاط به علما (’ilman) to know s.th.
thoroughly, have comprehensive
knowledge of s.th.; to take cognizance,
take note of s.th.; اجاطه علما ب he informed
him of ..., he let him know about ... ; he
brought ... to his notice V to guard, protect
(.., 6 s.o., s.th.); to take precautions ( ھ
with regard to), attend ( ھ to); to be
careful, be cautious, be on one’s guard
VIII to be careful, be cautious, watch out,
be on one’s guard; to take precautions,
make provision ( ل for, so as to ensure ... );
to surround ( ب s.o., s.th.); to guard,
protect, preserve ( على ب s.th. from), take
care ( ب of), attend ( ب to), look after ( ,(ب
see to it ( بأن that)
حيطة ḥīṯa, ḥaṭa, حوطة ḥauṭa
cautiousness, caution, provident care,
prudence, circumspection │ أخذ
حيطته (ḥīṭatahu) to be on one’s guard, take
precautions; بلا حيطة thoughtlessly,
unthinkingly, inadvertently
حياطة ḥiyāṭa guarding, custody,
protection, care 214
تحويط taḥwīṭ encirclement
احاطة iḥāṭa encirclement,
encompassment; comprehension, grasp,
understanding, knowledge, cognizance ( ب
of s.th.), acquaintance, familiarity ( ب
with); information, communication
تحوط taḥawwuṭ provision, care,
attention, precaution, prudence; pl. -āt
precautionary measures, precautions
احتياط iḥtiyāṭ caution, cautiousness,
prudence, circumspection, carefulness;
provision, care, attention, precaution,
prevention; pl. -āt precautionary
measures, precautions │ على سبيل المثال as a
precaution, out of precaution, to be on the
safe side
احتياطي ihṭiyāṭī precautionary;
prophylactic; preventive; replacement;
spare- (in compounds); reserve- (in
compounds); stand-by; reserve funds,
capital reserves (fin.); reserve (mil.) │ حبس
احتياطي (ḥabs) detention pending
investigation; تدابير احتياطية precautionary
measures, precautions قوات احتياطية (quwāt)
reserves (mil.); مال احتياطي capital reserve,
reserve fund; احتياطى الزيت الخام (crude-)oil
reserves
حائط pl. حيطان ḥīṭān, حياط ḥiyāṭ, حوائط
ḥawā’iṭ2 wall │ حائط المبكى ḥ. al-mabkā
Wailing Wall (in Jerusalem); ضرب) به
عرض الحائط or) القى alqā (ḍaraba) bihī
‘urḍa l-ḥā’iṭ to make little of s.th., scorn,
disdain, despise s.th.; to reject s.th.,
discard s.th., throw s.th. overboard; to
ruin, thwart, foil s.th.
حويط ḥāwiṭ (eg.) clever, smart, shrewd
محيط muḥīṭ surrounding ( ب s.th.);
comprehensive; familiar, acquainted ( ب
with); -- (pl. -āt) circumference,
periphery; extent, range, scope, compass,
reach, domain, area; milieu, environment,
surroundings; ocean; pl. محيطات
surroundings, environment │ المحيط
الاطلنطي (aṭlanṭī) the Atlantic Ocean; المحيط
الھادئ (ḥādi’) the Pacific Ocean
محاط muluiJ surrounded ( ب by)
متحوط mutaḥawwiṭ cautious, prudent,
provident, circumspect, careful, watchful
حوف ḥauf edge, rim, brim, brink; border, hem,
fringe
حافة ḥāfa pl. -āt, حواف ḥawāfin border,
rim, brim, brink, verge; edge; fringe, hem
│ بين حوافيه within it, in it, therein
حاق (حوق ) ḥāqa u (ḥauq) to surround, enclose,
infold, embrace ( ب s.o.. s.th.) II = I ( على
s.o., s.th.)
حوقل 1 ḥauqala ( حوقلة ḥauqala) to pronounce
the formula: 􀍿 لا حول ولا قوة الا با (see حول
ḥaul)
حوقلة 2 ḥauqala pl. حواقل ḥawāqil2 phial
(chem.), Florence flask
حاك (حوك ) ḥāka u (ḥauk, حياك ḥiyāk, حياكة
ḥiyāka) to weave ( ھ s.th.); to interweave (
ھ s.th.); to knit ( ھ s.th.); to braid, plait ( ھ
s.th.); to contrive, devise, hatch, concoct (
ھ s.th.; e.g., ruses, intrigues, pretexts),
think up, fabricate, create ( ھ s.th. in one’s
imagination)
حياكة ḥiyāka weaving; knitting;
braiding, plaiting
حائك ḥā’ik pl. حاكة ḥāka weaver; --
(mor.) an outer garment made of a long
piece of white woolen material, covering
body and head
حول) and حيل) حال ḥāla u to change, undergo a
change, be transformed; to shift, turn,
pass, grow ( الى into s.th., also ھ ), become
الى) s.th.); to deviate, depart ( عن from, e.g.,
a commitment), dodge, evade, fail to meet
عن) s.th.); to elapse, pass go by (time); -- (
حيلولة ḥailūla) to prevent ( دون s.th.); to
intervene, interfere, interpose, come ( بين
between) │ حال عن عھد (‘ahd) to withdraw
from a contract; حال بين فلان وبين الأمر ٢١٥
to make s.th. inaccessible to s.o.,
impossible for s.o.; to bar or obstruct
s.o.’s way to s.th.; to prevent s.o. from
s.th., deny s.o. s.th.; حال بين نفسه وبين الإشفاق
(išfāq) to resist compassion, deny o.s. any
sympathy II ḥawwala to change ( الى ھ or
ھ ھ s.th. to s.th. else), transform,
transmute, convert, turn, make ( الى ھ or ھ
ھ s.th. into s.th. else); to transplant (s.th.);
to transfer ( ھ s.th.); to convert ( ھ s.th.,
mathematically); to switch commutate ( ھ
current; el.); to convert, transform ( ھ
current; el.); to shunt ( ھ a railroad car); to
switch ( ھ a railroad track); to remit, send,
transmit ( ھ s.th., e.g., money by mail, الى
to s.o.); to pass on, hand on ( الى ھ s.th. to
s.o.); to forward ( الى ھ s.th. to s.o. or to an
address); to endorse ( ھ a bill of exchange,
a promissory note); to direct, turn ( ھ s.th.,
also نظرة naẓratan a glance, الى to or
toward); to divert, distract, keep ( عن ھ or ه
s.o. or s.th. from); to turn away, avert (
بصره عن baṣarahū one's eyes from); to
turn off, switch off, disconnect ( ھ current;
el.) │ حول الدفة (daffa) to turn the helm,
change the course III (ḥāwala to try,
attempt, endeavor ( ھ s.th., ان to do s.th.),
make an attempt, make an effort ( ان to do
s.th.); to seek to gain ( ھ s.th.) by artful
means; to deceive by pretenses, make
excuses, hedge, dodge IV to change ھ ھ
or الى ھ s.th. to), transform, transmute,
turn, make ( ھ ھ or الى ھ s.th. into); to
convert, translate ( ھ ھ or الى ھ s.th. into);
to transfer ( ھ s.th.); to remit, send ( ھ s.th.
الى or على to s.o.); to assign ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.,
الى or على to s.o.); to turn over, hand over,
pass on ( على ھ or ه s.o. or s.th. to); to
forward ( على ھ s.th. to); to refer ( الى ه s.o.
to); to cede, transfer ( ھ a debt, على to s.o.;
jur.) │ احيل على (الى) المعاش (uḥīla, ma‘āš)
and احيل الى التقاعد (taqā‘ud) he was
pensioned off; احيلت الكمبيالة الى البروتستو the
bill was protested (fin.) V taḥawwala to
change, undergo a change; to be changed (
الى to), be transformed, be transmuted, be
converted ( الى into), become ( الى s.th.),
turn, grow ( الى into), transform ( من-- الى or
عن from -- into), change, develop, evolve (
من -- الى from to); to withdraw, go away,
leave; to move ( الى to a residence); to turn
away ( من from), turn one’s back ( عن on);
to deviate ( عن from); to depart, digress,
stray ( عن الطريق from the way); to
renounce, forgo, relinquish, disclaim
(s.th.); to proceed slyly or cunningly │
تحول كل حيلة to employ every conceivable
trick; -- taḥayyala to employ artful means;
to ponder ways and means ( ل to an end, in
order to attain s.th.) VI taḥāwala to try,
endeavor, take pains ( على to do s.th.),
strive ( على for); -- taḥāyala and VIII to
employ artful means, resort to tricks, use
stratagems ( على against s.o.); to deceive,
beguile, dupe, cheat, outwit, outsmart ( على
s.o.); to be out ( على for s.th.) or achieve (
على s.th.) by artful means, by tricks VIII to
work or strive (on one’s own resources),
make efforts (on one’s own) IX احول
aḥwala to be cross-eyed, to squint X to
change ( الى to, into), turn, be transformed,
be converted ( الى into); to be
transubstantiated (bread and wine, الى into
the body and blood of Christ; Chr.); to
proceed, pass on, shift, switch ( الى to s.th.
new or s.th. different); to be impossible (
على for s.o.); to be inconceivable, absurd,
preposterous
حال ḥāl m. and f., pl. احوال aḥwāl
condition, state; situation; position, status;
circumstance; case; present, actuality (as
opposed to future); circumstantial
expression or phrase (gram.); pl.:
conditions, circumstances; matters, affairs,
concerns; cases; ḥāla (prep.) during;
immediately upon, right after; just at; in
case of …, in the event of …; حالا ٢١٦
ḥālan presently, immediately, at once,
right away, without delay; now, actually,
at present │ في الحال and للحال on the spot, at
once, immediately; على كل حال (kulli ḥālin)
and على أي حال (ayyi ḥ.) in any case, at any
rate, anyhow; يبقى على حاله (yabqā) it
remains unchanged, just as it is; في حال من
الأحوال in some case or other, anyway, if
occasion should arise, possibly; (with
neg.) by no means, under no
circumstances, not at all, in no way; على
حال، بحال، بأي حال bi-ayyi ḥ. with neg.: by
no means, not at all, in no way; كذلك الحال
في the same goes for ..., it is the same with
…; it is also the case with ...; كما ھو الحال في
as is the case with; كيف حالك how are you?
شيء بحاله a thing in itself, a separate,
independent thing; الأحوال الجوية (jawwīya)
atmospheric conditions; محاكم الأحوال
الشخصية (šakṣīya) courts dealing with vital
statistics; الأحوال الشخصية (نظام or) قانون
personal statute; صاحب الحال noun referent
of a circumstantial phrase (gram.); عرض
حال ‘arḍ ḥ. application, memorial, petition;
لسان الحال, لسان حاله see لسان
حالما ḥālama (conj.) as soon as
حالة ḥala pl. -āt condition, state;
situation; (possible, actual) case; ḥālata
(prep.) during │ حالة ان ḥālata an (conj.)
whereas; والحالة ھذه under these
circumstances, such being the case, things
being as they are; في حالة (ḥālati) in (the)
case of ..., in the event of …, e.g., في حالة
غيابه (giyābihī) in case of his absence, في
حالة الوفاة (wafāh) in case of death; في ھذه
الحالة in this (that) case; لحالة ان li-ḥālati an
in case that …, in the event that …; في حالة
ما اذا if; كما ھي الحالة في if as is the case with
حالة اجتماعية ;… (ijtimā‘īya) marital status;
الحالة الجوية (jawwīya) atmospheric
conditions; حالة الخطر ḥ. al-kaṭar stand-by,
alert, state of alarm; الحالة الراھنة the status
quo; حالة الطوارئ ḥ. aṭ-ṭawāri’ state of
emergency; في حالة التلبس (talabbus)
flagrante delicto (jur.); الحالة المدنية
(madanīya) civil status, legal status; سوء
الحالة sū’ al-ḥ. predicament, plight
حالي ḥālī present, current, actual,
existing; momentary, instantaneous; حاليا
ḥālīyan at present, actually │ صورة حالية
(ṣūra) snapshot (phot.)
حالية ḥālīya actuality, topicality,
timeliness
حول ḥaul pl. احوال aḥwāl year; might,
power │􀍿 لا حول ولا قوة الا با lā ḥaula wa-lā
quwata illā bi-llāh there is no power and
no strength save in God; لا حول له ولا حيلة
(wa-lā ḥīlata) he is completely powerless,
he can do nothing, he is at the end of his
resources
حول ḥiwal change of place, change │ لا
يبتغون عنه حولا (yabtagūna) they don’t want
it otherwise, they ask for it
حول ḥaula (prep.) around, about; circa,
about, some, approximately, roughly (with
following number); about (esp. in news
headings, approx. = re, concerning) │ من
حوله (ḥaulihī) (= حوله ) around him (or it),
about him (or it); من حوليھما (ḥaulaihimā)
around the two of them, about them; from
their vicinity, from their surroundings
(dual)
حولي ḥaulī periodic, temporary, interim;
one year old (animal), yearling; young
animal; lamb, wether
O حوليات ḥaulīyāt yearbook, annals (=
Fr. annales, as a scientific publication)
حيل ḥail strength, force, power, vigor │
على حيله (standing) upright, erect; لا قوة له ولا
حيل (qūwata) completely helpless and
paralyzed
حيلة ḥīla pl. حيل ḥiyal, احاييل aḥāyīl2 artifice,
ruse, stratagem, maneuver, subterfuge,
wile, trick; device, shift; a 217 means to
accomplish an end; expedient, makeshift,
dodge, way-out; legal stratagem (for the
purpose of in fraudem legis agere) │ ما
الحيلة what’s to be done! لا حيلة له في (ḥīlata)
I have no possibility to …, I am in no
position to …; ما بيدي حيلة (bi-yadī) I can
do nothing, I can get nowhere; لم يجد حيلة الا
lam yajid ḥīlatan illā he couldn’t do
anything except …, he had no other
choice than …; اعيته الحيلة (a‘yathu) he was
at a loss, he was at the end of his wits
حيلي ḥiyalī cunning, crafty, wily, sly,
tricky, foxy
احيل aḥyal2 craftier, wilier
حول ḥawal squinting, strabismus
احول aḥwal2, f. ḥaula’2 ḥaulā2, pl. حول
ḥūl squinting, squint-eyed, wall-eyed,
walleyed
حؤول ḥu’ūl change, transformation,
transmutation; prevention ( دون of s.th.)
حوال ḥiwāl obstacle; partition, screen
حيال ḥiyāla (prep.) in view of ..., with
regard to …, in the lace of, opposite, in
front of, before
حوالة ḥawāla pl. -āt assignment, cession
(jur.); bill of exchange, (promissory) note,
check, draft │ حوالة البريد, حوالة بريدية money
order; حوالة السفر ḥ. safar traveler’s check
حوالى ḥawālā (prep.) around, about;
circa, approximately, roughly, about,
some (with following number)
حيلولة ḥailūla separation, interruption,
disruption; prevention ( دون of s.th.)
لا محال lā maḥalla = لا محالة (see below)
محالة muḥāla roller, wheel (of a draw
well)
لا محالة منه lā maḥālata minhu it is
inevitable; there is no doubt about it; (also
لا محالة alone) most certainly, positively,
absolutely, by all means
تحويل taḥwīl transformation,
transmutation, conversion ( الى into s.th.);
change, alteration, modification;
transplantation; transposition, reversal,
inversion, translocation, dislocation,
displacement; transfer, assignment;
conversion (e.g., of currency); conversion,
transformation (of electric current); O
transfer (fin.; also تحويل الدين t. ad-dain);
remittance (of money), transmittal,
sending, forwarding; bill of exchange,
promissory note, draft (com.); check;
endorsement (com.); c.o.d., cash on
delivery │ قابلية العملة للتحويل الى العملات الاجنبية
(qābilīyal al-’mla, ajnabīiya)
convertibility of currency
تحويلة taḥwīla pl. تحاويل taḥāwīl2 branch,
offshoot; siding, sidetrack (railroad); side
canal (irrigation; Eg.); switch (railroad)
محاولة muḥāwala pl. -āt attempt, try;
effort, endeavor;. recourse to expedients,
shifts, or dodges, dodging, hedging │
محاولة على حياته (ḥayātihī) attempt on s.o.’s
life, murderous assault
احالة iḥāla transfer, conveyance,
assignment; remittance; forwarding,
referring ( الى or على to a competent
authority); transmission, transmittal; O
transfer (fin.); cession, assignment (Isl.
Law); absurdity │ بالاحالة على with
reference to; قاضي الاحالة magistrate sitting
at defendant’s arraignment, trial judge;
احالة الى (على) المعاش (ma‘āš) and احالة الى
التقاعد (taqā‘ud) pensioning off
تحول taḥawwul change, transformation,
transmutation; abrupt change, sudden turn,
reversal; shift, transition; departure,
deviation, digression ( عن from);
renunciation ( of) │ نقطة التحول nuqṭat
at-t. turning point
تحيل taḥayyul use of tricks, trickery 218
تحايل taḥāyul and احتيال iḥtiyāl use of
tricks, trickery; cunning, craft, subtlety,
artfulness; malice, treachery, perfidy;
deception, fraud
تحايلي taḥāyulī and احتيالي iḥtiyālī
fraudulent, e.g., افلاس احتيالي (iflās)
fraudulent bankruptcy
استحالة istiḥāla change, transformation,
transmutation, turn, shift, transition;
transubstantiation (Chr.); impossibility,
inconceivability, absurdity,
preposterousness
حائل ḥā’il pl. حوائل ḥawā’il obstacle,
obstruction, impediment ( دون on the way
to s.th., بين -- و see حال ḥāla I); barrier;
partition, screen, folding screen; -- (pl.
حول ḥuwwal) changeable, variable,
frequently changing; feeble, languid, wan,
pallid
محول muḥawwil pl. -āt converter,
transformer (el.); endorser
محولة muḥawwila switch (railroad)
محول عليه muḥawwal ‘alaihi c.o.d., cash
on delivery; محول به collected on delivery
محيل muḥīl transferor, assignor (Isl.
Law)
محال muḥāl inconceivable, unthinkable,
impossible, absurd, preposterous,
unattainable
متحول mutaḥawwil changeable,
variable, changing │ الأعياد المتحولة (a‘yād)
the movable feasts (Chr.)
محتال muḥtāl artful, cunning, deceitful,
treacherous, perfidious, fraudulent;
swindler, cheat, impostor, fraud; crook,
scoundrel; assignee (Isl. Law) │ محتال عليه
debtor of a ceded claim, transferee (Isl.
Law)
مستحيل mustaḥīl impossible, absurd,
preposterous; مستحيلات impossible things,
impossibilities, absurdities
حوم) حام) ḥāma u (ḥaum, حوم ḥawamān) to
circle, hover. glide (in the air; of a bird,
also of an aircraft); to hover, swarm, buzz
حول) and على around) │ حامت الشبھة ضده
(šubha, ḍiddahū) suspicion concentrated
on him, he was suspected II to circle in the
air; to hover in circles, to circle; to go
around, revolve (thoughts and images, in
one’s head or mind); to browse ( في in a
book)
حومة ḥauma pl. -āt turmoil of battle,
thick of the fray; main part, bulk, main
body; (tun.) quarter, section (of a city)
حان and حانة see حين
حانوت see حنو
حوى ḥawā i to gather, collect, unite ( ھ s.th.);
to encompass, embrace, contain, hold,
enclose, comprise, include ( ھ s.th.); to
possess, own, have ( ھ s.th.); to clasp ( ھ
s.th., the hand) V to curl (up), coil (up)
VIII to encompass, embrace, contain,
hold, enclose, comprise, include ( ھ or على
s.th.); to possess, own, have ( ھ or على
s.th.)
حوية ḥawīya convolution, coil, curl,
roll; pl. حوايا ḥawāyā intestine, bowels,
entrails
حواية ḥiwāya pl. -āt (eg.) wase round
pad to support a burden on the head or on
the back
حاو ḥāwin pl. حواة ḥuwāh snake
charmer; juggler, conjurer, magician
محتويات muḥtawayāt content(s) (of a
book. of a receptacle) │ محتويات النفوس the
innermost thoughts. the secrets of the
heart
حى، حيو) حيي) ḥayiya, حي ḥayya يحيا yaḥyā ( حياة
ḥayāh) to live; حي ḥayya to live to see,
experience, witness ( ھ s.th.), live ( ھ
through a time) ليحي الملك li-yaḥyā 219 lmalik
long live the king! حيي ḥayiya يحيا
yaḥyā ( حياء ḥayā’) to be ashamed ( من of;
because of) II حيا ḥayyā to keep ( ه s.o.)
alive, grant ( ه s.o.) a long life; to say to
s.o. ( ه): حياك لله may God preserve your
life!; to greet, salute ( ه s.o.) IV احيا aḥyā to
lend life ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.), enliven,
animate, vitalize, endow with life, call
into being ( ھ s.th.), give birth ( ھ to); to
revive, reanimate, revivify ( ھ s.th.), give
new life ( ھ to); to put on, produce, stage,
arrange ( ھ e.g., a theatrical performance, a
celebration, and the like); to celebrate ( ھ
s.th., also a festival) │ احيا الذكرى (dikrā) to
commemorate (a deceased person),
observe the anniversary (of s.o.’s death);
احيا الليل (lail) to burn the midnight oil, احيا
الليل صلاة (ṣalātan) to spend the night in
prayer; احيا السھرة (sahrata) to perform in
the evening (of an artist); احيا حفلة
(ḥaflatan) to give a performance; to
perform at a celebration (artist); قد احيت
الفرقة ثلاث ليال qad aḥyat il-firqatu talāta
layālin the theatrical troupe gave three
evening performances X استحيا istaḥyā to
spare s.o.’s ( ه) life, let live, keep alive ( ه
s.o.); استحيا istaḥyā, استحى istaḥā to be
ashamed ( ه to face s.o.; من of s.th., because
of s.th.); to become or feel embarrassed (
من in front of s.o.), be embarrassed ( من
by); to be bashful, shy, diffident
حي ḥayy pl. احياء aḥyā’ living, live,
alive; lively, lusty, animated, active,
energetic, unbroken, undaunted,
undismayed; living being, organism; tribe,
tribal community; block of apartment
houses; section, quarter (of a city) │ علم
الأحياء ‘ilm al-aḥyā’ biology; حي العالم ‘ilm
al-‘ālam houseleek tree (Sempervivum
arboreum L.; bot.)
حي ḥayya: حي على الصلاة ḥayya ‘alā ṣ-
ṣalāh come to prayer!
حية ḥayya pl. -āt snake, serpent, viper
O احيائي aḥyā’ī biologic(al); (pl. -ūn)
biologist │ كيمياء احيائية (kīmiyā’) biochemistry
حيي ḥayīy bashful, shy, diffident,
modest
حياء ḥayā’ shame, diffidence,
bashfulness, timidity; shyness │ قليل الحياء
shameless impudent; قلة الحياء qillat al-ḥ.
shamelessness, impudence
حياة ḥayāh pl. حيوات ḥayawāt life; lifeblood;
liveliness animation │ حياة الريف ḥ.
ar-rīf country life, rural life; الحياة العامة
(‘āmma) public life; الحياة العائلية family life;
ميتوى الحياة mustawā l-ḥ. living standard; O
علم الحياة ‘ilm al-ḥ. biology
حيوي ḥayawī lively, full of life, vital,
vigorous; vital, essential to life
حيوية ḥayawīya vitality, vigor, vim
حيويات ḥayawīyāt: مواد مضادة للحيويات
(mawādd muḍādda) antibiotics
حيوان ḥayawān pl. -āt animal, beast;
(coll.) animals, living creatures │ حيوانات
ثدية (tadyīya) mammals; حيوانات مجترة
(mujtarra) ruminants; حيوان طفيلي (ṭufailī)
parasite; علم الحيوان ‘ilm al-ḥ. zoology
حيواني ḥayawānī animal (adj.);
zoologic(al)
حيوانية ḥayawānīya bestiality; animality,
animal nature
حوين ḥuwayyin pl. -āt minute animal,
animalcule
احيى aḥyā livelier; more vigorous, more
vital
تحية taḥīya pl. –āt, تحايا taḥāyā greeting,
salutation; salute; cheer (= wish that God
may give s.o. long life) │ تحية لذكراه
taḥīyatan li-dikrāhu in order to keep his
memory alive, in remembrance of him;
التحية العسكرية (‘askarīya) military salute
احياء iḥyā’ animation, enlivening; revival,
revitalization, revivification; arranging,
staging. conducting, putting on, 220
holding (of a celebration) │ احياء الذكرى i.
ad-dikrā commemoration (of a deceased
person); احياء لذكرى I (iḥyā’an) (with foll.
gen.) in commemoration of …, in
memoriam ...; احياء الموات i. al-mawāt
cultivation of virgin land
استحياء istiḥyā’ shame; diffidence,
bashfulness, timidity; shyness
محيا mūḥayyan face, countenance
الست المستحية as-sitt al-mustahīya
sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica; bot.)
حيث 1 ḥaitu (conj.) where (place and direction);
wherever; since, as, due to the fact that;
whereas; inasmuch as │ حيث ان (anna)
since, as, because, due to the fact that ... ;
in that ... ; حيث كان wherever it be; in any
case, at any rate; الى حيث ilā ḥaitu where
(direction); to where …, to the place
where ...; من حيث min ḥaitu from where,
whence, wherefrom; where (place);
whereas; (with foll. nominative) as to, as
for, concerning, regarding, with respect to,
in view of, because of; من حيث الثقافة min ḥ.
taqāfatu with regard to education, as far as
education is concerned; من حيث يدري ولا
يدري (yadrī wa-lā yadrī) whether he
knows it or not, knowingly or without his
knowledge; من حي ثلالا (with foll. perf.)
without (being, doing, etc.); من حيث ھو
such, in itself, العالم من حيث ھو (‘ālam) the
world in itself, the world as such; من حيث
ان (anna) inasmuch as; in view of the fact
that; since, as, due to the fact that; بحيث bi-
ḥaitu inasmuch as; in such a manner
that ..., so as to ...; so that ...; such as ...;
(he found himself) at a point or degree
where, e.g., كان من البراءة بحيث لا ترى
(barā’a, tarā) = she was so naive that she
couldn't see ...; بحيث لا insofar as ... not,
provided that … not; بحيث ان (anna) in
such a manner that ..., so as to ..., so
that ...
حيثما ḥatumā wherever, wheresoever
(place); wherever, no matter where ...
(direction) │ حيثما اتفق (ittafaqa) anywhere,
wherever it was (or he), haphazardly, at
random
حيثية ḥaitīya pl. -āt standpoint; view,
point, point of view, approach; aspect,
respect, regard, consideration; high social
standing, social distinction, dignity; pl.
also: considerations, legal reasons on
which the judgment is based, opinion
(jur.) │ ذوو الحيثية (البارزة ) (dawū) or اصحاب
الحيثية، اصحاب الحيثيات people of (high)
social standing, prominent people, people
of distinction; من الحيثية الحيوانية
(ḥayawānīya) from a zoological viewpoint
الحيثيون 2 al-hātīyūn the Hittites
حيد) حاد) ḥāda i (ḥaid, حيود ḥuyūd, حيدان
ḥayadān, محيد maḥīd) to deviate, swerve,
depart, desist (If from); to leave, quit, give
up, abandon, relinquish ( عن s.th.); حاد به عن
to dissuade or get s.o. away from ... ; to
incline, tend ( الى، نحو to, toward), sbade,
blend ( الى، نحو into) II to keep aside, put
aside ( ھ s.th.) III to stay away, keep apart
ھ، ه) from s.o., from s.th.); to avoid, shun (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) VII to depart, deviate,
digress, swerve ( عن from)
حيد ḥaid, حيدان ḥayadān deviation,
digression, departure, swerving, turning
aside, turning away
حيدة ḥaida deviation, digression,
swerving, departure (from a course);
neutrality; impartiality │ على حيدة aside,
apart, to one side
محيد maḥīd avoidance ( عن of s.th.) │ لا
محيد (maḥīda) it is unavoidable
حايد ḥiyād neutrality (pol.) │ على الحياد
neutral; حياد عن الخط (kaṭṭ) derailment
(railroad) 221
حيادي ḥiyādī neutral (pol.)
محايدة muḥāyada neutrality (pol.)
حائد ḥā’id neutral (pol.)
محايد muḥāyid neutral (pol.); المحايدون
the neutrals (pol.)
متحايد mutaḥāyid neutral (pol.)
حيدراباد ḥaidarābād2 Hydarabad
حار (حير ) ḥāra (1st pers. perf. حرت ) a ( حيرة
ḥaira, حيران ḥayarān) to become confused;
to become or be helpless, be at a loss,
know nothing ( في of, about); to waver,
hesitate, be unable to choose ( بين -- وبين
between - and) │ حار في امره (amrihi) to be
confused. baffled, bewildered, dismayed
to be at a loss, be at one’s wit’s end II to
confuse, baffle, bewilder, nonplus,
embarrass ( ه s.o.) V to become confused;
to be or become dismayed, startled,
baffled, perplexed ( في by), be at a loss ( في
to); to waver (uncertainly) ( بين between) │
تحير في امره (amrihi) to be confused,
baffled, bewildered, disconcerted, be at a
loss, be at one’s wit’s end VIII = V
حير ḥair fenced-in garden, enclosure │
حير الحيوان ḥ. al-ḥayawān zoological
garden, zoo
حيرة ḥaira confusion, perplexity,
bewilderment, embarrassment,
helplessness في حيرة embarrassed, at a loss,
helpless
حيران ḥairān2, f. حيرى ḥairā, pl. حيارى
ḥayārā, ḥuyārā confused, perplexed,
startled, dismayed, disconcerted, baffled,
Nonplused, bewildered, appalled, taken
aback, stunned; embarrassed, at a loss, at
one’s wit’s end; uncertain, helpless,
sheepish (smile, etc.), confused,
incoherent (words, and the like)
تحير taḥayyur confusion, perplexity,
bewilderment, dismay; embarrassment,
helplessness
حائر ḥā’ir disconcerted, perplexed,
startled. dismayed; embarrassed, helpless,
at a lost, at one’s wit’s end; baffled,
bewildered, confused, uncertain ( في
about); straying, astray │ حائر في امره
(amrihī) confused, baffled, bewildered,
embarrassed, at a loss, helpless
محير muḥayyar embarrassed, at a loss,
helpless
محير muḥayyir and محتار muḥtār = حائر
حيز see حوز
حيزبون see حزب
حاص (حيص ) ḥāṣa i (ḥaiṣ, حيصة ḥaiṣa, محيص
maḥīṣ) to flee, escape ( عن s.th. or from
s.th.), run away ( عن from), turn one’s back
عن) on) VII do.
حيص ḥaiṣ, حيصة ḥaiṣa flight, escape
وقع في حيص بيص waqa‘a fī ḥaiṣa baiṣa
to get into a bad fix, meet with difficulties
حياصة see حوص
محيص maḥīṣ flight, escape; place of
refuge, retreat, sanctuary │ ما عنه محيص it
is unavoidable; لم يكن لھم من محيص they
couldn’t but ..., they had no other
alternative but to ...
حيض) حاضت) ḥāḍat i (ḥaiḍ, محيض maḥīḍ,
محاض maḥāḍ) and V to menstruate, have a
monthly period
حيض ḥaiḍ (n. un. حيضة ) and حياض ḥiyāḍ
menstruation, monthly period
حائض ḥā’iḍ (f.) and حائضة menstruating
حيطة، حياطة، حيطان، حياط see حوط
حاف (حيف 1 ) ḥāfa i (ḥaif) to deal unjustly ( على
with s.o.), wrong, injure, harm ( على s.o.);
to restrict, limit, curtail, impair ( على s.th.),
encroach ( على upon) V to 222 impair,
injure, prejudice, violate ( ھ or من s.th.),
encroach, infringe ( ھ or من upon)
حيف ḥaif wrong, injustice; harm,
damage, prejudice │ حيف عليه what a pity!
too bad! لا حيف به (ḥaifa) it is not out of
place, it is quite appropriate
حيفاء 2 ḥaifā’ Haifa (seaport in NW Israel)
حاق (حيق ) ḥāqa i to surround, beset from all
sides ( ب s.o.); to fall, descend, come ( ب
upon s.o., punishment), befall, overtake,
grip, seize, overcome ( ب s.o.), happen,
occur ( ب to); to penetrate, pierce ( في the
body; of a sword); to affect, influence ( في
s.o., s.th.) IV to surround, beset from all
sides ( ب s.o.); to bring down ( ھ ب upon
s.o. s.th.), cause s.th. ( ھ ) to descend ( ھ ب
upon s.o.)
حيق ḥaiq consequence, effect (of a
misdeed redounding upon the evildoer)
حيك II to weave
حياكة see حوك
حيك ḥaik = حائك see حوك
حيل 1 V, حيلة, احيل, حيال, حيلولة , etc., see ; حول
احيلي see حلو
حايل 2 ḥāyil2 Hail (town and oasis in N Nejd)
حان ( حين ) ḥāna i to draw near, approach, come,
arrive (time); to happen accidentally │ حان
الوقت the (right) time has come; now is the
time; حان له الوقت the time has come for
him to …; اما حان لھم ان يفھموا (amā, an
yafhamū) haven’t they understood yet ...?;
حانت مني التفاتة (minnī iltifāta) I happened to
turn around ( الى to), it just happened that
my eyes fell on ( الى ) II to set a time ( ه for
s.o.) IV to destroy, wipe out ( ه s.o.) V to
watch, wait ( ھ fur a time or an
opportunity) │ تحين الفرصة (furṣata) to wait
for an opportunity, bide one's time X
استحين istaḥyana to wait for the right time
حان ḥān bar; cabaret
حانة ḥāna pl. -āt bar, wineshop, wine
tavern; pub, tavern, taproom
حين ḥain death, destruction
حين ḥīn pl. احيان aḥyān, احايين aḥāyīn2
time; propitious time, good time,
opportunity; ḥīna (prep.) at the time of ...,
at, upon; (conj.) at the time when, when;
as soon as; حينا ḥīnan for some time; once,
one day; احيانا aḥyānan occasionally, from
time to time, sometimes │ حينا -- حينا
sometimes -- sometimes, at times -- at
times; في الاحايين at times, sometimes, once
in a while; في بعض الأحيان (الأحايين ) fī ba‘ḍi
l-a. and بعض الأحيان ba‘ḍa l-a. sometimes,
occasionally, now and then, once in a
while, from time to time, at times; في اغلب
الأحيان fī aglabi l-a. mostly, most of the
time, in most cases; الى حين for some time;
meanwhile, for the time being; في حينه
then, at the time, in his (its) time; in due
time, at the appointed time; ذا الحين dā l-
ḥīna just now, right now; من ذلك الحين from
that time on, from then on; الى ذلك الحين
until that time, till then; في حين (with foll.
verb) whereas; في حين ان and على حين ان
(ḥīni) at the same time when ..., while;
whereas, also without ان , e.g., على حين ھم
يزعمون ‘alā ḥīni hum yaz‘umūna whereas
they, on the other hand, claim; من حين الى
حين، بين حين وحين، حينا بعد حين، من حين لآخر
(li-ākara) and بين حين ولآخر (wa-ākara)
from time to time, now and then, once in a
while
حينئذ ḥīna’idin at that time, then, that
day
حينذاك ḥīnadāka at that time, then, that
day
حينما ḥīnamā (conj.) while; when, as
حيوان، حيوي and حيوية see حي ٢٢٣
خ
خاء ḳā’ name of the letter خ
خاتون ḳātūn pl. خواتين ḳawātīn2 lady, socially
prominent woman│ زھرة الخاتون zahrat al-
ḳ. little blue flower of the steppe (syr.)
خاخام ḳāḳām (= حاخام ) rabbi
خارصين ḳāriṣīn and خارصينى ḳāriṣīnī (eg.) zinc
خازوق ḳāzūq pl. خوازيق ḳawāzīq2 post, stake,
pole; dirty trick│ ھذا خازوق that’s tough
luck!
خاقان ḳāqān pl. خواقين ḳawāqīn2 overlord, ruler,
sovereign, monarch, emperor
خاكى ḳākī earth-colored, khaki
خؤول، خؤولة see خول
خام ḳām raw, unworked, unprocessed;
untanned; linen; calico; (pl. -āt) raw
material; inexperienced, green, untrained,
unskilled, artless, uncouth, boorish; pl.
خامات raw materials│ جلود خام raw leather;
خيوط خام raw fibers; زيت خام (zait) crude
oil; سكر خام (sukkar) raw sugar; المواد الخام
(mawādd) the raw materials
خان ḳān pl. -āt hostel, caravansary; inn, pub,
tavern│ الخان الخليلى (ḳalīlī) district of Cairo
(center of art trade and market activity);
خان يونس Khan Yunis (town in Gaza
sector)
خانة pl. -at column (e.g., of a
newspaper); square (e.g., on a chessboard)
خب ḳabba u (ḳabb, خبب ḳabab, خبيب ḳabīb) to
amble (animal); to trot (horse); to jog,
saunter (person), to sink ( فى in sand); -- u
(ḳabb) to surge, heave, be rough (sea) V
and VIII to amble (animal); to trot (horse)
خبب ḳabab amble; trot
خب ḳabb, ḳibb heaving, surging (of the
sea, rough sea
خب ḳabb impostor. swindler
خب ḳaba’a a and II to bide, conceal ( ھ s.th) V
to hide, conceal o.s.; to be hidden, be
concealed VIII to hide, conceal o.s.; to
disappear; to be hidden, be concealed
خبء ḳib’ that which is hidden, a hidden thing
خبيئة ḳabī’a pl. خبايا ḳabāyā that which is
hidden; a hidden, secret thing; a cache│
خبايا الارض ḳ. l-arḍ that which is hidden in
the earth; natural resources
مخبأ maḳba’ pl. مخابئ maḳābi’2 hiding place;
hide-out, refuge, haunt, retreat; cellar,
shelter, air-raid shelter
خباء ḳibā’ pl. اخبئة aḳbi’a, اخبية aḳbiya tent;
husk, hull (of grain)
خابئة ḳābi’a, خابية ḳāiya pl. خوابئ ḳawābī’ خواب , 2
ḳawābin large vessel, cask, jar
مخبآت muḳabba’āt hidden, secret things;
secrets
مختبئ muḳtabi’ hidden, concealed
خبت IV to be humble ( الى before God(
خبث ḳabuta u (ḳubt, خباثة ) to be bad; to be
wicked, evil, malicious, vicious,
malignant VI to behave viciously, display
malice; to feel awkward, feel embarrassed
خبث ḳubt badness, wickedness;
malignancy (e.g., of a disease); malice,
malevolence, viciousness
خبث ḳabat refuse, scum, dross, slag
خبيث ḳabīt pl. خبث ḳubut, خبثاء ḳubatā’2,
اخباث aḳbāt, خبثة ḳabata bad, evil, wicked;
malicious, vicious, spiteful; noxious,
injurious, harmful; malignant (disease);
offensive, repulsive, nauseating,
disgusting (odor)
اخبث aḳbat worse; more wicked
خباثة ḳabāta badness wickedness;
malice, malevolence, viciousness,
malignancy
خبر ḳabara u (ḳubr, خبرة ḳibra) to try, test ( ھ
s.th.); to experience ( ھ s.th.); to have
tried, have experienced, know by
experience ( ھ s.th.); to get to know
thoroughly, know well ( ھ s.th., ه s.o.);
ḳabura u to know thoroughly ( ب or ھ
s.th.), be fully acquainted ( ب or ھ with
s.th.) II to notify, advise, apprise, inform,
tell ( ه s.o., ب of or about) III to write ( ه to
s.o.). address ( ه s.o.), turn, appeal ( ه to
s.o.), contact ( ه s.o.) in writing; to
negotiate, treat, parley ( ه with s.o.) IV to
notify, inform, apprise, advise ( ب ه s.o.
of), let know, tell ( ب ه s.o. about); to
communicate, report, relate ( ب ه to s.o.
s.th.), tell ( ب ه s.o. s.th.) V to inquire ( ه of
s.o.), ask ( ه s.o.) VI to inform one another,
notify one another; keep one another
informed; to correspond, write each other;
to negotiate, treat, parley ( مع with s.o., في
about) VIII to explore ( ھ s.th.), search ( ھ
into), seek information ( ھ about); to test,
examine ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to try, put to the
test ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to have tried, have
experienced, know by experience ( ھ
s.th.); to know well ( ھ s.th.) X to inquire (
عن ه of s.o. about), ask ( عن ه s.o. about)
خبر ḳabar pl. اخبار aḳbār news;
information, intelligence: report,
communication, message; notification;
rumor; story; matter, affair; (gram.)
predicate of a nominal clause; pl. annals │
سأله عن أخباره to inquire of s.o. about s.o.
else; كان في خبر كان or دخل في خبر كان
(ḳabari kana) to belong to the past, be
passé, be no longer existent
خبرة ḳibra, خبر ḳubr experience;
knowledge
خبير kabīr experienced, expert ( ب in);
familiar, conversant, well-acquainted ( ب
with), cognizant ( ب of); الخبير the Knowing
(one of the attributes of God); (pl. خبراء
kubarā’2) expert, specialist │ خبير
الضرائب tax expert, tax adviser
خابور kābūr pl. خوابير kawābīr2 peg; pin;
wedge
مخبر makbar sense, intrinsic
significance; (pl: مخابر makābir2)
laboratory
مخبار mikbār pl. مخابير makābīr2 test
tube (chem.)
مخابرة mukābara pl. -āt correspondence,
(esp. written) information (in classified
ads: المخابرة ب please write to ..., please
contact ...), notice, notification,
communication │ مخابرة تلفونية telephone
call, telephone conversation; مخابرة خارجية
(kārijīya) long-distance call; مخابرة سرية
(sirriya) secret communiqué; قلو المخابرات
qalam al-m. intelligence bureau; المخابرة
حضوريا (ḥuḍūrīyan) apply in person (in
classified ads)
اخبار ikbār notification, information,
communication, note, message; report;
indirect discourse, oratio obliqua (gram.)
اخباري ikbārī news-, information- (in
compounds)
تخابر takābur negotiation;
correspondence
اختبار iktibār pl. -āt exploration, study;
examination; test; test item (of an
examination); trial, testing; (scientific)
investigation, research, experiment;
experience, empirical knowledge;
practical experience │ اختبارات تحريرية
(taḥrīrīya) written examination items;
اختبار ذاتي ٢٢٥ (dātī) personal experience;
على سبيل الاختبار experimentally; تحت الاختبار
on probation, on trial; حقول الاختبار
experimental fields
اختباري iktibārī experimental;
experiential; empirical
اختبارية ihtibārīya empiricism
استختبار istikbàr pl. -āt inquiry │ دائرة
الاستختبارات information bureau
مخبر mukbir pl. -ūn reporter; detective
مختبر muktabar pl. -āt laboratory
خبز kabaza i (kabz) to bake ( ھ bread) VIII do.
خبز kubz pl. اخباز akbāz bread
خبزة kubza loaf of bread
خباز kubza pl. -ūn, خبازة baker
خباز kubbaz, خبيز kubbaiz, خبازى
kubbazā mallow (bot.)
خبازة kibāza baker’s trade, art of baking
مخبز makbaz, مخبزة pl. مخابز makābiz2
bakery
خبص kabaṣa i (kabṣ) to mix, mingle, intermix
ب ھ) s.th. with) II to mix, mingle,
intermix ( ھ s.th.); to muddle, jumble,
confuse ( ھ s.th.), make a mess ( ھ of)
خبيص kabīl, خبيصة medley, mess,
mishmash, hodgepodge; خبصة a jellylike
sweet
خباص kabbāṣ one who causes
confusion, who messes things up; an
irresponsible, light-minded person
خبط kabaṭa i (kabṭ) to beat, strike ( ھ s.th.,
against s.th.); to knock, rap ( ھ on, الباب on
the door); to stamp ( الارض the ground; of
animals) │ يخبط خبط عشواء (kabṭa ‘ašwā’)
he acts haphazardly, he proceeds rashly or
at random V to beat, strike, hit ( ه s.o.); to
bring down, fell, knock out, throw to the
ground ( ه s.o.); to bump, hit ( ھ against),
collide ( ھ with), stumble ( ھ over); to be
lost, wander about, stray; to grope about,
fumble about; to struggle, resist; to clatter
over the ground, gallop (horse) VIII to
bump (against); to struggle, resist; to
grope about, fumble about; to be lost,
wander around, stray; to stir, bustle
خبطة kabta blow, stroke; rap, knock;
noise, din, uproar
خباط kubāṭ insanity, madness, mental
disorder
خبل kabala u (kabl) to confound, confuse,
mess up, complicate ( ھ s.th.); to hinder,
impede, handicap, stop, hold back ( ه s.o.);
to befuddle ( ه s.o.), confuse s.o.’s ( ه) mind,
rob ( ه s.o.) of his senses make ( ه s.o.)
crazy; -- kabila a (kabal, خبال kabal) to get
confused; to be or become mentally
disturbed, crazy, insane II to confound,
confuse ( ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to complicate,
entangle, mess up, muddle, throw into
disorder ( ھ s.th.); to rob of his senses,
drive insane ( ه s.o.) VIII to become
muddled, disordered (mind)
خبل kabl, kabal confusion; mental
disorder, insanity
خبل kabil mad, crazy, insane;
feebleminded, dim-witted
اخبل akbal 2 mad, crazy, insane; feebleminded,
dim-witted
اختبال iktibāl mental disorder
مخبول makbūl mad, crazy, idiotic,
imbecilic, mentally deranged, insane;
muddlehead, dolt, fool
مخبل makbal confused. baffled,
perplexed, dismayed; muddled, confused,
mixed up
خبو) خبا) kabā u (kabw, kubūw) to go out, die
(fire)
خبايا and خباء pl. اخبية see خبأ
خابية pl. خواب see خبأ ٢٢٦
خبياري kibyārī caviar
ختر katara i (katr) to betray ( ه s.o.), act
perfidiously, disloyally ( ه toward s.o.); to
deceive, cheat, dupe ( ه s.o.)
ختر katr disloyalty, breach of
confidence, perfidy, treachery, betrayal,
deception
ختار kattār traitor, disloyal person,
cheat, swindler
خاتر kātir treacherous, perfidious,
disloyal
ختل katala i u (katl, ختلا katalan) to dupe, gull,
cheat, double-cross, deceive ( ه s.o.) III to
deceive, cheat, dupe ( ه s.o.); to behave
hypocritically VIII = I
ختل katl and مخاتل mukātala deception,
trickery, double-dealing, duplicity,
duping, gulling
مخاتل mukātil deceitful, crafty, wily,
foxy
ختم katama i (katm, ختام kitām) to seal, provide
with a seal or signet ( ھ s.th.); to stamp,
impress with a stamp ( ھ s.th.); to seal off,
close, make impervious or inaccessible ( ھ
s.th.; also على the hearts, said of God); to
put one’s seal ( ھ on), conclude, terminate
ھ) s.th.); to wind up, finish, complete ( ھ
s.th.); to close, heal, cicatrize (wound) V
to put on or wear a ring ( تختم بالذھب │ ( ب
(dahab) to wear a golden ring VIII to
conclude, finish, terminate, wind up ( ھ
s.th.)
ختم katm sealing; -- (pl. اختام aktām, ختوم
kutūm) seal, signet, seal imprint; stamp,
stamp imprint; also = ختمة (see below) │
ختم البريد postmark, (postal) cancellation
stamp; شمع الختم šam‘ al-k. sealing wax
ختمة katma pl. katamāt recital of the
entire Koran, esp. on festive occasions
خاتم kātam, kātam pl. خواتم kawātim2 seal
ring, signet ring; ring, finger ring; seal,
signet; stamp │ خاتم الزواج k. zawāj
wedding ring; خاتم النبيين k. an-nabīyīn the
Seal (i.e., the last) of the Prophets =
Mohammed
خاتام kātām pl. خواتيم kawātīm2 seal ring,
signet ring; ring
ختام kitām sealing wax; end, close,
conclusion, termination │ في الختام at the
end, at last, finally, eventually
ختامي kitāmī final, concluding │ كلمة
ختامية (kalima) concluding speech
اختتام iktitām end, close, conclusion,
termination
خاتمة kātima pl. خواتم kawātim خواتيم , 2
kawātīm2 end, close, conclusion,
termination; epilogue (of a book); خواتيم
final stage
مختم mukattam ringed, adorned with a
ring or rings (hand)
مختتم muktatam end, close, conclusion,
termination
ختن 1 katana i (katn) to circumcise ( ه a boy)
VIII pass
ختن katn circumcision
ختن katan pl. اختان aktān son-in-law
bridegroom
ختان kitān, ختانة kitāna circumcision
خاتون 2 look up alphabetically
خثر katara u and katira a to become solid,
become thick, solidify, thicken; to be or
become viscous, syrupy; to clot, coagulate
(liquid); to curdle (milk) II and IV to
thicken, inspissate, condense, coagulate ( ھ
liquid); to curdle ( ھ milk) V = I
O خثرة katra thrombosis (med.)
خثار kutar dregs (of a liquid); scum of
the earth, riffraff, mob
خثارة kutāra dregs (of a liquid);
sediment, lees 227
تخثر takattur coagulation │O تخثر المخ (mukk)
cerebral thrombosis
خاثر kātir thickened, inspissated, condensed;
viscous, ropy, sirupy; curdled, coagulated,
clotted; yoghurt, curd
مخثر mukattar thickened, inspissated,
condensed; viscous, ropy, sirupy; curdled,
coagulated, clotted
خجل kajila a (kajal) to become embarrassed; to
be ashamed ( من of s.th. or to face s.o.), be
abashed ( by s.th.), feel embarrassed ( من
about s.th. or in front of s.o.) II and IV to
shame ( ه s.o.); to embarrass, abash, put to
shame ( ه s.o.)
خجل kajal shame ( من at); bashfulness
diffidence, timidity, shyness; abashment;
disgrace, shame, ignominy │ يا للخجل (la-lkajal)
O disgrace! the shame of it!
خجل kajil abashed, embarrassed;
bashful, diffident, shy, timid; overgrown
with luxuriant, profuse vegetation; long
and flowing (garment)
خجول kajūl abashed, ashamed, shamefaced;
shy, bashful, diffident, timid
خجلان kajalān abashed, ashamed,
shamefaced; shy, bashful, diffident, timid;
bewildered with shame, embarrassed
مخجول makjūl ashamed, shamefaced
مخجل mukjil arousing shame, shameful;
shocking, disgraceful, ignominious │
اعضاء المخجلة (a‘ḍā’) the pudenda
خد kadda u to furrow, plow (a the ground) V to
be furrowed; to become wrinkled (akin)
خد kadd pl. خدود kudūd cheek; lateral
portion, side │ صعر خده ṣa‘‘ra kaddahū to
put on a contemptuous mien
خد kadd and خدة kudda pl. خدد kudad
furrow, ridge, groove, rut
اخدود ukdūd pl. اخاديد akādīd2 furrow,
ridge, groove, rut; trench, excavation
خد mikadda pl. مخاد makadd2 cushion,
pillow; seat cushion
خديج kadīj premature child
خداج kidāj abortion, miscarriage
خدر kadira a (kadar) to be numb, prickle,
tingle (leg, arm); to be or become limp,
benumbed, paralyzed; -- kadara u to
confine to women’s quarters, keep in
seclusion ( ھا a girl) II to numb, benumb,
stupefy ( ه s.o., ھ a s.th.); to anesthetize,
narcotize, put to sleep ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.;
med.); to confine to women’s quarters,
keep in seclusion (la a girl) IV to make
torpid, stupefy, benumb, deprive of
sensation, narcotize ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.) V to be
numbed. be stunned, be stupefied, be
deprived of sensation; to come to rest,
calm down
خدر kidr pl. خدور kudūr, اخدار akdār,
اخادير akādīr2 curtain, drape; women’s
quarters of a tent; boudoir, private room
(of a lady)
خدر kadar and خدرة kudra numbness,
insensibility (esp. of a limb gone to sleep);
daze. torpor, stupor
خدر kadir numb (limb); benumbed,
torpid, dazed
خدر takdīr anesthetization,
narcotization
خادر kādir limp, languid; benumbed,
torpid, dazed; hidden in his den, lurking
(lion)
خادرة kādira chrysalis (of a caterpillar;
zool.)
مخدر mukaddir anesthetic, painkilling,
tranquilizing; (pl. -āt) an anesthetic; a
narcotic, drug, dope
مخدر mukaddar numb, torpid,
insensible; (eg.) tipsy, fuddled, drunk
مخدرة mukaddira girl kept in seclusion
from the outside world 228
خدش kadaša i (kadš) to scratch ( ھ s.th.); to
maul, lacerate, tear to pieces ( ھ s.th.); to
violate ( ھ the rules of decency, s.o.’s
honor, and the like); to disturb ( ھ the
peace); to ruin, sully, run down ( سمعته
sum‘atahū s.o.’s reputation) II to scratch (
ھ s.th.) j to maul, lacerate, tear to pieces (
ھ s.th.); to violate ( ھ the rules of decency,
s.o.’s honor, etc.); to ruin, sully, run down
سمعته) sum‘atahū s.o.’s reputation)
خدش kadš pl. خدوش kudūš, اخداش akdāš
scratch, scratch mark; graze, abrasion
خدع kada‘a a to cheat ( ه s.o., عن out of s.th.);
to deceive, mislead, dupe, gull ( ه s.o.);
pass. kudi‘a to be mistaken, be wrong ( عن
about); to fail to see clearly ( عن with
regard to), get the wrong impression ( عن
of s.th.) III to cheat, dupe, deceive, take in
ه) s.o.); to try to deceive or double-cross ( ه
s.o.) VII to let o.s. be deceived, be
deceived, deluded, misled ( ب by); to be
mistaken, be wrong
خدع kud‘a pl. خدع kuda‘, -āt deception,
cheating, swindle
خدعة kuda‘a impostor, swindler, cheat,
sharper
سوى خدع sawwā akda‘ahū to crush
s.o.’s pride, humble s.o.
خديعة kadī‘a pl. خدائع kadā’i‘2 deception,
deceit, betrayal, treachery, perfidy,
trickery, imposture
خداع kaddā‘ impostor, swindler,
sharper, cheat, crook; deceptive, delusive
خيدع kaida‘ fata morgana, mirage
اخاديع akādi‘2 swindles, underhand
dealings, crooked practices; phantoms,
phantasms, delusions
مخدع mika‘, mukda‘, makda‘ pl. مخادع
makādi2 small room, chamber, cabinet;
bedchamber
خداع kidā‘ deception, deceit, swindle,
imposture, betrayal, treachery, perfidy,
trickery, duplicity
خداعي kidā‘ī deceitful, fraudulent;
deceptive, delusive, fallacious
مخادع mukādi‘ swindler, impostor,
cheat, sharper, crook
خدل kadala a to stiffen, become rigid; to
become numb, torpid, limp
خدم kadama i u ( خدم kidma) to serve, be at
service, do service; to have a job; to work;
to wait ( ه on s.o.); to serve ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.);
to render a service ( ه to s.o., ھ to s.th.),
stand up ( ه for s.o.) │ خدم الأرض to till or
cultivate the soil; خدمه خدمات كثيرة
(kidamātin katīratan) he rendered him
many services; خدم ركاب فلان (rikāba) to be
at s.o.’s beck and call; خدم مصالح فلان
(maṣāliḥa) to serve s.o.’s interests; خدم
القداس (quddāsa) to celebrate Mass (Chr.)
II to employ, hire ( ه s.o.), engage the
services ( ه of s.o.); to give work ( ه to s.o.),
provide work ( ه for) X to employ, hire,
take on ( ه s.o., ل for s.th.), engage the
services ( ل ه of s.o. for s.th.); to put in
operation, operate ( ھ e.g., a public utility);
to employ, use ( ھ s.th., ل for), make use,
avail o.s. ( ھ of s.th., ل for a purpose)
خدم kadam servants, attendants
خدمة kidma pl. خدم kidam, -āt a service
(rendered); attendance, service; operation;
office, employment, occupation, job; work
│ في خدمة شيء in the service of s.th.; في
خدمتكم at your service; خدم للحقيقة
(kidmatan) in the interest of truth, for the
sake of truth; خدمة عسكرية ('askarīya)
military service; الخدمة الاجبارية (ijbārīya)
conscription, compulsory service; الخدمة
السرية (sirrīya) secret service (pol.); خدمة
القداس k. al-quddās celebration of Mass
(Chr.) 229
خدام kaddām pl. ة manservant, servant,
attendant; woman servant, female
domestic servant, maid
خدام kadāma attendance, service;
employment, occupation, office, job
خدام kaddāma pl. -āt woman servant,
female domestic servant, maid
تخديم takdīm work, occupation or duty
of an employment agent ( مخدم mukaddim
see below) │ مكتب التخديم maktab at-t. labor
office, employment bureau
استخدام istikdām (putting into) operation;
use, utilization; employment, hiring (of an
employee); service, occupation, position,
job
خادم kādim pl. خدام kuddām, خدمة
kudama domestic servant, help;
manservant; woman servant; employee;
attendant; waiter; deacon (Chr.)
خادمة kādima woman servant; female
domestic servant, maid; woman attendant
خادمية kādimīya status of a servant
مخدوم makdūm pl. -ūn, مخاديم makādīm2
master, employer
مخدومة makdūma mistress, lady (of the
house), woman employer
مخدومية makdūmīya status of the master
or employer
مخدم mukaddim pl. -ūn employment
agent
مستخدم mustakdim pl. -ūn employer; --
mustakdam (colloq. mustakdim) pl. -ūn
employee, official
خدن III to befriend ( ه s.o.), make friends ( ه with
s.o.); to associate socially ( ه with)
خدن kidn pl. اخدان akdān (intimate)
friend, companion, confidant
خدين kadīn (intimate) friend,
companion, confidant
خديو kidīw, خديوي kudaiwī khedive
خديوي kidīwī khedivial
خذأ X to submit, subject o.s.
مستخذئ mustakdi’ submissive, servile,
subservient, obedient
خذروف kūdrūf pl. خذاريف kadārīf2 (spinning)
top
خذروفي kudrūfī turbinate, toplike
خذف kadafa i (kadf) to hurl away ( ھ، ب s.th.)
مخذفة mikdafa sling, slingshot, catapult
خذل kadala u (kadl, خذلان kidlān) to leave,
abandon, forsake, desert, leave in the
lurch ( ه or عن s.o.); to stay behind; to
disappoint; pass. kudila to fail, suffer a
setback, meet with disappointment III to
leave, abandon, forsake, desert, leave in
the lurch ( ه s.o.) VI to let up, flag, grow
slack, languish, wane, decrease, fade,
grow feeble VII to be left in the lurch; to
be helpless; to be defeated; to meet with
disappointment
خذل kidlān disappointment
تختذل ta!:d4u.l fatigue, languor,
weakness, feebleness; relaxation,
lessening of tension; disagreement,
dissent, disunion
انخذال inkidāl forsakenness,
desertedness, abandonment; defeat
خذل mutakādil languid, weak, exhausted,
spent, effete
خذو X to submit, subject o.s.
استخذاء istikdā’ subservience,
submissiveness, servility
مستخذ mustakdin submissive, servile,
subservient, obedient
خر karra i ( خرير karīr) to murmur, bubble,
gurgle, purl (of running water); to ripple,
trickle; to snore; -- (karr, خرور ٢٣٠ kurūr)
to fall, fall down, drop; to sink to the
ground, prostrate o.s. │ خر على الأرض fall
to the ground; خر بين يديه (baina yadaihi)
he prostrated himself before him; خر تحت
قدميه (taḥta qadmnaihi) he fell at hill feet
خرير karīr purl, murmur, ripple (of water)
خرئ kari’a a ( خرء kar’) to evacuate the
bowels, defecate
خرء kur’ and خراء karā’ excrement,
feces
خراسان kurāsān2 Khurasan (province in NE
Iran)
خرب 1 karaba i (karb) to destroy, wreck,
demolish, shatter, devastate, lay waste ( ھ
s.th.); -- kariba a ( خراب karāb) to be or
become destroyed, ruined, waste, go to
ruin, fall apart, disintegrate II to devastate,
lay waste, destroy, wreck, demolish, ruin,
lay in ruins ( ھ s.th.) IV = II; V to be or
become destroyed, ruined, waste, go to
ruin, Call apart, disintegrate
خرب karb destruction, devastation
خرب kurb hole; eye of a needle; anus
خرب karib destroyed, demolished,
wrecked, devastated, waste; dilapidated,
tumble-down, ramshackle; broken, ruined,
out of order
خربة kirba pl. خرب kirab (site of)
ruins; ruin, disintegrating structure
خربة karba, kurba irreligion,
lawlessness
خربة kurba pl. خرب kurab hole; eye of a
needle; anus
خربة kariba (site of) ruins
خراب karàb ruin, ruination; state of
destruction or dilapidation; desolation; (pl.
اخربة akriba) (site of) ruins
خرابة karāba pl. -āt, خرائب karā’ib2
disintegrating structure, ruin, ruins
خربان karbān, kirbān destroyed,
wrecked, demolished, devastated, waste;
ruined, broken, out of order
تخريب takrīb pl. -āt devastation,
destruction, wrecking, demolition;
sabotage
عمل تخريبي ‘amal takrībī act of sabotage
خارب kārib annihilator, destroyer
مخرب mukarrib pl. -ūn annihilator,
destroyer; saboteur
مخرب mukrib annihilator, destroyer
خروب 2 karrūb (coll.; n. un. ة) carob, locust;
carob bean, locust pod, St.-John’s-bread
خروبة karrūba pl. -āt kharouba, a dry measure
(Eg.; = 1/16 قدح = . ٢٩١ l)
خربش karbaša to scratch; to scrawl, scribble
خربوش karbuš pl. خرابيش karābīš (syr.)
tent
O مخربشات mukarbašāt graffiti
خربط karbaṭa to throw into disorder,
disarrange, confuse ( ھ s.th.)
خربق karbaqa to perforate, riddle ( ھ s.th.); to
spoil, mar ( ھ s.th.)
خربق karbaq hellebore (bot.)
خرت karata u (kart) to pierce, bore, perforate (
ھ s.th.), make a hole ( ھ in)
خرت kurt, kart pl. اخرات akrāt, خروت
kurūt hole; bore, drill hole; ring, eye,
eyelet
حريت kirrīt experienced, practiced,
skilled; guide
خرتيت kartīt rhinoceros
خرج karaja u ( خروج kurūj) to go out, walk out;
to come out ( من of), emerge ( من from); to
drive or ride out, go out (in a vehicle); to
flow out, exude, effuse; to go away,
depart, leave, retire; to protrude, 231
project, stick out; to leave ( من s.th.); to
dismount, alight, disembark ( من from), get
out, step out ( من of); to emanate, issue,
arise, originate, result ( من from); to draw
away, segregate, separate, secede, dissent
عن) from), disagree ( عن with); to deviate,
depart ( عن from an arrangement, from a
principle); to be an exception ( عن to); to
be outside a given subject ( عن ), go beyond
a topic ( عن ), exceed ( عن a topic); to be
alien ( عن to), be extraneous ( عن from), not
to belong ( عن to), be not included ( عن in),
have nothing to do with ( عن)؛ لا يخرج عن it
is limited to ..., it is nothing but ... ; to go
forth (into battle); to attack ( على s.o., s.th.),
rise, fight ( على against); to rebel, revolt (
على against); to violate, break, infringe (
على a rule, a regulation); خرج عليه ب to
come up to s.o. with …, confront s.o. with
... ; to get out, bring out, take out ( ب s.o.);
to turn out, oust, dislodge ( ب s.o.); to lead
away, dissuade ( عن ب s.o. from); to find
out, discover ( ب s.th.) │ خرج عن الخط (kaṭṭ)
to be derailed, run off the track (train) II to
move out, take out, dislodge ( ه s.o., ھ
s.th.); to turn out, oust, expel, evict, drive
out ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to remove, eliminate ( ه
s.o., ھ s.th.); to exclude, except ( ھ s.th.);
to train ( ه s.o., في in a skill, and the like);
to educate, bring up ( ه s.o.); to distill ( ھ
s.th.); to pull out, extract ( ھ s.th.); to
gather, deduce, infer ( ھ s.th.); to explain,
interpret, expound, elucidate ( ھ s.th.) IV
to move out, take out, get out, bring out,
dislodge ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to unload ( ھ
s.th.), disembark, detrain, etc. ( ه s.o., e.g.,
troops); to turn out, oust ( ه s.o.); to emit,
send out ( ھ s.th., e.g., electric waves); to
stick out ( ھ e.g., the tongue); to fish out (
ھ s.th. from the pocket); to bring out into
the open, make public ( ھ s.th.); to
remove, extract ( ھ s.th.); to eliminate ( ھ
s.th.); to expel, evict, exile, expatriate ( ه
s.o., من from a country); to dismiss, fire,
remove ( ه s.o., من from an office); اخرجه من
ثروته (tarwatihī) to rob s.o. of his property,
dispossess, expropriate s.o.; to give off,
sound, emit ( ھ s.th., e.g., a tone; said of a
musical instrument); to set forth, state,
express, utter, voice ( ھ an opinion); to
break ( ريحا rīḥan wind); to educate, bring
up ( ه s.o.); to train ( ه s.o.); to stage,
produce ( ھ a play; theat.); to bring out,
make, shoot ( رواية riwāyatan a film, said
of a director); to except, exclude ( ھ s.th.,
عن from); to pull out, extract ( ھ s.th.); to
select ( ھ s.th.) V to be educated; to be
trained ( في in a school, college, also من؛ في
in a field); to graduate ( في from a school,
from a college, also من ) VI to part
company, separate; to disengage,
disassociate, withdraw from one another;
to cede, assign, transfer, make over ( ل عن
s.th. to s.o.) X to get out, move out,
remove ( ھ s.th., من from); to take out,
draw ( ھ s.th., من from); to pull out, extract
ھ) s.th., من from); to mine, extract,
recover ( ھ mineral resources); to win,
gain, make ( ھ a product, من from); to
copy, excerpt (A s.th., من from a book or
document); to derive, draw, deduce, figure
out, compute ( من ھ s.th. from); to elicit ( ھ
s.th., e.g., astonishment, من from s.o.); to
find out, discover ( ھ s.th.)
خرج karj expenditure, outlay,
expense(s), costs; land tax; s.th.
appropriate or suitable, that which is s.o.’s
due, which s.o. deserves, which s.o. needs;
(eg.) ration (food); (pl. خروجات kurūjāat)
trimming; edge, edging, piping; pl. lace;
trimmings │ ھذا خراجك that’s what you
need, what you deserve; خرج المشنقة k. almašnaqa
one who deserves to be hanged
خرج kurj pl. خرجة kiraja saddlebag,
portmanteau 232
خرجة karja pl. karajāt exit, departure;
protrusion, protuberance, projection,
salient part; (eg.) funeral
خراج karāj tax; kharaj, land tax (Isl.
Law)
خراجي karājī of or pertaining to land
tax; of or pertaining to the taxed and
cultivable area
خرج kurāj (coll.; n. un. ة, pl. -āt) skin
eruption; tumor, abscess
خروج kurūj exit; egression, emergence;
departure; exodus; emigration; raid,
foray, sortie ( على against), attack,
assault ( على on) │ خروج عن الخط ( k aṭṭ)
derailment (of a train)
خريج kirrīj pl. -ūn graduate (of a school,
college, or university) │ مؤتمر الخريجين
العرب mu’tamar al-k. al-‘arab Congress of
Arab Graduates (a supra-national
organization of university graduates
advocating a unified Arab world)
مخرج makraj pl. مخارج makārij2 (place
of) exit; way out (of a difficult situation),
outlet, escape, loophole, shift, dodge,
excuse; articulation (of a sound); O
cathode (el.) │ علم مخارج الحروف phonetics
تخريج takrīj education, training (in
schools, colleges); raising, upbringing,
rearing (of children); extraction;
derivation, deduction; interpretation,
exegesis
اخراج ikrāj taking out, moving out,
removal; unloading, disembarkment,
detrainment; emission; moving, carting
away, hauling off; evacuation;
publication, publicizing, bringing before
the public; extraction, removal;
elimination; dismissal, removal (from an
office); ousting, expulsion, eviction,
expatriation, banishment (from a country);
excretion (biol.); finding out, discovery,
figuring out; training, formation,
education; direction, production, staging
(motion pictures, theater) │ تولى الاخراج
(tawallā) to have the, direction (motion
pictures, theater); من اخراج ... directed by
(motion picture)
تخرج takarruj graduation (from a
school or college)
تخارج takāruj separation, disassociation,
disengagement, (mutual) withdrawal
استخراج istikrāj taking out, moving out,
pulling out, removal; withdrawing;
extraction, derivation, gaining (of
industrial products, etc.), mining, recovery
(of mineral resources); preparation of an
extract; excerpting, copying; deduction,
inference; solution (of a problem)
خارج kārij outer, outside, outward,
exterior; external, foreign j outside,
exterior (n.); foreign country or countries;
quotient (arith.); karija (prep.) outside,
out of خارجا kārijan outside │ خارجا عن
outside of, apart from; في الخارج abroad, in
foreign countries; outside; الى الخارج
abroad, to foreign countries; to the
outside, outward, out
الخارجة El Khārga (town in central
Egypt, in Khārga oasis)
خارجي kārijī outer, out- (in
compounds), outside, outward, exterior,
external; foreign; nonresident │ عيادة خارجية
(‘iyāda) policlinic; وزارة خارجية ministry of
foreign (external) affairs, foreign ministry;
تلميذ خارجي (tilmīd) a student not living at a
boarding school, a day student
خوارج kawārij2 the Khawarij, Kharijites
(the oldest religious sect of Islam);
dissenters, dissidents, backsliders, rebels
مخرج mukrij pl. -ūn (screen or stage)
director
مخرج mukraj excerpt, extract (from a
book); مخرجات excretions (biol.) 233
متخرج mutakarrij pl. -ūn graduate ( في or
من of a school or college)
مستخرج mustakraj pl. -āt extract;
excerpt ( من from), partial copy ( من of)
خرخر karkara to snore
خرد 1 karida a to be a virgin, be untouched,
innocent, chaste
خريدة karida pl. خرائد karā’id خرد , 2
kurud virgin; unbored pearl
خردة 2 kurda scrap metal, scrap iron; pl. خردوات
kardawāt notions, smallwares; small
goods, smalls, miscellaneous small
articles; (eg. also) novelties, fancy goods
for ladies
خردجي kurdajī dealer in miscellaneous
smallwares
خردق kurdaq, kurduq small shot, buckshot
خردل kardal (coll.; n. un. ة) mustard seeds;
mustard
خرز karaza I u to pierce, bore ( ھ s.th.)
خرز karaz (coll.; n. un. ة) pearls
مخرز mikraz pl. مخارز makāriz2 awl;
punch
مخراز mikrāz awl; punch
خرس 1 karisa a (karas) to be dumb mute; to
become silent, keep silent, hold one’s
tongue IV to silence, reduce to silence,
gag ( ه s.o.)
خرس karas dumbness, muteness
اخرس akras2, f. خرساء karsā’2 pl. خرس
kurs, خرسان kursān dumb, mute
خرسان karsān2 dumb, mute
خرسان 2 karasān, خرسانة karasāna concrete
(béton) │O خرسانة مسلحة (musallaḥa)
armored (or reinforced) concrete
خرشوف kuršūf (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. خراشيف
karāšīf artichoke
خرص karaṣa u (karṣ) to guess estimate ( ھ
s.th.); to conjecture, surmise ( ھ s.th.),
form conjectures ( ھ about); to tell an
untruth, a falsehood, to lie V to fabricate
lies ( على against s.o.); to raise false
accusations ( على against s.o.)
خرص kirṣ, kurṣ, pl. خرصان kirṣān,
kurṣān earring
خراص karrāṣ pl. -ūn Ii&!', slanderer,
calumniator
خرط karaṭa u i (karṭ) to pull off, strip ( ھ
leaves from a tree); to turn, lathe, shape
with a lathe ( ھ wood, metal); to
exaggerate, boast, brag, lie; -- u (eg.) to
cut into small pieces; to mince, chop, dice
ھ) meat, carrots, etc.) II (eg.) to cut into
small pieces, mince, chop ( ھ s.th.) VII to
be turned. be lathed. be shaped with a
lathe; to join, enter ( في، في سلك fī silk an
organization, a community), affiliate (، في
في سلك with an organization, a
community); to penetrate ( في s.th. or into);
to plunge headlong ( في into), embark
rashly ( في upon); to labor, slave, toil │
انخرط في البكاء (bukā’) to break into tears
خرط karṭ pulling-off (of leaves); دون ذلك
خرط القتاد see دون turning, turnery
خراط karrāṭ pl. -ūn turner, lather;
braggart, bluffer, storyteller
خراطة kirāṭa turner’s trade, turnery, art
of turning
خراطة karrāta skirt (syr.)
خريطة karīṭa pl. خرائط karā’iṭ, خرط
kuruṭ map, chart
مخرطة mikraṭa, makraṭa pl. مخارط
makāriṭ2 lathe
خارطة kāriṭa pl. -āt map, chart
مخروط makrūṭ cone (math.); conic 234
مخروطي makrūṭī conic
خرطوش karṭūš, خرطوشة karṭūša pl. خراطيش
karāṭīš 2 cartridge; lead (of a pencil);
cartouche (arch.); daybook
خرطال karṭāl oats
خرطوم karṭūm pl. خراطيم karāṭīm2 proboscis,
trunk (of the elephant); hose
الخرطوم al-karṭūm Khartoum (capital of
the Sudanese Republic)
خراطين karāṭīn2 a kind of earthworm
خراطيني karāṭīnī wormlike, vermiform
خرطيط karṭīṭ rhinoceros
خرع karu‘a u (kur‘, خراعة kurā‘a) and kari‘a a
(kara‘) to droop, be or become slack,
limp, flabby; to be or become languid,
soft, spineless, yielding VII do. VIII to
invent, devise, contrive ( ھ s.th.); to create.
originate ( ھ s.th.)
خرع kari‘ and خريع karī‘ soft, languid,
yielding, spineless, devoid of energy,
nerveless
خروع kirwa‘ castor-oil plant, palma
Christi (Ricinus communis; bot.)
اختراع iktirā‘ pl. -āt invention
مخترع muktari‘ pl. -ūn inventor
مخترع muktara‘ pl. -at invention
خرف karifa a (karaf) to dote, be senile and
feeble-minded; to drivel, talk foolishly
خرف karaf feeble-mindedness, dotage,
senility; childishness (of an old man)
خرف karif and خرفان karfān feebleminded,
doting; childish; dotard
خريف karīf autumn, fall
خريفي karīfī autumnal
خروف karūf pl. خراف kirāf, اخرفة akrifa,
خرفان kirfān young sheep, lamb, yearling;
wether
خرافة kurāfa pl. -āt superstition; fable,
fairy tale
خرافي kurāfī fabulous, fictitious,
legendary
مخرفة makrafa prattle, drivel, twaddle,
bosh
تخريف takrīf folly, delusion; foolish
talk, drivel, twaddle, bosh, buncombe
مخرف mukarrif childish, foolish; (pl.
-ūn) prattler, chatterbox, windbag;
charlatan
خرفش kartaša to shuffle, mix ( ھ s.th.)
خرفوشة karfūša pl. خرافيش karāfīš2 card
of low value, discard (in card playing)
خرق karaqa I u (karq) to tear, rend, tear apart (
ھ s.th.); to make a hole ( ھ in); to
perforate, pierce, bore ( ھ s.th.); to
penetrate ( ھ s.th.), break, pass ( ھ through
s.th.); to traverse, cross, transit ( ھ s.th., a
country); to violate, impair, infringe ( ھ
s.th.), encroach ( ھ upon); to break ( ھ a
vow, and the like), commit a breach of (
ھ ); to exceed the ordinary, be unusual,
extraordinary, unprecedented, unheard-of
│ خرق العادة to go beyond what is ordinary
or customary IV to lurk, lie in wait V and
VII to be torn, be rent, be pierced, be
broken VIII to pierce ( ھ s.th.); to cut,
break, pass' ( ھ through s.th.), penetrate ( ھ
s.th.); to traverse, cross, transit ( ھ s.th.),
travel through s.th. ( ھ ); to exceed ( ھ e.g.,
a limit), go beyond s.th. ( اخترق مسامعه │ ( ھ
(masāmi‘ahū) to shrill in s.o.’s ears
خرق karq tearing, rending, laceration; piercing,
boring, perforation; penetration;
disruption; breakthrough; traversion,
crossing, transit; violation, breach; (pl.
خروق kurūq) hole, aperture, opening │ خرق
الأمن من العام k. al-amn al-‘āmm violation of
public security; خرق العادة offense against
common usage, violation of mores; اتسع
الخرق على الراقع (ittasa‘a) the rent is beyond
repair 235
خرق kurq and خرقة kurqa awkwardness,
clumsiness; stupidity │ خرق في الرأي (ra’y)
stupidity; folly, madness; من الخرق في الرأي
ان ... it would be very unwise to ...
خرقة kirqa pl. خرق kiraq tatter, shred;
rag; scrap (of paper); polishing cloth;
eraser (cloth)
اخرق akraq2 f. خرقاء karqā’2, pl. خرق
kurq clumsy, awkward; stupid; irregular;
illegal, illicit, unlawful
مخرقة makraqa trickery, sleight of hand,
legerdemain, hocus-pocus, swindle
مخارق makāriq2 a kind of pastry (tun.)
اختراق iktirāq penetration; piercing,
disruption; traversion, crossing, transit
خارق kāriq and ( للعادة or) خارق العادة
exceeding the customary, unusual,
extraordinary, unprecedented, unheard-of;
pl. خوارق kawāriq2 preternatural
phenomena. miracles; that which
transcends the conceivable or the rational
│ خارق الطبيعة supernatural; خوارق المصادفات
k. al-muṣādafāt miraculous coincidences
مخترق muktaraq passage, passageway
خرم karama i (karm) and II to pierce ( ھ s.th.),
make a hole or holes ( ھ in); to perforate (
ھ s.th.) VII to be pierced, be riddled, be
torn; to be deranged, unsettled,
disorganized; to come to an end, run out,
peter out, get lost VIII to destroy,
annihilate ( ه s.o.); to carry off, carry away
ه) s.o., of death); to break ( الصفوف the
ranks), pass through s.th. ( (ھ
خرم karm pl. خروم kurūm gap, blank
(e.g., in a manuscript, or the like)
خرم kurm hole │ خرم الابرة k. al-ibra eye
of the needle
خرامة karāma drill, bit, auger, gimlet;
punch, perforator
خرم akram2 having a perforated nasal
septum
تخريم takrīm piercing, boring, drilling;
perforation; punching; lace-making, lacework
تخريمة takrīma lace, lace-work,
openwork, filigree
انخرام inkirām state of unsettlement,
disturbance, disorganization, derangement
│ انخرام في التوازن (tawāzun) disturbance of
equilibrium
مخروم makrūm defective, incomplete
(e.g., a manuscript)
مخرم mukarram perforated; done in
openwork, in filigree
خرماشة kurmāša pl. -āt (ir.) harrow
خرنوب kurnūb carob, locust; carob bean, locust
pod, St.-John’s-bread
خرنق kirniq pl. خرانق karāniq2 young hare,
leveret
خروع kirwa‘ castor-oil plant, palma Christi
(Ricinus communis; bot.)
خز 1 kazza u to pierce, transfix ( ه s.o.); to stab (
ه s.o., ب with) VIII to pierce, transfix ( ه
s.o., ب with)
خز 2 pl. خزوز kuzūz silk fabric
خزر 1 kazara uto look askance ( ه at s.o.), give
s.o. ( ه) a sidelong glance
بحر الخزر 2 baḥr al-kazar the Caspian Sea
خيزران kaizurān pl. خيازر kayāzir2 cane, reed;
rattan; bamboo
خيزرانة kaizurāna cane, stick
خزع kaza‘a a (kaz‘) to cut, sever ( ھ s.th.)
خزعبل kuza‘bal idle talk, bosh
خزعبل kuza‘bala pl. -āt idle talk, bosh; joke,
jest, hoax; fib, yarn; cock and bull story
236
خزف kazaf pottery, earthenware; porcelain,
china; ceramics
خزفي kazafī (made of) porcelain;
porcelaneous, porcelain, china (adj.)
خزاف kazzāf dealer in chinaware; potter
خزافة kizāfa potter’s trade, pottery
خزق kazaqa i to pierce, stab, transfix ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to drive, ram ھ في الأرض s.th. into
the ground); to tear, rend, rip apart ( ھ
s.th.) II to tear, rend, rip apart ( ھ s.th.) V
and VII pass of I and II
خزق kazq rip, rent, tear, hole (in a garment)
خازوق kāzūq pl. خوازق kawāziq2 post, stake,
pole; dirty trick │ ھذا خازوق that’s tough
luck!
خوزق 2 look up alphabetically
خزل kazala i (kazl) to cut off, sever ( ھ s.th.); to
hinder, prevent, hold back, restrain, keep (
ه s.o., عن from) VIII to cut off, cut short,
end abruptly ( ھ s.th.); to shorten, abridge,
abbreviate ( ھ s.th.); to stand alone ( ب with
an opinion)
اختزال iktizāl abridgment, abbreviation;
shorthand, stenography
مختزل muktazil stenographer
خزم kazama i (kazm) to string, thread ( ھ
pearls) │ خزم انفه (anfahū) to pierce the
nasal septum (of a camel) and insert the
nose ring for the bridle; to make s.o.
subservient to one’s will
خزام kizām, خزامة kizāma pl. خزائم
kazā’im2 nose ring
خزامى kuzāmā lavender (bot.)
خزن kazana u (kazn) to store, stock, lay up,
hoard, amass, accumulate; to keep secret,
keep ( ھ a secret) II and VIII to store,
stock, lay up, warehouse ( ھ s.th.); to store
up, accumulate ( ھ s.th.); to dam ( ھ s.th.);
to put in safekeeping, keep ( ھ s.th.)
خزن kazn storing; accumulation,
hoarding, amassing; storage, warehousing
خزنة kazna treasure house; safe, coffer,
vault; wardrobe, locker; cupboard
خزانة kizāna pl. -āt, خزائن kazā’in2
treasure house; vault, coffer, safe;
treasury, treasury department (of an
official agency), any office for the deposit
and disbursement of funds; locker,
wardrobe, closet; cupboard; library │ خزانة
الدولة k. ad-daula and خزانة عامة (‘āmma)
public treasury, exchequer; خزانة الثلج k. attalj
icebox, refrigerator; خزانة الكتب k. alkutub
bookcase; library; خزانة خصوصية
(kuṣūṣīya) private library; خزانة الملابس
wardrobe, closet, locker
خزينة kazīna pl. خزائن kazā’in2 treasure
house; public treasury, exchequer;
treasury, treasury department (of an
official agency), any office for the deposit
and disbursement of funds; cashier’s
office; vault, coffer, safe; cashbox, till (of
a merchant) │ الخزينة الخاصة (kāṣṣa)
(formerly) the Royal Privy Purse (Ir.);
خزينة الدولة k. ad-daula public treasury,
exchequer; خزينة راصدة، خزينة نقود راصدة
cash register
خزان kuzzān pl. -āt, خزازين kazāzīn2
dam; reservoir; basin, sump, pool; storage
tank (also for oil); - (pl. -ūn)
storehouseman, warehouseman
مخزن makzan pl. مخازن makāzin2
storeroom, storehouse; depository; stockroom,
storage room; depot, magazine,
warehouse; store, shop, department store;
المخزن al-makzan the Makhzan, the
Moroccan government (formerly:
govemmental finance department; Mor.)
│ مخزن ادوية m. adwiya drugstore; مخزن
الاصدار m. al-iṣdār shipping room (com.);
مخزن العفش m. al-‘afš trunk (of an
automobile) 237
مخزني makzanī being under government
control or administration. belonging to the
government (Mor.) │ املاك مخزنية (amlāk)
government land (Mor.)
مخازني makāzinī pl. -īya native
gendarme (Mor.)
مخازن makāzin مخازن الطريق , 2 m. aṭ-ṭarīq
the nearest, shortest way, a short cut
مخزنجي makzanjī storehouseman,
warehouseman
خزندار kazandār, kaznadār treasurer
تخزين takzīn storage, storing,
warehousing; storing up, accumulation;
damming
خازن kāzin pl. خزنة kazana, خزان kuzzān
treasurer
مخزون makzūn stored, stored up,
deposited, warehoused; (pl. -āt) stock,
supply, stock in trade
خزي kaziya a (kizy, kazan) to be or become
base, vile, despicable, contemptible; ( خزاية
kazāya) to be ashamed ( من of); -- kazā i to
disgrace, dishonor, discredit, put to shame
ه) s.o.); to shame, abash, embarrass ( ه s.o.)
IV to humiliate, degrade, dishonor ( ه s.o.);
to shame, put to shame ( ه s.o.) X to be
ashamed
خزى kizy, kazan shame, disgrace,
ignominy │ يا للخزى ! yā la-l-kazā what a
shame!
خزيان kazayān2 f. خزيا kazyā, pl. خزايا
kazāya ashamed, shamefaced, abashed;
shameful, disgraceful, scandalous,
infamous, base, mean, vile
مخزاة makzāh pl. مخاز makāzin a
shameful thing, a disgrace; reason for
shame; pl. shameful things, disgraceful
acts, infamies
مخزي makzīy ashamed, shamefaced,
abashed; embarrassed, confused; المخزي
the Devil
مخز mukzin disgraceful, shameful,
scandalous, infamous
مخزية mukziya pl. -at disgraceful act,
infamy
خس kassa (1st pers. perf. kasistu) a ( خسة kissa,
خساسة kasāsa) to be mean, base, vile; to
become less, decrease, diminish,
depreciate, fall in value; -- kassa u to
lessen, reduce, diminish ( ھ s.th.) II to
lessen, reduce, diminish ( ھ s.th.)
خس kass lettuce (Lactuca sativa; bot.)
خس kassa (n. un.) head of lettuce
خس kissa and خساسة kasāsa meanness,
baseness, vileness
خسيس kasīs pl. اخساء akissā’2 mean,
base, low, vile, despicable, contemptible,
miserable
خسيسة kasīsa pl. خسائس kasā’is mean
trick, infamy
خسأ kasa’a a (kas’) to chase away ( ه s.o.); --
خسئ kasi’a a to be driven away, make off
│ خسئت kasi’ta beat it! scram! اخسأ اليك
iksa’ ilaika do.
اخسأ aksa’2 baser, meaner, more
despicable; weaker
خاسئ kāsi’ spurned, rejected, outcast;
low, base, vulgar, despicable,
contemptible; disgraceful, shameful,
scandalous, infamous; futile, vain
(attempt); weak, feeble, languid
خستكة kastaka indisposition
مخستك mukastak indisposed, unwell,
sickly
خسر kasara a (kusr, خسار kasār, خسارة kasāra,
خسران kusrān) to incur a loss, suffer
damage; to lose, forfeit ( ھ s.th.); to go
astray, lose one’s way, get lost; to perish
II to cause loss or damage ( ھ to s.o.); to
do harm ( ه to s.o.); to destroy, 238 ruin ( ھ
s.o.); to corrupt, deprave ( ه s.o.)
IV to cause a loss ( ه to s.o.); to shorten, cut,
reduce ( ھ s.th.) X to grudge ( على or في
s.o., s.th.), envy s.o. ( على or في ) the
possession of ( (ھ
خسر kur loss, damage
خسران kusrān loss, damage, forfeiture;
decline, deterioration; depravity,
profligacy
خسارة kasāra pl. خسائر kasā’ir2 loss,
damage; pl. losses, casualties ( في in; mil.)
│ يا خسارة what a pity! too bad!
خسران kusrān (eg.) loser; affected by
damage or loss
خاسر kāsir lost, hopeless; involving
substantial losses; loser; depraved,
corrupted; profligate, disreputable person,
scoundrel
مخسر mukassir causing damage,
harmful, noxious, injurious, detrimental
خسف kašafa i (kasf, خسوف kusūf) to sink, sink
down, give way, cave in, disappear, go
down; to be eclipsed (moon); -- i (kasf) to
cause to sink, cause to give way │ خسف لله
به الأرض k. llāh bihī l-arḍa God made him
sink into the ground, God made the
ground swallow him up VII to sink, sink
down, go down
خسف kasf baseness, ignominy, disgrace,
shame; inferiority │ سام خسفا sāma kasfan
to humiliate, abase, degrade (.s.o.)
خسوف kusūf occultation (astron.); lunar
eclipse
خش kašša i u (kašš) to enter ( في s.th.)
خشاش kišāš vermin, insects
خشب II to lignify, become woody or woodlike;
to line, face or cue with wood, to panel,
wainscot ( ھ ٨ .tb.) V to lignify, become
woody or woodlike; to become bard, still,
firm, rigid; to stiffen, freeze (e.g., with
panic)
خشب kašab pl. خشب akšāb wood,
lumber, timber │ خشب الأنبياء k. al-anbiyā’
guaiacum wood, lignum vitae
خشبة kašaba pl. –āt, اخشاب akšāb piece
of wood; a timber; pale, post; plank, board
│ خشب الميت al-mayyit coffin; خشبة المسرح
al-masraḥ stage (of a theater), على خشبة
المسرح on the “boards”
خشبي kašabī wooden, woody, ligneous,
made of wood; timber-, lumber- (in
compounds)
خشاب kaššāb pl. ة lumber merchant
تخشيب takšīb paneling, wainscoting
تخشيبة takšība pl. -āt, تخاشيب takāšīib2
barrack, wooden shed
تخشب takaššub stiffness, rigor, rigidity;
stiffening
متخشب mutakaššib frozen, rigid; stiff,
bard, firm
خشت kušt pl. خشوت kušūt javelin
خشخاش 1 kaškāš (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. خشاخيش
kašākīš2 poppy
خشخش kaškša to clank, clatter, rattle; to rustle
خشخشة kaškaša pl. -āt noise; clank,
clatter, rattle; rustle, rustling; crash
خشخشية (= شخشيخة ) rattle (toy)
خشارة kušāra leftover (of a meal); offal, refuse;
a discard, a worthless thing
خشع kaša‘a a ( خشوع kušū‘) to be submissive,
be humble; to humble o.s.; to fade (voice)
│ خشع ببصره (baṣarihī) to lower one’s eyes
II to humble, reduce to submission ( ه s.o.)
V to display humility; to be humble; to be
moved, be touched
خشوع kušū‘ submissiveness,
submission, humility
خاشع kaši‘ pl. خشعة kaša‘a submissive,
humble 239
خشاف kušāf various fruits, stewed and waked
in syrup or rose water, compote
خشكار kuškār coarsely ground grain, grits
خشكريشة kaškarīša scab, slough, scurf
خشم II to intoxicate, make drunk ( ه s.o.)
خشم kašm nose; mouth; vent, outlet
خيشوم kaišūm pl. خياشم kayāšim2 nose;
gills; also pl. خياشيم nose
خشن kašuna u ( خشونة ) to be rough, coarse,
crude; to be raw, uncut, unpolished II to
roughen, coarsen, make crude ( ھ s.th.) III
to be rude, uncivil, boorish ( ه to s.o.) V to
display rough, rude, or coarse, manners; to
be rough, uneven; to lead as rough life XII
اخشوشن ikšaušana to be rough, coarse,
crude; to lead a rough life
خشن kašin pl. خشان kišān rough, crude;
coarse (as opposed to ناعم nā‘im); rude,
unpolished, uncouth; tough, harsh (life);
hoarse, raucous (voice) │ خشن اللمس k. allams
coarse to the touch, rough, uneven,
wrinkled; خشن الخلق k. al-kulq uncouth,
boorish; خشن القشرة k. al-qišra thickshelled;
الجنس الخشن (jins) the strong sex
اخشن akšan2, f. خشناء kašnā’2, pl. خشن
kušn rough, tough, harsh, rude, uncouth
الخشناء al-kašnā’ the vulgar, uneducated
people
خشونة kušūna roughness, coarseness;
crudeness; rudeness
خشي kašiya a (kašy, خشية kašya) to fear, dread (
ه s.o., ھ s.th., على for s.o. or s.th.), be
afraid ( ه of) II to frighten, scare, terrify,
alarm ( ه s.o.) V = I; VIII to be
embarrassed; to be ashamed
خشية kašya fear, anxiety, apprehension
│ خشية من kašyatan min for fear of
اخشى akšā more timorous, more fearful;
more to be feared. more frightening
خشيان kašyān2. f. خشيا kaāyā, pl. خشايا
timorous, timid, anxious, apprehensive
خاش kāšin timorous, timid, anxious,
apprehensive
خص kašša u to distinguish, favor (especially,
before others), single out ( ه s.o.), bestow
special honors ( ه upon s.o., in preference
to others); to endow ( ب s.o. with), confer,
bestow ( ب upon s.o. s.th.); to apportion,
allot, assign, accord, give, dedicate,
devote ( ب ه to s.o. s.th., in preference to
others); with لنفسه to take possession ( ھ
of), demand ( ھ s.th.; also خص به نفسه
nafsahū); to be specifically associated ( ه
with s.o.), be characteristic ( ه of s.o.), be
peculiar ( ه to); to apply in particular ( ھ
to), be especially valid ( ھ for); to concern,
regard ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.), have special
relevance ( ھ to), bear ( ھ on) │ خصه بعنايته
(bi-‘ināyatihī) to devote one’s attention to
s.o., favor s.o. with one’s attention; خصه
بالذكر (bi-d-dikr) to make special mention
of s.o. or s.th.; واخص منھم (akuṣṣu) I
mention, among them, especially (with
foll. acc.); ھذا لا يخصني this does not
concern me, this is none of my business II
to specify, particularize, itemize ( ھ s.th.);
to specialize ( ھ s.th.), narrow, restrict ( ل ھ
s.th. to); to designate, destine, set aside,
earmark, single out ( ل ھ or ه s.o. or s.th.
for a purpose); to devote in particular,
dedicate, assign ( ل ھ s.th. to); to allocate,
allot, apportion ( ل ھ s.th. to); to
appropriate ( ل ھ funds for); to reserve,
held, withhold ( ل ھ s.th. for); to tie down (
ب ه s.o. to a special field) V to specialize (
ل in, also ب or في in a scientific field); to
devote all one’s attention ( ل to s.th.); to
apply o.s. ( ل to), go in for s.th. ( ل); to be
peculiar ( ب to); to be chosen, destined,
earmarked ( ل for) VIII to distinguish,
favor ( ب ه s.o. with), confer distinction ( ب
ه upon s.o. by); to devote, give, accord,
afford ( ب ه to s.o. s.th., in preference to
others); to dedicate ( ب ه to s.o. s.th., e.g.,
one’s services); (with لنفسه ) to take
exclusive possession ( ھ of), claim,
demand ( ھ s.th.), lay special claim ( ھ to;
also اختص به نفسه nafsahu); to be
distinguished, be marked ( ب by); to
possess alone, in distinction from all
others, have above others ( ب s.th.), have
the advantage over others ( ب that); to be
peculiar ( ب to); to concern, regard ( ب
s.th.), bear ( ب on); to be pertinent, have
relevance ( ب to), have to do ( ب with); to
be duly qualified, be competent, have
jurisdiction ( ب in; e.g., an authority); to
have as a special function or task ( ب s.th.)
خص lettuce (bot.)
خص kuṣṣ pl. خصاص kiṣāṣ, اخصاص
akṣāṣ, خصوص kuṣūṣ, hut, shack, shanty,
hovel
خصة kaṣṣa jet of water
خصاص kaṣāṣ interstice, interval,
crevice, crack, gap
خصاصة kaṣāṣa crevice, crack, interval,
gap
خصيصة kaṣīṣa pl. خصائص kaṣā’iṣ2
special characteristic or quality, specialty,
particularity, peculiarity
خصيصا kiṣṣīṣan particularly, especially,
specifically
خصوص kuṣūṣ specialness; خصوصا
kuṣūṣan especially, in particular,
specifically │ بخصوص، في خصوص and من
خصوص (with foll. genit.) as to,
concerning, regarding, with respect to, as
regards; بھذا الخصوص and من ھذا الخصوص in
this connection, in this matter, in this
respect, about this, concerning this; على
الخصوص and على وجه الخصوص (wajhi l-k.)
especially, particularly, in particular,
specifically
خصوصي kuṣūṣī; special; private,
personal
خصاصة kaṣāṣa poverty, penury,
privation, destitution, want
اخص akaṣṣ2 more special, more
specific │ على الأخص especially; في الأخص
do.
اخصاء akiṣṣā’2 intimate friends,
confidante
اخصائي ikṣā’ī see خصى 2
تخصيص takṣīṣ specialization;
specification, particularization,
itemization; designation, destination (for a
purpose); allotment, apportionment,
allocation; reservation; (pl. -āt)
appropriation, financial allocation; credit
│ على تخصيص and على وجه التخصيص
specifically
تخصص takaṣṣuṣ specialization (esp., in
a scientific field)
اختصاص iktiṣāṣ pl. -āt jurisdiction,
competence; special province or domain,
bailiwick (fig.); pl. prerogatives,
privileges, monopolies; concessions
(Intern. Law); ذو (ذات) الاختصاص ( duly
qualified, authorized, responsible,
competent; دائرة الاختصاص scope of
competence, sphere of authority,
jurisdiction, province, domain, field
اختصاصي iktiṣāṣī pl. -ūn specialist
خاص kaṣṣ special, particular; specific,
peculiar; relative, relevant, pertinent ( ب
to), concerning ( ب s.th.); earmarked,
Designated, destined, set aside ( ب for);
especially valid or true ( ب for), especially
applicable ( ب to), characteristic ( ب of);
distinguished; private; exclusive, not
public │ جريدة خاصة ب professional journal
for ...; الخاص والعام (‘āmm) the special and
the general; high and low, all people;
الطبيب الخاص physician in ordinary 241
خاصة kāṣṣa pl. خواص kawāṣ2 exclusive
property; private possession; specialty,
particularity, peculiarity, characteristic,
property, attribute; essence, intrinsic
nature; leading personalities, people of
distinction, الخاصة the upper class, the
educated; kāṣṣatan and بخاصة bi-kāṣṣatin
especially, in particular │ في خاصة انفسھم fī
k. anfusihim at the bottom of their hearts,
deep inside
خاصية kāṣṣīya pl. -āt, خصائص kaṣā’iṣ2
specialty, particularity, characteristic,
peculiarity, property, special attribute,
feature, trait, qualification; prerogative,
privilege; jurisdiction, competence
خويصة kuwaṣṣa (dimin. of خاصة ) one’s
own business, private affair │ يدخل في
خويصة امري he meddles in my private
affairs
مخصوص makṣūṣ special
مخصص mukaṣṣaṣ chosen, set aside,
earmarked, designated, destined ( ل for);
allotted, apportioned, allocated; -- pl.
مخصصات (financial) allocations;
appropriations, credits; (daily) allowance;
(food) rations │ مخصصات اضافية (iḍāfīya)
extra allowances; مخصصات الملك m. almalik
civil list
مختص muktaṣṣ pertaining, pertinent,
relevant, relative ( ب to); duly qualified,
authorized, responsible, competent;
special; pl. مختصات muktaṣṣāt
competences │ المقامات المختصة the
competent authorities; الدوائر المختصة
competent (or authoritative) quarters
خصب kaṣaba i and kaṣiba a (kiṣb) to be fertile
(soil) II to make fertile ( ھ s.th.); to
fructify, fertilize ( ھ s.th.) IV = I
خصب kaṣib fertility; abundance, plenty;
superabundance, profusion
خصب kaṣib and خصيب kaṣīb fertile,
productive, fat
خصوبة kuṣūba fertility
تخصيب takṣīb fructification, fertilization
اخصاب ikṣāb fertility
مخصبات mukaṣṣibāt fertilizers
مخصب mukṣib fertile, productive, fat
خصر kaṣira a (kaṣar) to become cold; to suffer
from the cold III to clasp ( ه s.o.) around
the waist, put one’s arm around s.o.’s ( (ه
waist VIII to shorten, condense, abridge,
epitomize ( ھ s.th.); to summarize ( ھ s.th.)
خصر kaṣr pl. خصور kuṣūr hip, haunch,
waist
مخصرة mikṣara pl. مخاصر makāṣir2
stick, baton, wand; mace, scepter
اختصار iktiṣār shortening, condensation,
abridgment, summarization, epitomizing
(of a statement); brevity │ بالاختصار and
باختصار briefly, in short, in a few words
مختصر muktaṣar shortened, condensed,
abridged; brief, short; concise, terse,
succinct; (pl. -āt) short excerpt, brief
exposition, synopsis, outline, summary,
abstract, epitome, compendium
خاصرة kāṣira pl. خواصر kawāṣir2 hip,
haunch, waist │ شوكة في خاصرته (šauka) a
thorn in his side
خصف kaṣafa i (kaṣf) to mend, repair, sew ( ھ a
shoe)
خصفة kaṣfa pl. خصاف kiṣāf basket
(made of palm leaves)
خصلة kuṣla pl. خصل kuṣal, -āt tuft; bunch,
cluster; lock, wisp (of hair)
خصلة kaṣla pl. خصال kiṣāl quality,
property, characteristic, peculiarity, trait;
(natural) disposition
خصم kaṣama i to defeat ( ه an opponent) in
argument; to deduct, subtract ( ھ s.th., من
from): to discount ( ھ a bill, a note III to
argue, quarrel, dispute ( ه with s.o. 242
to bring legal action ( ه against s.o.), sue ( ه
s.o.), litigate ( ه with); VI to quarrel, argue,
have a fight; to go to law, carry on a
lawsuit, litigate ( مع with s.o.) VII to be
deducted, be subtracted VIII to quarrel,
argue, have a fight
خصم kaṣm pl. خصوم kuṣūm, اخصام
akṣām adversary, antagonist, opponent;
opposing party (in a lawsuit)
خصم deduction; subtraction; rebate;
discount; pl. خصوم kuṣūm
liabilities (fin.) │ سعر الخصوم si‘r al-k.
discount rate, bank rate; خصم الكمبيالات k.
al-kambiyālāt bill discount
خصيم kaṣīm pl. خصماء kuṣamā’ خصمان , 2
kuṣmān adversary, antagonist, opponent
خصومة kuṣūma quarrel, argument,
dispute, controversy, feud; lawsuit
خصام kiṣām quarrel, argument, dispute,
controversy, feud; lawsuit
مخاصم mukāṣim adversary, opponent,
opposing party (in a lawsuit); antagonist;
litigant
خصى 1 kaṣā ( خصاء kiṣā’) to castrate, emasculate
ه) s.o.)
خصى kasīy pl. خصيان kiṣyān, خصية kiṣya
a castrate, eunuch
خصية kuṣya pl. خصى kuṣan testicle
مخصى makṣīy castrated, emasculated
فرس مخصى (faras) gelding
اخصائي 2 ikṣā’ī pl. -ūn specialist; expert (of a
specialized field)
خض kaḍḍa (kaḍḍ) to jolt, jog ( ھ s.th.); to
shake ( ھ s.th.); to frighten, scare ( ه s.o.)
لبن خض laban kaḍḍ buttermilk
خضة kaḍḍa concussion, shock, jolt;
fright, terror, fear
خضب kaḍaba i (kaḍb) to dye, color,
tinge ( ھ s.th.); -- kaḍaba i and kaḍiba a (
خضوب kuḍūb) to be or become green
(plant) II to color, tinge ( ھ s.th.); to dye (
ھ s.th) XII اخضوضب ikḍauḍaba to be or
become green (plant)
O خضب kaḍb chlorophyll (biol.)
خضاب kiḍāb dye, dyestuff │O خضاب الدم
k. ad-dam hemoglobin (biol.)
خضوب kuḍūb green, greenness, green
color
خضيب kaḍīb dyed
خضخض ḳaḍkaḍa ( خضخض ḳaḍkaḍa) to set in
motion, upset, rock, shake ( ھ s.th.)
خضخض kaḍkaḍa concussion, shock,
jolt
خضد kaḍada i (kaḍd) to cut off, break off ( ھ
thorns) │ خضد شوكته (šaukatahū) to tame
s.o., hold s.o. in check, curb s.o.’s power
خضر kaḍira a (kaḍar) to be green II to make
green, dye or color green ( ھ s.th.) │ خضر
الأرض (arḍ) to sow the land, till the earth
IX to be or become green XII اخضوضر
ikḍauḍara = IX
خضر kaḍir green, verdant; verdure,
greenery; young green crop (of grain)
الخضر al-kaḍir, al-kiḍir a well-known
legendary figure
خضرة kuḍra green, greenness, green
color; - (pl. خضر kuḍar) vegetation,
verdure, greenery, greens; meadow; خضر
vegetables
خضري kuḍarī greengrocer
خضار kaḍār green, greenness, green
color; greens, herbs, potherbs
خضير kadīr green
خضارة kaḍāra greens, herbs, potherbs
خضار kaḍḍār greengrocer
اخضر akḍar f. خضراء kaḍrā’ pl. خضر
kuḍr green │ اتى على الاخضر واليابس (atā) to
destroy everything, wreak havoc
الخضراء al-kaḍrā’ “the Verdant”
(epithet of Tunis); the sky 243
خضراوات kaḍrāwāt vegetables; greens,
herbs, potherbs
الخضيراء al-kuḍairā’ Paradise
O يخضور yakḍūr chlorophyll (biol.)
مخضرة makḍara meadow, lawn, turf,
sod, greens, verdant land
مخضرات mukaḍḍarāt vegetables
خضرم kiḍrim pl. خضارم kaḍārim2 abundant,
copious; well-watered, abounding in
water; openhanded, generous, liberal,
munificent
مخضرم mukaḍram designation of such
contemporaries of Mohammed, esp. of
poets, whose life span bridges the time of
paganism and that of Islam; an old man
who has lived through several generations
or historical epochs
خضع kaḍa‘a a ( خضوع kuḍū‘) to bow, defer,
submit, yield, surrender ( ل to s.o., to s.th.),
humble o.s. ( ل before), obey, follow ( ل
s.o. or s.th.); to be subject ( ل and الى to a
law, to a power, etc.), be under s.o.’s ( ل or
الى ) control II and IV to humble,
subjugate, subdue, make tractable ( ه s.o.);
to submit, subject, expose ( ل ه or ھ s.th. or
s.o. to s.th.)
خضوع kuḍū‘ submission, obedience,
humility, subjection
خضوع kaḍū‘ pl. خضع kuḍu‘ submissive,
humble
اخضاع ikḍā‘ subjugation, subdual;
subjection
خاضع kāḍi‘ pl. خضع kuḍa‘, خضعان
kuḍ‘ān, kiḍ‘ān submissive, humble;
obedient, pliant, tractable; subject, liable,
prone ( ل to s.th.)
خضل kaḍila a to be or become moist II and IV
to moisten, wet ( ھ s.th.) IX = I
خضل kaḍil moist, wet; juicy, succulent;
refreshing, gay, lighthearted
خضم kaḍama i (kaḍm) to munch ( ھ s.th., with
a full mouth), bite ( ھ into s.th.)
خضم kiḍamm vast (said of the sea); sea,
ocean
خط kaṭṭa u (kaṭṭ) to draw or trace a line ( على
on); to draw, trace, sketch, design ( ھ
s.th.); to write, pen ( ھ s.th.); to carve,
engrave, inscribe ( ھ s.th.); to outline,
mark, trace out, prescribe ( ھ ل for s.o.
s.th.) │ خط خطا (سطرا ) (kaṭṭan, satran) to
draw a line; خطه الشيب (šaibu) his hair
turned gray II to draw lines; to rule ( ھs.
th.); to furrow, ridge ( ھ s.th.); to mark
with lines or stripes, stripe, streak ( ھ
s.th.); to pencil ( ھ the eyebrows); to mark,
designate, earmark, indicate ( ھ s.th.); to
demarcate, delimit, delineate, stake out,
survey ( ھ land, real estate); to layout, map
out ( ھ roads) VIII to trace out, mark,
outline, prescribe ( ھ a way); to mark,
demarcate, delimit, stake out, delineate ( ھ
s.th.); to map out, plan, project ( ھ e.g., the
construction of a city); to make, design,
devise ( ھ a plan); to plan ( ھ s.th.), make
plans ( ھ for)
خط kaṭṭ pl. خطوط kuṭūṭ line; stroke;
stripe, streak; (railroad) line, line of
communication; telephone line; frontline
(mil.); furrow, ridge; handwriting; writing,
script; calligraphy, penmanship │O خط
ارضي (arḍī) ground wire (radio); O الخط
الاسفيني (isfīnī) cuneiform writing; الخطوط
الأمانية (amāmīya) the foremost lines, battle
lines (mil.); خط بارز (bāriz) relievo script;
خط تلفوني telephone line; خطوط جوية
(jawwīya) airlines; خط حديدي (ḥadīdī) and
خط سكة الحديد k. sikkat al-ḥadīd railroad
line, railroad track; خط الزوال k. az-zawāl
meridian (astron.; = خط نصف النھار k. niṣf
an-nahār); O الخط المسماري (mismārī)
cuneiform writing; خط الاستواء k. al-istiwā’
equator; خط الطول k. aṭ-ṭūl or خط طولي (ṭūlī)
circle of longitude, meridian (geogr.); خط
العرض k. al-‘arḍ or خط عرضي (‘arḍī)
parallel (of latitude) (geogr.); خط تقسيم المياه
k. taqsīm al-miyāh divide, watershed; خط
القوة الكھربائية k. al-qūwa al-kahrabā’īya
power lines; خط الھاجرة meridian (grogr.);
خرج عن الخط to derail, run off the rails
(train); على خط مستقيم (mustaqīm)
straightaway, in a straight line; outright,
out and out; على طول الخط (ṭūl al-k.) all
along the line
خط kuṭṭ section, district, quarter (of a
city)
خطي kaṭṭī handwritten; linear; spear
خطة kuṭṭa matter, affair; condition,
state; office, function, position
خطة kiṭṭa, kuṭṭa pl. خطط kiṭaṭ, kuṭaṭ a
place of land acquired for the purpose of
building a house; a place of real estate,
lot; district; map or plan of a place of real
estate, layout; plan, project, design,
intention; line of action, course, policy,
rule, precept, guiding principle │ خط العمل
k. al-‘amal operation plan, work plan; طبقا
لخطة مرسومة (ṭibqan) according to
schedule, as scheduled or planned
خطاط kaṭṭāṭ pl. -ūn penman,
calligrapher; -- tracing lines, leaving
straight trace │ فشك خطاط (fašak) or قذيفة
خطاطة tracer bullet, tracer (mil.)
تخطيط takṭīṭ ruling, drawing of, or
marking with, lines; lineation;
designation, marking, earmarking;
surveying, survey (of land); planning;
projecting, mapping out, laying out (of
cities, of roads); plan, design
رسم تخطيطي (rasm) rough draft, first
sketch, design
مخطوط makṭūṭ handwritten; manuscript
مخطوط makṭūṭa pl. -āt manuscript
مخطط mukaṭṭaṭ striped, streaked, ruled;
furrowed; designated, marked, earmarked;
planned, guided, controlled; (pl. -āt)
sketch, design, plan, layout; map (of a
city)
خطئ kaṭI’a a ( خطأ kaṭa’) to be mistaken; to
commit an error, make a mistake; to sin II
to charge with an offense, incriminate,
declare guilty ( ه s.o.); to accuse ( ه s.o.) of
an error or mistake; to fine ( ه s.o.; tun.) IV
to be mistaken, to err, commit an error, be
at fault ( في in); to be wrong ( في about, in);
to make a mistake ( في in, with); to miss ( ه
s.o., e.g., a shot; ھ the target); to escape ( ه
s.o. or s.o.’s notice; a fact) │ أخطأ
فأله (fa’luhū) (his omen was wrong, i.e.) his
expectations do not come true, are not
fultilled; that’s where he is wrong, that’s
where he made a mistake! أخطأه الشيء
(šai’u) (lit.: the thing escaped him, missed
him, i.e.) he lacked it; أخطأه التوفيق he
failed, was unsuccessful; أخطأ في استنتاجاته
he drew the wrong conclusions; أخطأ بين
الشيئين he confused the two things, he
mistook one thing for the other
خطء kiṭ’ slip, lapse, fault, offense, sin
خطأ kaṭa’ and خطاء kaṭā’ error; mistake,
incorrectness; offense, fault; kaṭa’an
erroneously, by mistake │ من الخطأ ان ...it
is (would be) wrong to …; اصلاح الخطأ
iṣlāḥ al-k. corrigenda, errata, list of
corrections; قتل الخطأ qatl al-k. accidental
homicide (jur.)
خطيئة kaṭī’a pl. -āt, خطايا kaṭāyā
mistake, blunder; slip, lapse; fault,
offense; crime, sin; fine (tun.)
خاطئ kāṭi’ wrong, incorrect, erroneous;
mistaken, at fault; (pl. خطاة kuṭāh, actually,
pl. of colloq. kāṭī), f. خاطئة kāṭi’a pl. خواطئ
kawāṭ’2 sinner
مخطئ mukṭi’ mistaken, at fault, wrong;
incorrect, wrong, erroneous
خطب kaṭaba u ( خطبة kuṭba, خطابة kaṭāba) to
deliver a public address, make a speech; to
preach, deliver a sermon ( في الناس and الناس
an-nāsa to the people); -- (kaṭb, خطبة 245
kiṭba) to propose ( ھا to a girl; said of the
man), ask for a girl’s hand ( ھا ) in marriage
ل) on behalf of s.o.; said of the
matchmaker); to give in marriage, betroth,
affiance, engage ( على or بنته ل one’s
daughter to s.o.) │ خطب ودھا (wuddahā)
and خطب مودتھا (mawaddatahā) he courted
her love III to address ( ه s.o.), speak, talk,
direct one's words ( ه to s.o.), turn ( ه to s.o.,
orally or in writing) │ خاطبه بالتليفون to
telephone s.o., call s.o. up; خاطبه بالكاف (bil-
kāf) to address s.o. on an intimate firstname
basis VI to talk to one another; to
converse, confer, have a talk, carry on a
conversation; to write each other,
correspond, carry on a correspondence
VIII to seek a girl’s ( ھا ) hand in marriage,
ask for a girl’s hand
خطب kaṭb pl. خطب kuṭb matter, affair,
concern, business; situation, conditions,
circumstances; misadventure, mishap │ ما
خطبك what do you want? what’s the
trouble? what’s the matter with you? ما
خطبه في what concern of his is ...? what has
he to do with ...? ما خطب ذلك what’s it all
about?
خطبة kiṭba courtehip; betrothal,
engagement
خطبة kuṭba pl. خطب kuṭab public
address; speech; lecture, discourse;
oration; sermon, specif., Muslim Friday
sermon, khutbah │ خطبة الافتتاح opening
address
خطاب kiṭāb pl. -āt, اخطبة akṭiba public
address, speech; oration; letter, note,
message │ خطاب ترحيب welcoming
address; خطاب العرش k. al-‘arš speech from
the throne; خطاب مستعجل (musta‘jil)
express letter, special-delivery letter; خطاب
تقدمة taqdima letter of introduction; O
خطابات ذات القيمة المقررة (dāt al-qīma almuqarrara)
(= lettres avec valeur
declarée) registered, insured letters (eg.);
فصل الخطاب faṣl al-k. (in letters:)
conclusion of the formal greetings by the
words اما بعد amma ba‘du; conclusion,
termination, end; decision; unmistakable
judgment; بيني وبينك فصل الخطاب we’re
through with one another once and for all
خطابي kiṭābī oratorical, rhetorical,
speech-, lecturing (in compounds)
خطيب kaṭīb pl. خطباء kuṭabā’ (public)
speaker; orator; lecturer; preacher, khatib;
suitor (for the hand of a girl); fiancé
خطيبة kaṭība fiancée
خطابة kaṭāba preaching, sermonizing,
oratory
خطابة kiṭāba rhetoric, oratory; speech,
lecture, discourse
خطوبة kūṭūba courtship; betrothal,
engagement
مخاطبة mukāṭaba pl. -āt address; public
address, speech; proclamation;
conversation, talk; conference, parley │
مخاطبة تليفونية telephone conversation,
telephone call
تختطب takāṭub conversation; talk,
discussion; (inter)communication (also,
e.g., telephonic, by radio, etc.) │ لغة التخطاب
lugat it-takāṭub colloquial language
خاطب kāṭib pl. خطباء kuṭabā’ خطا , 2 kuṭṭāb
suitor; matchmaker
خاطبة kāṭiba pl. خطاب kuṭṭāb woman
matchmaker
مخطوبة makṭūba fiancée
مخاطب mukāṭab addressed, spoken to;
(gram.) second person
اخطبوط look up alphabetically
خطر kaṭara i ( خطران kaṭarān) to swing, wave,
brandish ( ب s.th.); to shake, tremble,
vibrate; to walk with a (proud) swinging
gait; to strut, parade haughtily; -- i u ( خطور
kuṭūr) to occur ( ل to s.o.), come 246 to
s.o.’s ( ل) mind │ خطر على باله (bālihī) the
matter came to his mind, occurred to him,
he recalled the matter (also في باله and بباله
or. على باله )؛ خطر له خاطر he had an idea; امر
لم يخطر ببال (lam yakṭur bi-bālin) an
unexpected matter, s.th. one wouldn’t
dram of; -- kaṭura u ( خطورة kuṭūra) to be
weighty; to be important, significant; to be
grave, serious, momentous, dangerous,
perilous, risky, hazardous III to risk,
hazard, stake ( ب s.th. بنفسه one’s life); to
incur the danger, run the risk ( ب of), risk (
ب s.th.); to bet, wager ( ه s.o., على a stake)
IV to notify, inform ( ه s.o.), let ( ه s.o.)
know ( ب about s.th.); to warn, caution ( ه
s.o.) V to walk with a lofty, proud gait; to
stride, strut (with a swinging gait); to
pendulate, oscillate, vibrate VI to make a
bet ( على against stake)
خطر kaṭar weightiness,
momentousness; importance,
consequence, significance; seriousness,
gravity; -- (pl. -āt, اخطار akṭār) danger,
peril, menace ( على to); riskiness,
dangerousness; risk; hazard; (pl. خطار
kiṭār) stake, bet, wager │ جليل الخطر of very
great importance, momentous; ذو خطر
dangerous, perilous; معرض للخطر
(mu‘arraḍ) endangered, jeopardized; اشارة
الخطر išārat al-k. alarm signal
خطر kaṭir dangerous, perilous, risky,
hazardous; serious, grave, weighty,
important, significant
خطر kaṭara pl. kaṭarāt pompous walk,
strut; swinging gait; idea, thought, notion
خطار kaṭṭār pendulum (phys.)
خطير kaṭīr pl. خطر kuṭr weighty,
momentous; important, significant; grave,
serious │ خطير الشأن of great importance
خطورة kuṭūra weight(iness),
importance, moment(ousness);
consequence, significance; gravity,
seriousness
خطران kaṭarān swinging, oscillation,
vibration
اخطر akṭar2 more dangerous, riskier;
weightier, of greater consequence; more
serious, graver
مخطرة look up alphabetically
مخاطر makāṭir2 dangers, perils
مخاطرة mukāṭara pl. -āt venture, risk,
hazard
اخطار ikṭār notification, information;
warning
خاطر kāṭir pl. خواطر kawāṭir2 ideas,
thought, notion; mind; desire, inclination,
liking │ لأجل خاطرك (li-ajl) for your sake;
من كل خاطر min'n kulli kāṭirin with all
one’s heart, most gladly; عن طيبة خاطر ‘an
ṭībati kāṭirin gladly, with pleasure; of
one’s own free will, voluntarily; على
خاطرك as you like; اخذ بخاطره to afford
satisfaction to s.o., to comfort, reassure
s.o.; اخذ على خاطر من to feel offended by, to
take offense at; صدع خاطره ṣadda‘a
kāṭirahū to trouble, bother s.o.; طمن
الخواطر (ṭammana) to calm the excitement;
مر بخاطره ان (marra) the thought crossed
his mind that ...; اكراما لخاطرك (ikrāman)
for your sake, to please you; سرعة الخاطر
sur‘at al-k. presence of mind; سريع الخاطر
quick-witted
مخاطر mukāṭir one who risks s.th., who
takes a chance; daring, bold, venturesome
مخطر mukṭir dangerous, perilous, risky,
hazardous
خطرف kaṭrafa (eg.) to be delirious,. to rave, to
talk irrationally
خطرفة kaṭrafa delirium, raving
خطف kaṭifa a, kaṭafa i (kaṭf) to snatch, wrench
or wrest away, seize, grab ( ھ s.th.); to
make off ( ھ with s.th.); to abduct, kidnap
ه) s.o.); to dazzle ( البصر ٢٤٧ al-baṣara the
eyes) V to carry away, sweep away (. s.o.)
VI to snatch or seize ( ھ s.th.) from one
another VII to be snatched away, be
wrested away; to be carried away, be
swept away VIII to grab, seize, take
forcibly ( ھ s.th.); to snatch, wrest, wrench
من ھ) s.th. from s.o.); to abduct, kidnap ( ه
s.o.); to run away, elope ( ھا with a
woman); to make off ( ھ with s.th.); to
dazzle ( البصر al-baṣara the eyes)
خطف kaṭf grabbing, forcible seizure,
rape; abduction, kidnapping; خطفا kaṭfan
rapidly, quickly
خطفة kaṭfa pl. kaṭafāt (n. vic.) a
snatching away, a grab; sudden stirring,
flash │ في خطفة البرق (barq) instantly, in a
trice, like a streak of lightning; خطفة من
خطفات الشعور an impulse, a sudden emotion
خطاف kaṭṭāf rapacious; robber
خطاف kuṭṭāf pl. خطاطيف kaṭāṭīf2 (iron)
hook; fishhook; (coll.; n. un. ة) swift, a
variety of swallow
خطيف kaṭīf pl. خطاطيف kaṭāṭīf2 iron hook
اختطاف iktiṯāf grabbing, forcible seizure,
rape; abduction, kidnapping
خاطف kāṭif pl. خواطف kawāṭif2 ravenous;
rapacious; rapid, prompt; quick, sudden;
lightninglike; fleeting; short, brief │ ذئاب
خاطفة ravenous wolves; صورة خاطفة (ṣūra)
snapshot; حرب خاطفة (ḥarb) Blitzkrieg
خطل kaṭila a (kaṭal) to talk nonsense IV do. V
to strut, walk with a pompous gait; to
walk with a proud, swinging gait
خطل kaṭal idle talk, prattle
خطل kaṭil garrulous, chattering, given to
silly talk; stupid, foolish
خطم kaṭm nose, snout, muzzle (of an animal);
front part (nose and mouth); foremost or
first part; important matter │ اطل مخطمة
(aṭalla) approx.: to manifest its force, set
in (e.g., of a disaster)
خطمي kiṭmī, kaṭmī (coll.; n. un. ة) marsh
mallow (Althaea officinalis; bot.)
خطام kiṭām pl. kuṭum noseband, halter (of a
camel)
خطا (خطو ) kaṭā u (kaṭw) to step, pace, walk; to
proceed, advance, progress │ خطا خطوات
واسعة (kaṭawātin) to take large strides, also
fig. = to make extraordinary progress II
and V to overstep, transgress ( ھ s.th.), to
cross ( ھ s.th.), go or walk through s.th. (
ھ ); to ford ( ھ a river); to leave its banks,
overflow (river); to cross, traverse ( البحار
the seas); to omit, disregard, ignore, pass
by ( ه so.); to go beyond s.th. ( ھ ); to extend
الى) to); to exceed, transcend ( ھ s.th.); to
excel, surpass, outstrip, outdo ( ه s.o.); to
proceed, pass ( ھ through s.th., الى to),
leave s.th. ( ھ ) behind and turn to s.th. else
الى) ); to disregard ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) in order
to turn one’s attention to ( تخطى به الى │ ( الى
الامام (ilā l-amāmi) to promote, advance
s.th. VII to step, pace, walk; to proceed,
advance, progress
خطوة kaṭwa pl. kaṭawāt and kuṭwa pl.
kuṭwāt, kuṭuwāt, خطى kuṭan step, pace,
stride │ سار في خطاه (kuṭāhū) to walk, or
follow, in s.o.’s footsteps; تقدم خطوة فخطوة
taqaddama kutwatan fa-kutwatan to
proceed or advance step by step; اتخذ خطوة
حاسمة (ittakada) to take a decisive step;
خطوتان وقفزة kaṭwatan wa qafza hop, skip
and jump (athlet.)
خطية kaṭīya (= خطيئة ) slip, lapse,
transgression, fault, offense, sin
خطاة kuṭāh pl. of خاطئ kāṭi’ sinner
خف kaffa i to be light (of weight); to be slight,
insignificant; to become lighter, decrease
in weight, lose weight; to decrease in
intensity, grow lighter (color); to be
nimble, agile, quick; to hasten, hurry, rush
الى) to) II to make lighter ( ھ s.th.), reduce
the weight of ( ھ ); to ease, lighten, relieve,
soften ( ھ عن for s.o. s.th. difficult or
oppressive, also ھ على؛ من s.th., e.g., s.o.’s
situation); to lessen, decrease, reduce,
diminish ( ھ or من s.th.); to mitigate,
alleviate, moderate, temper ( ه or من s.th.);
to thin, dilute ( ھ e.g., a liquid); (gram.) to
pronounce ( ھ a consonant) without tašdīd
│ خفف عنك kaffif ‘anka! cheer up! be of
good cheer! خفف من سرعتك kaffif min
su‘atika! slow down! خفف الآلام عنه to
soothe s.o.’s pains V to dress lightly; to
disburden, relieve o.s. (of a burden); to rid
o.s., free o.s. ( من of s.th.); to hurry away (
من from), leave ( من s.th.) in a hurry X to
deem ( ھ s.th.) light; to value lightly,
disdain, scorn, despise ( ب s.o. or s.th.),
look down ( ب upon), think nothing ( ب of),
make light ( ب of), set little store ( ب by);
not to take seriously ( ب s.th.), attach no
importance ( ب to); to carry away,
transport ( ه s.o., e.g., joy)
خف kuff pl. خفاف kifāf, اخفاف akfāf shoe,
slipper; -- (pl. اخفاف akfāf) camel hoof;
foot (of the ostrich); sole (of the foot) │
رجع بخفي حنين raja‘a bi-kaffai ḥunain to
return with empty hands, without having
achieved one’s mission; to accomplish
nothing, fail, be unsuccessful
خفة `kiffa lightless (of weight);
slightness, insignificance, triviality;
sprightliness, buoyancy; agility,
nimbleness; inconstancy, fickleness,
flightiness, levity, frivolity │ خفة الحركة k.
al-ḥaraka, خفة في الحركة nimbleness,
agility, quickness; خفة الدم k. ad-dam
amiability, charm; خف الروح k. ar-rūḥ do.;
خفة اليد k. al-yad manual skill, dexterity,
deftness
اخف akaff2 lighter; lesser, slighter;
weaker │ اخف الضررين a. ad-ḍararain the
lesser of two evils
خفاف kafāf, حجر الخفاف ḥajar al-k.
pumice, pumice stone
خفان kuffān pumice, pumice stone
خفيف kafīf pl. خفاف kifāf, اخفاف akfāf,
اخفاء akiffā’2 light (of weight); slight, little,
trivial, insignificant; thin, scanty, sparse;
nimble, agile, sprightly, lively; -- الخفيف
name of a poetic meter │ خفيف الحركة k. al-
ḥaraka easily movable, very mobile;
nimble, agile; خف الدم k. ad-dam amiable,
charming; خفيف الروح k. ar-rūḥ likable,
charming, winning, amiable; gay, in high
spirits, cheerful; خفيف الظل k. az-zill
likable, nice (person); خفيف العارضين k.
al-‘āriḍīn having a thin beard; خفيف العقل k.
al-‘aql feeble-minded, dimwitted; خفيف اليد
k. al-yad nimble-fingered, deft; شاي خفيف
weak tea
تخفيف takfīf lightening, easing;
lessening, decrease, diminution;
reduction; allaying, mitigation, alleviation,
palliation, moderation; commutation
(jur.); relief; thinning. dilution (e.g., of a
liquid) │ ظروف التخفيف extenuating
circumstances (jur.)
استخفاف istikfāf disdain, scorn,
contempt; levity, frivolity
ظروف مخففة ẓurūf mukaffafa extenuating
circumstances (jur.)
مخفف mukaffaf thin, diluted
خفت kafata u ( خفوت kufūt) to become inaudible,
die down, die away (sound, voice); to
become silent, become still III ، خافت بكلامه
بصوته (bi-kalāmihī, bi-ṣautihī) to lower
one’s voice IV to silence, reduce to
silence ( ه s.o.) VIII = I
خفوت kufūt fading (radio)
خفت kāfit dying away, dying down,
becoming silent; inaudible; faint, dying,
fading, trailing off (sound, voice); soft,
subdued (light, color)
مختفت muktafit soft, low, subdued 249
خفر kafara u (kafr, خفارة kifāra) to watch ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th. or over s.o., over s.th.), guard,
protect ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); -- kafira a (kafar,
خفارة kafāra) to be timid, shy, bashful II =
I kafara V = I kafira
خفر kafr watching, watch, guard(ing)
خفر kafar guard detachment, guard;
escort │ خفر السواحل coast guard (Eg.)
خفر kafar timidity, shyness,
bashfulness, diffidence
خفر kafir bashful, diffident, timid, shy,
embarrassed, coy
خفير kafīr pl. خفراء kufarā’2 watchman;
protector, guardian; guard, sentry, sentinel
خفارة kafāra watch(ing), guard(ing),
protection; guard duty
مخفر makfar pl. مخافر maḳāfir 2
guardhouse, guardroom; guard, control
post │ مخفر الشرطة m. aš-šurṭa police
station
خافرة kāfira: خافرة السواحل k. as-sawāḥil
coastguard cruiser (Eg.)
مخفور makfūr under escort, escorted;
covered, sheltered, protected
خفس kafasa u (kafs) to ridicule, scorn ( ه s.o.),
laugh, mock ( ه at); to destroy, demolish,
tear down ( ه a house)
خفش kafaš day blindness, hemeralopia
اخفش akfaš2, f. خفشاء kafšā’2, pl. خفش kufš day
blind, hemeralopic; weak-sighted,
afflicted with defective vision
خفاش kuffāš pl. خفافش kafāfiš2 bat (zool.)
خفض kafada􀀀 i (kafḍ) to make lower ( ھ s.th.);
to lower, decrease, reduce, lessen,
diminish ( ھ s.th.); to lower, drop ( ھ، من
s.th., also, e.g., the voice); (gram.) to
pronounce the final consonant of a word
with i; to put ( ھ a word) in the genitive │
خفض جناحه (janāḥahū)to unbend toward
s.o., show o.s. open-minded, responsive,
accessible to; -- kafuḍa u to be carefree,
easy, comfortable (life); to sink, dip, drop,
settle, subside; to become low, drop to an
undertone (voice) II to lower, decrease,
reduce ( ھ s.th., price) │ خفض عليك kaffiḍ
‘alaika! take it easy! خفض عليك جأشك
(ja’šaka) cool off! calm down! relax! IV
اخفض صوته (ṣautahū) he lowered his voice
V and VII to sink, dip, drop, settle,
subside; to be lowered, be reduced (price);
to decrease, grow less; to be diminished
خفض kafḍ lowering, lessening,
decrease, diminution, reduction; subduing,
lowering, muffling (of the voice);
curtailment, limitation, restriction; ease
(of life); (gram.) pronunciation of the final
consonant with i │ خفض القيمة k. al-qīma
devaluation (of a currency); خفض العيش k.
al-‘aiš carefree, easy life; ھو في خفض من
العيش he lives in ease and comfort; خفض
الصوت k. aṣ-ṣaut lowering of the voice;
حرف الخفض ḥarf al-k. preposition (gram.)
خفض kafiḍ low, soft, subdued (voice)
تخفيض takfīḍ lowering, cutback, reduction (esp.
of prices); diminution, decrease,
lessening, curtailment, restriction,
limitation
انخفاض inkifāḍ sinking, dropping, subsidence;
lowering, reduction; lessen ing, decrease.
diminution, decrement; dropping of the
water level, low water │ انخفاض جوي
(jawwī) low-pressure area (meteor.)
مخفض mukaffaḍ lowered, reduced, low,
moderate (price, rate); lower
منخفض munkafiḍ low (altitude, frequency,
price, etc.); soft, low, subdued, muffled
(voice) │ الأراضي المنخفضة the Netherlands;
-- munkafaḍ pl. -āt low ground;
depression (geogr.) 250
خفق kafaāqa i u (kafq, خفقان kafaqān, خفوق
kufūq) to vibrate; to tremble, shake; to
beat, throb, palpitate (heart); to flutter,
wave, stream (flag); to flap the wings,
flutter (bird); to waver, flicker; -- (kafq) to
flash (lightning); to beat, whip ( ه s.th.;
eggs, cream, etc.); to make the sound of
footsteps (shoe); - ( خفوق kufūq) to drop
one’s head drowsily, nod off, doze off (
خفق خفقة k. kafqatan); -- i ( خفوق kufūq) to
set, go down (celestial body) II to
roughcast, plaster, stucco ( ھ a wall) IV to
flap the wings, flutter (bird); to set, go
down (celestial body); to be unsuccessful,
go wrong, fail, miscarry, come to nothing,
be abortive; to fail, be unsuccessful ( في in
s.th.)
خفق kafq throb(bing) palpitation;
beating, beat; footfall, footstep, tread (of a
boot, of the foot)
خفقة kafqa pl. kafaqāt (n. vic.) beat,
throb; tap, rap, knock; ticking noise, tick
خفقان kafaqān palpitation of the heart,
heartbeat; throb(bing), beat(ing);
f1uttering, flutter
خفاق kaffāq palpitant, throbbing (heart);
fluttering, waving, streaming (flag)
O مخفقة mikfaga whisk, eggbeater
اخفاق ikfāq failure, fizzle, flop, fiasco
خافق kāfiq palpitant, throbbing (heart);
fluttering, waving, streaming (flag); الخفقان
al-kafaqān East and West; الخوافق alkawāfiq
the cardinal points, the four
quarters of the world
خافقي kāfiqī mortar, plaster, rough-cast;
stucco
خفان see خف
خفى kafiya a to be hidden, be concealed; to be
unknown (a fact; على to s.o.); to disappear,
hide │ لا يخفى ان it is well known that ...; as
everybody knows ..., it is obvious that ... ;
لا يخفى عليك you know very well ..., you are
well aware (of it); -- kafā i to hide,
conceal ( ھ s.th.); to keep secret ( ھ s.th.)
IV to hide, conceal ( ھ s.th.); to afford ( ھ
s.o.) a place to hide, shelter, hide ( ھ s.o.);
to keep secret ( ھ s.th.); to disguise,
conceal ( ھ s.th., على or عن from s.o.) │
اخفى الصوت to lower the voice, speak in an
undertone V to hide, keep o.s. out of view;
to disguise o.s. VIII to hide, keep o.s. out
of view; to disappear, vanish; to be
hidden, be unknown; to be lacking, be
missing, be absent │ اختفى عن الأنظار to be
hidden or disappear from sight X to hide,
keep o.s. out of view; to be hidden, be
concealed; to be hidden from s.o.’s ( (عن
view, become invisible ( عن to s.o.),
disappear from sight
خفي kafīy hidden, concealed; secret,
unknown; unseen, invisible; mysterious │
خفي الاسم k. al-ism anonymous; O انوار خفية
(anwār) indirect lighting
خفية kufyatan, kifyatan secretly,
clandestinely, covertly; خفية عنه without his
knowledge
خفية kafīya pl. خفايا kafāyā a secret, a
secret affair
خفاء kafa’ secrecy, hiddenness │ في الخفاء
secretly, clandestinely, covertly; لا خفاء في
ان (kafā’a) it is quite evident, it is quite
obvious that ...
اخفاء ikfā’ hiding, secretion;
concealment; lowering of the voice
تخف takaffin disguise
اختفاء iktifā’ disappearance
خاف kāfin hidden, concealed; secret,
unknown; unseen, invisible
خافية kāfiya pl. خواف kawāfin a secret; --
pl. الخوافى al-kawāfī the coverts, the
secondaries (of a bird’s wing)
مخفي makfīy hidden, concealed 251
متخف mutakaffin disguised, in disguise
مختف muktafin hidden. Concealed,
clandestine, covert, secret; disappearing,
vanishing
مختفى muktafan hiding place, hide-out
خاقان look up alphabetically
خل kalla u (kall) to pierce, transfix ( ھ s.th.) II
to turn sour; to make sour, to sour, acidify
ھ) s.th.); to pickle, marinate ( ھ s.th.); to
salt. cure with salt or in brine ( ھ s.th.); to
pick ( ھ the teeth); to run the fingers ( ه
through s.th.), part, comb ( ھ the hair, the
beard, also with the fingers) III to treat ( ه
s.o.) as a friend IV to offend ( ب against),
infringe, transgress ( ب s.th.); to violate,
break ( ب s.th., e.g., a rule, a custom); to
fail to fulfill, fail to meet ( ب an
agreement); to forsake, desert, abandon ( ب
s.o., s.th.); to disturb, upset, harm,
prejudice ( ب s.th.) V to be, lie or come
between s.th. ( ھ ; also in time), intervene (
ھ between); to be located or situated, be
Interposed, be placed ( ھ between); to
Permeate, pervade, interpenetrate ( ھ
s.th.), mix, mingle, blend ( ھ with) VIII to
be or become defective; to be in disorder,
be faulty, deficient, imperfect; to become
disordered; to be upset, be unbalanced; to
be disturbed (order, system) │ اختلت الشروط
the conditions are not fulfilled; اختل توازنه
(tawāzunuhū) to lose one’s balance,
become unbalanced; اختل عقله (‘aqluhū) to
be mentally deranged
خل kall vinegar
خل kill, kull pl. اخلال aklāl friend,
bosom friend
خلل kalal pl. خلال kilāl gap, interval,
interstice; cleft, crack, rupture, fissure; a
defective, unbalanced state, imbalance;
defectiveness, imperfection; fault, flaw,
defeat, shortcoming; disturbance, upset,
disorder; damage, injury, harm (that s.th.
suffers or suffered); خلال kilāla during;
between; through │ في خلل fī kalali and في
خلال fī kilāli during; in the course of,
within, in a given period of; في خلال ذلك
meanwhile, in the meantime; من خلال min
kilāli across, through, right through the
middle of; out of, from within; (to judge,
reason, draw conclusions, etc.) by, on the
basis of, on the strength of, (to recognize)
from
خلة kalla need, want, luck; -- (pl. خلال
(kilāl) property, attribute, peculiarity;
characteristic; natural disposition
خلة kulla pl. خلل kulal friendship
خلال kilāl pl. اخلة akilla boring or
drilling implement; peg, pin; spit, skewer;
(also خلالة pl. -āt) toothpick; see also خلل
kalal
خليل kalīl pl. اخلاء akillā’ خلان , 2 kullān
friend, bosom friend; lovers; الخليل Hebron
(town in Jordanian Palestine) │ خليل لله
epithet of Abraham
خليلة kalīla pl. -āt girl friend, woman
friend; sweetheart, paramour
ام الخلول umm al-kulūl river mussel
(zool.)
اخلال iklāl pl. -āt breach, infraction,
violation (of a law, of a treaty, and the
like); offence (against), transgression,
infringement (of); disturbance (of an
order, of a system); impairment, injury,
harm (to); average, damage, by sea │ مع
عدم الاخلال ب (‘adami l-i.) without
prejudice to, without detriment to اختلال
iktilāl deficiency, defectiveness,
imperfection; (a falling into) disrepair,
deterioration; faultiness; disturbance (of a
system, of a function, of the equilibrium,
etc.); disorder, confusion
مخلل mukallal pickled; salted; (pl. -āt)
pickles, pickled vegetables
مخل mukill disgraceful, shameful │ مخل
بالآداب immoral, indecent, improper 252
خلب kalaba i u (kalb) to seize with the claws,
clutch ( ھ s.th.), pounce ( ھ on); -- u ( خلابة
kilāba) to cajole, coax, wheedle ( ه s.o.); to
inveigle, beguile, bewitch, enchant ( ه s.o.,
عقله ‘aqlahū s.o.’s mind); to charm,
fascinate, captivate ( ه s.o.) III to cajole,
wheedle, coax. inveigle, beguile, bewitch,
enchant ( ه s.o.) VIII to seize with the
claws, clutch ( ھ s.th.), pounce ( ھ on); to
cajole, inveigle, beguile, bewitch, enchant
ه) s.o.)
خلب kilb pl. اخلاب aklāb fingernail,
claw, talon
برق خلب barqun kallābun and barqu
kullabin lightning without a downpour; a
disappointing, disillusioning matter; خلب
and خلب من برق delusion, illusion
خلبي kullabī: فشك خلب (fašak) blank
cartridges (Syr.; mil.)
خلاب kallāb gripping, captivating,
fascinating; attractive, engaging, winning;
tempting, enticing; fraudulent, deceitful;
deceptive, delusive, fallacious
خلابة kilāba engaging manners,
attractiveness, charm
مخلب miklab pl. مخالب makālib claw,
talon
خالب kālib = خلاب kallāb
خلبص II kalbaṣa (eg.) to clown
خلبوص kalbūṣ pl. خلابيص kalābīṣ2,
خلابصة kalābiṣa (eg.) clown, buffoon,
harlequin
خلج kalaja i and III to be on s.o.’s ( ه) mind,
trouble, preoccupy, prepossess ( ه s.o.,
s.o.’s mind; said of worries, doubts, etc.);
to pervade, fill ( ه s.o.; said of a feeling) │
خالج قلبه (qalbahū) to be uppermost in s.o.’s
heart V to be shaken, be convulsed, be
rocked VIII to quiver, tremble, quake,
shake; to twitch (eye, limb, body); to
animate, move, stir, inspire, fill, pervade,
possess ( ھ، في the heart; said of a feeling)
│ اختلج غما (gamman) to be filled with
sorrow, with grief (heart)
خلجة kalja pl. ka1ajāt emotion,
sentiment; scruple, qualm, misgiving
خليج kalīj pl. خلج kulj, خلجان kuljān bay,
gulf; canal; الخليج name of Cairo’s ancient
city canal which was abandoned and
leveled at the end of the 19th century │
الخليج الفارسي the Persian Gulf
خلاج kilāj misgiving, doubt, scruple,
qualm
اختلاجة iktilāja (n. vic.) convulsion, jerk,
twitch; tremor
خالجة kālija pl. خوالج kawālij2 emotion,
sentiment; scruple, qualm; idea
خلخل kalkala to shake, convulse, rock ( ھ s.th.);
to rarefy ( ھ s.th., e.g., air; chem.- phys.) II
takalkala to be shaken, be rocked; to come
off, become disjointed, become detached;
to become loose, work loose; to be or
become rarefied (chem.- phys.)
خلخل kalkal pl. خلاخل kalākil2 anklet
خلخال kalkāl pl. خلاخيل kalākīl 2 anklet
تخلخل takalkul rarefication
مخلخل mukalkal and متخلخل mutakalkil
rarefied
خلد kalada u ( خلود kulūd) to remain or last
forever, be everlasting; to be immortal,
deathless, undying; to abide forever ( الى or
ب in, with); to remain, stay ( الى or ب or ل
at a place) │ خلد الى الراحة to rest, relax; خلد
الى النوم to lie down to sleep II to make
eternal or everlasting, perpetuate,
eternalize ( ھ s.th.), make immortal,
immortalize ( ھ s.o.); to make
ineffaceable, unforgettable ( ھ s.th.; a
memory); to remain, stay, abide, linger ( ب
at, in a place); to grow very old, enjoy a
long life, be long-lived IV to eternize,
immortalize, make immortal ( ه s.o., ھ
s.th.); to perpetuate ( ھ s.th.); to remain,
stay, abide, linger ( الى or ب at, in a place)
253 to be disposed, incline, lean, tend ( الى
to) V to become eternal or immortal,
perpetuate o.s. j to be or become long,
lasting, perpetual
خلد kuld infinite duration, endless time,
perpetuity, eteruity │ دار الخلد Paradise, the
hereafter
خلد kuld mole (zool.)
خلد kalad, pl. اخلاد aklād mind, heart,
spirit, temper
خلود kulūd infinite duration, endless
time, perpetuity, eternity; eternal life,
immortality; abiding, remaining, staying
تخليد taklīd perpetuation, eternization,
immortalization
خالد kālid everlasting, perpetual, eternal;
immortal, deathless, undying;
unforgettable, glorious; pl. خوالد kawālid2
mountains │ الجزائر الخالدات the Canary
Islands
مخلد muklid disposed, inclined, tending
الى) to)
خلس kalasa i (kals) to steal ( ھ s.th.); to pilfer,
filch, swipe, purloin ( ھ s.th.) III خلسه النظر
(naẓara) to glance furtively at s.o. VIII to
steal, pilfer, filch, swipe ( ھ s.th.); to get
under false pretenses or by crooked means
ھ) s.th.); to embezzle, misappropriate ( ھ
s.th.); to spend secretly ( ھ hours) │ اختلس
الخطى الى (kuṭā) to sneak up on s.o.; اختلس
النظر الى (في ) to glance furtively at s.o.
خلسة kulsatan by stealth, stealthily,
surreptitiously, furtively
خلاسي kilāsī mulatto, bastard
اختلاس iktilās pl. -āt embezzlement,
misappropriation, defalcation
مختلس muktalis embezzler, defalcator
خلص kalaṣa u ( خلوص kulūṣ) to be pure,
unmixed, unadulterated; to belong ( ل to
s.o.); to get, come ( الى to), arrive ( الى at); --
خلاص) kallāṣ) to be or become free, be
freed, be liberated ( من from), be cleared,
get rid ( من of); to be saved, be rescued,
escape ( من from); to be redeemed, be
delivered, attain salvation (Chr.); --
(colloq.) to be finished, be done, be
through, be over; to be all gone II to clear,
purify, refine, purge, rectify ( ھ s.th.); to
clarify ( ھ a situation); to liberate, free,
save, rescue ( ه s.o., من from), rid (. s.o., من
of); to redeem, deliver (Chr.); to prepay
the postage ( على on); to pay duty ( على
البضائع on merchandise), clear ( على goods);
to settle ( ھ a bill); (colloq.) to finish ( ھ
s.th.) │ خلص حقه (ḥaqqahū) to restore one’s
right, secure one’s due III to act with
integrity, with sincerity ( ه toward s.o.),
treat ( ه s.o.) fair and square; to get even,
become quits ( ه with s.o.) IV to dedicate (
ھ ل to s.o. s.th.); to be loyal ( ل to s.o.); to
be devoted, be faithful ( ل to) │ اخلص له
الحب (ḥubba) to love s.o. dearly; 􀍿 اخلص
دينه (li-llāhi dīnahū) to worship God
faithfully and sincerely V to rid o.s. ( من
of), free o.s. ( من from), get rid ( من of); to
be freed, be delivered, be saved, be
rescued, escape ( من from) VI to act with
reciprocal integrity and sincerity; to be
quits, be even X to extract ( ھ s.th., من
from); to copy, excerpt ( ھ s.th., من from);
to abstract, take, gather, work out ( ھ s.th.,
as the quintessence, من of); to deduce,
infer, derive ( من s.th., من from); to
discover, make out, find out ( ھ s.th.); to
select, choose ( ھ s.th.) ; to demand
payment of a sum ( ھ ) and get it ( من from
s.o.) │ استخلص فائدة من to derive profit from,
profit, benefit from; استخلص منه وعدا
(wa‘dan) to exact a promise from s.o.
خلاص kalāṣ liberation, deliverance,
riddance; rescue, salvation ( من from);
redemption (Chr.); payment, settlement,
liquidation (of a bill); receipt; placenta,
afterbirth 254
خلاصة kulāṣa pl. -āt excerpt; extract,
essence; quintessence, substance, gist (of
s.th.); abstract, resume, summary,
epitome; synopsis │ خلاصة نھائية (nihā’īya)
summation (jur.); الخلاصة اللاھوتية (allāhītīya)
the “summa theological” (of
Thomas Aquinas); خلاصة عطرية (‘iṭrīya)
perfume essence; والخلاصة in short, briefly,
in a word (introducing a summary of the
basic ideas)
خليص kalīṣ, pl. خلصاء kulaṣā’2 pure,
clear, unmixed, unadulterated; sincere,
faithful, loyal; loyal adherent
خلوص kulūṣ clearness, purity; sincerity,
candor; frankness
خلاص kallāṣ (magr.) tax collector
مخلص maklaṣ safe place; refuge,
escape, rescue, salvation, deliverance
تخليص taklīṣ clearing, purification,
refining, rectification; clarification;
liberation, extrication, deliverance, rescue,
salvation; payment, settlement,
liquidation; prepayment of postage ( على
on); customs clearance, payment of duty (
على البضائع on merchandise; also تخليص
(البضائع
مخالصة mukālaṣa pl. -āt receipt
اخلاص iklāṣ sincere devotion, loyal
attachment, sincere affection; sincerity,
frankness, candor; loyalty, faithfulness,
fidelity, allegiance ( ل to)
تخلص takalluṣ freedom, liberation,
release, extrication, escape ( من from)
استخلاص istiklāṣ extraction; excerption;
derivation, deduction; selection; collecting
(of a sum of money)
خالص kāliṣ pl. خلص kullaṣ clear; pure,
unmixed, unadulterated; sincere, frank,
candid, true; free, exempt ( من from) │
خالص الأجرة k. al-ujra post-free; خالص الرد
k. ar-radd prepaid, reply paid for
(telegram); خالص من الكمرك (gumrug)
dutyfree; خالص الضريبة tax-exempt
مخلص mukalliṣ liberator; Savior,
Redeemer (Chr.)
مخلص (عليه ) mukallaṣ (‘alaihi) postage
paid
مخلص mukliṣ devoted; sincere, frank,
candid; loyal; faithful ( ل to s.o., to s.th.);
purehearted, virtuous, righteous; المخلص
(in letters) approx.: yours truly …,
sincerely yours ...
مستخلص mustaklaṣ pl. -āt extract,
excerpt
خلط kalaṭa i (kalṭ) to mix, mingle, commingle,
blend ( ب ھ s.th. with); to confuse,
confound, mix up ( بين two things; بين – وبين
s.th. with), mistake ( بين -- و s.th. for) II to
mix, mingle, commingle, blend ( ھ s.th.);
to cause confusion III to mix, mingle,
blend, merge, fuse ( ھ with s.th.); to
meddle ( ھ in), interfere ( ھ with); to mix,
associate ( ه with s.o.); to have to do ( ه with
s.o.) │ خالط نفسه (nafsahū) to befall, attack
s.o. (pain, etc.); خولط في عقله kūliṭa fī
‘aqlihi to be or become disordered in
mind VIII to be mixed, mix, mingle, form
a mixture or blend; to consist of a
heterogeneous mixture, be motley,
promiscuous; to associate, be on intimate
terms ( ب with); to be or become confused,
get all mixed up
خلط kalṭ mixing, blending;
combination; mingling, commingling ( ب
with); confusing, confounding, mistaking,
mix-up, confusion
خلط kilṭ pl. اخلاط aklāṭ component of a
mixture; ingredient; pl. mixture, blend │
اخلاط الانسان the four humors of the human
body (blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and
black bile); اخلاط من الناس common people,
populace, rabble, riffraff, mob; خلط ملط kilṭ
milṭ, kalṭ malṭ motley, pell-mell,
promiscuously 255
خلطة kalṭa mixture, blend, medley
خلطة kulta company; mixture
خلاط and خلاطة kallāṭa pl. -āt mixer,
mixing machine
خليط kalīṭ mixed, blended; motley,
heterogeneous, promiscuous; mixture,
blend ( من of); medley, hodgepodge; (pl.
خلطاء kulaṭā’2) associate, companion,
comrade
تخليط taklīṭ pl. -āt insanity; delirium
مخالطة mukālaṭa company, intercourse,
association
اختلاط iktilāṭ (process of) mixing,
blending; mingling, commingling;
confusion; mental disorder; (social)
intercourse, association, dealings ( ب with)
مخلوط maklūṭ pl. مخاليط makālīṭ2
mixture, blend; alloy
مخلط mukallaṭ confused, disordered
مخالط mukālaṭ stricken, afflicted ( ب e.g.,
by a disease)
مختلط muktaliṭ mixed │ المحاكم المختلطة
the mixed courts, see محكمة؛ تعليم مختلط
coeducation
خلع kala‘a a (kal‘) to take off, put off, slip off (
ھ a garment); to doff, take off ( طربوشة
one’s tarboosh); to extract, pull ( ھ a
tooth); to wrench, dislocate, luxate ( ھ a
joint); to depose, remove, dismiss,
discharge ( ه s.o., من from an office); to
renounce, forgo, give up ( ھ s.th.),
withdraw ( ھ from); to throw off, cost off (
عذاره ‘idārahū one’s restraint, one’s
inhibitions); to refuse ( الطاعة obedience);
to disown, repudiate ( ابنه one’s son); to
divorce ( ھا one’s wife) in return for a
compensation to be paid by her; to get
through, have done ( ھ with s.th.), be
through, have gone through s.th. ( ھ , e.g., a
hard day); to impart ( على ھ s.th. to); to
confer, bestow ( على ھ s.th. upon s.o.),
grant, award ( على ھ s.th. to s.o.) │ خلع ثيابه
(tiyābahū) to undress; خلعه من العرش (‘arš)
to dethrone s.o.; خلع عليه خلعة (kil‘atan) to
bestow a robe of honor upon s.o.; خلع على
نفسه حق (ḥaqqa) to arrogate to o.s. the right
of ...; -- kalu‘a u ( خلاعة kalā‘a) to be
dissolute, morally depraved II to take
away, remove, displace, dislocate ( ھ
s.th.); to knock out of joint, take or break
apart ( ھ s.th.); pass. kulli‘a to fall to
pieces, get out of joint III to divorce ( ھا
one’s wife, in return for a compensation to
be paid by her) V to go to pieces, fall
apart, break; to become or be luxated,
dislocated (joint); to take a vacation in the
country (tun.) │ تخلع في الشراب (šarāb) to be
addicted to drinking, drink heavily VII to
be displaced, be dislocated, be removed;
to be divested, be deprived, be stripped (
من of s.th.), forfeit, lose ( من s.th.) │ انخلع
قلبه (qalbuhū) he was completely taken
aback, he was alarmed, startled
خلع kal‘ slipping off, taking off (of
clothes); deposition (e.g., of a ruler);
dislocation, luxation │ خلع الأسنان extraction
of teeth
خلع kul‘ khula, divorce at the instance
of the wife, who must pay a compensation
(Isl. Law)
خلعة kil‘a pl. خلع kila‘ robe of honor
خليع kalī‘ pl. خلعاء kula‘a’2 deposed,
dismissed, discharged (from an office);
repudiated, disowned; wanton, dissolute,
dissipated, profligate, morally depraved
خلاع kallā‘ wild, unruly, wanton,
shameless, impudent
خلاعة kalā‘a dissoluteness, dissipation,
profligacy, wantonness, licentiousness,
moral depravity; (tun.) recreation in the
country, summer vacation
خولع kaula’ fool, dolt, simpleton 256
خالع kāli‘: خالع العذار k. al-‘idār
unrestrained, ;uninhibited, wanton;
libertine, debauchee, roué, rake
مخلوع maklū‘ unrestrained, uninhibited,
wanton; wild, unruly; reckless, heedless,
irresponsible; crazy, mad
خلف kalafa u to be the successor ( ه of s.o.),
succeed ( ه s.o.): to follow ( ه s.o.), come
after s.o. ( ه): to take the place of s.o. ( ,(ه
substitute (. for s.o.): to replace ( ه s.o., ھ
s.th.): to lag behind s.o. ( عن ): to stay
behind ( عن after s.o.’s departure); to be
detained, be held back, be kept away, stay
away ( من from) II to appoint as successor (
ه s.o.); to leave behind, leave ( ھ, ه s.o.,
s.th.); to have descendants, have offspring
III to be contradictory, contrary, opposed (
ھ to): to conflict, clash, be at variance ( ھ
with); to contradict ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to be
different, differ, diverge ( ھ from), be
inconsistent, incompatible, not in keeping,
not to harmonize ( ھ with); to offend ( ھ
against a command, a rule), break, violate,
disobey ( ھ a command, a rule) IV to leave
ه) offspring, children); to compensate,
requite, recompense ( على s.o.; said of
God): to break, fail to keep ( وعده wa‘dahū
one’s promise), go back on one’s word; to
disappoint ( الرجاء ar-rajā’a the hopes) V
to stay behind; to lag or fall behind ( ;(عن
to stay, stay on, remain; to fail to appear
or show up; to play truant; to be absent; to
stay away ( عن from), not go ( عن to), not
attend ( عن s.th.) │ تخلف عن المجيء (majī’) to
fail to come or arrive; تخلف عن العودة
(‘auda) not to return VI to disagree, differ,
be at variance; to differ in opinion, be of a
different mind VIII to differ, be different,
vary ( عن from); to be varied, varying,
variable, various, diverse, dissimilar; to
vary ( بين between); to disagree, differ in
opinion, be at variance, argue, quarrel,
dispute ( في about); to come or go
frequently ( الى to), frequent, patronize ( الى
a place), visit frequently ( الى s.o., s.th.),
come and go ( الى at); to come, descend (
على upon s.o.; said of afflictions), befall,
overtake ( على s.o.) X to appoint as
successor or vicar ( ه s.o.)
خلف kalf back, rear, rear part or portion;
successors; kalfu and من خلف min kalfu
(adv.) at the back, in the rear; kalfa (prep.)
behind, after, in the rear of │ جرى خلفھا he
ran after her: من خلف min kalfi behind, in
the rear of; من الخلف from behind, from the
rear; الى الخلف to the rear, backward, back;
الى خلف الشيء in the wake of s.th.; في الخلف
in the rear; at the back, in the background
خلفي kalfī rear, hind, hinder, back
خلف kilf pl. اخلاف aklāf test, nipple,
mammilla
خلف kulf dissimilarity, disparity,
difference, contrast, variance, discrepancy
خلف kalaf pl. اخلاف aklāf substitute;
successor; descendant, offspring, scion
خلفة kilfa dissimilarity, disparity,
difference; that which follows s.th. and
replaces it (e.g., second growth of plants,
day and night, etc.)
خليفة kalīfa pl. خلفاء kulafā’ خلائف , 2
kalā’if2 vicar, deputy; successor; caliph;
(formerly) senior official of the native
administration in Tunis, assigned to a قائد
(formerly) title of the ruler of Spanish
Morocco
المنطقة الخليفية al-minṭaqa al-kalīfīya the
Caliphate Zone (formerly, designation of
Spanish Morocco)
خلافة kilāfa vicarship, deputyship;
succession; caliphate, office or rule of a
caliph: (formerly) administrative
department of a خليفة (Tun.), see above
مخلاف miklāf pl. مخاليف makālīf2
province (Yemen) 257
خلاف kilāf pl. -āt difference, disparity,
dissimilarity; divergence, deviation;
contrast, contrariety, incongruity,
contradiction, conflict; disagreement,
difference of opinion ( على or في about);
dispute, controversy; kilāfa (prep.) beside,
apart from, aside from │ خلافه kilāfuhū (=
غيره ) other, the like, خلافھم others (than
those mentioned), وخلافه and the like (after
an enumeration); بخلاف bi-kilāfi beside,
apart 'from, aside from; contrary to, as
opposed to, unlike; خلافا ل kilāfan li
contrary to, against, in contradiction to;
على خلاف ذلك unlike that, contrary to that,
on the contrary, on the other hand
خلافي kilāfī controversial, disputed
مخالفة mukālafa pl. -āt contrast,
contrariety; contradiction, inconsistency;
contravention, infringement, violation;
misdemeanor (jur.; as distinguished from
جنحة and جناية ); fine (for a misdemeanor)
تخلف takalluf staying away,
nonappearance, nonattendance,
nonpresence, absence, truancy (also تخلف
عن الحضور ); staying behind, staying on;
stopover (railroad); backwardness
اختلاف iktilāf pl. -āt difference,
dissimilarity, disparity; diversity, variety;
variant, variation; difference of opinion,
disagreement; controversy │ الرعية على
اختلاف المذاھب الدينية (ra‘īya, dīnīya) the
subjects of every (= irrespective of their)
religious denomination; على اختلاف احزابھم
whichever party they may belong to; الفواكه
على اختلافھا all the different fruits, fruits of
every kind
مخلوفة maklūfa pl. -āt camel saddle
مخلف mukallaf left, left behind; left
over; pl. مخلفات heritage, legacy, estate;
scraps, leftovers
مخالف mukālif divergent, varying,
different; inconsistent, incompatible,
contradictory, contrasting, conflicting;
transgressor (of a command)
متخلف mutakallif residual; left over;
retarded, backward, underdeveloped
(mentally, in growth, etc.); pl. -ūn one left
behind; straggler; pl. متخلفات heritage,
legacy, estate; leftovers; scraps, refuse,
offal │ اتربة متخلفة (atriba) waste material,
overburden, superstratum (in mining); المياه
المتخلفة (miyāh) waste water, sewage
مختلف muktalif different, varying,
divergent ( من from); varied, various,
diverse; having a different opinion,
disagreeing ( في or على about)
مختلف فيه (عليه ) muktalaf fīhi (‘alaihi)
controversial, disputed
خلق kalaqa u (kalq) to create, make, originate (
ھ s.th.); to shape, form, mold ( ھ s.th.); --
kaliqa a and kaluqa u to be old, worn,
shabby (garment); -- kaluqa u ( خلاقة
kalāqa) to be fit, suitable, suited II to
perfume ( ھ s.th.) IV to wear out ( ھ s.th.),
let ( ھ s.th.) become old and shabby V
pass. of II; to be molded, be shaped ( ب by
a model or pattern), change ( ب with a
model); to become angry VIII to invent,
contrive, devise ( ھ s.th.); to fabricate,
concoct, think up ( ھ s.th.); to attribute
falsely ( ھ على to s.o. s.th.)
خلق kalq creation; making; origination;
s.th. which is created, a creation;
creatures; people, man, mankind; physical
constitution
خلق kulq, kuluq pl. اخلاق aklāq innate
peculiarity; natural disposition, character,
temper, nature; -- pl. اخلاق aklāq character
(of a person); morals; morality │ سوء الخلق
sū’ al-k. ill nature; سيئ الخلق sayyi’ al-k. illnatured;
سھل الخلق sahl al-k. complaisant,
obliging; ضيق الخلق ḍayyiq al-k. impatient,
restless; علم الأخلاق ‘ilm al-a. ethics; moral
science, morals; سمو الأخلاق 258 sumūw ala.
nobility of character; مكارم الأخلاق noble
manners, high moral standards; شرطة
الأخلاق šurṭa al-a. vice squad
خلقي kulqī ethic(al), moral │ جرائم خلقية
offenses against public morals
خلق kalaq (m. and f.) pl. خلقان kulqān,
اخلاق aklāq shabby, threadbare, worn
(garment)
خلقة kilqa pl. خلق kilaq creation; innate
peculiarity of character, natural
disposition, nature; constitution;
physiognomy; kilqatan by nature
خلقي kilqī natural, native, congenital,
innate, inborn, inbred
خلقة kalaqa rag, tatter
خلاق kalāq share (of positive qualities,
of religion) │ لا خلاق له (kalāqa)
disgraceful, ignominious, despicable; a
worthless fellow, a good-for-nothing
خليق kalīq pl. خلقاء kulaqā’2 fit,
qualified, suitable, appropriate ( ب، ل for
s.th., ان to do s.th.); apt ( ان to do s.th.); in
keeping with ( ب), adequate ( ب to), worthy
ب) of) │ نحن خليقون ان it is (would be) only
fair that we ..., we should ..., we ought
to ...; ھو خليق ان he is apt to ..., it is only
natural for him that he ...; خليق بھذا ان يكون
مؤلما (mu’liman) this is apt to be paicful. it
is only natural that this is painful; نظرة
يسيرة خليقة ان تقنعنا بأن (tuqni‘anā) no more
than a quick glance is apt to convince us
that ...
خلوق kalūq of firm character, steadfast,
upright
اخلق aklaq more adequate, more
appropriate, more natural
خلاق kallāq Creator, Maker (God)
خليقة kalīqa the creation, the universe
created by God; nature; natural
disposition, trait, characteristic; creatures,
created beings; pl. خلائق kalā’iq2 creatures,
created beings
اخلاقي aklāqī moral; ethic(al); ethicist,
moral philosopher │ جرم اخلاقي (jurm)
offence against public morals; الفلسفة
الأخلاقية (falsafa) moral science, moral
philosophy; ethics
أخلاقية aklāqīya morality, moral practice
خلقاني kulqānī dealer in old clothes
خالق kāliq creative; Creator, Maker
(God)
مخلوق maklūq created; (pl. -āt. مخاليق
makālīq2) creature, created being
مختلق muktaliq inventor, fabricator (of
untruths)
مختلق muktalaq fabricated, trumped up,
invented, fictitious; apocryphal; pl. -āt
lies, falsehoods, fabrications, fictions
خلقين kalqīn pl. خلاقين kalāqīn2 caldron,
boiler, kettle
خلنج 1 kalanj heath, erica (bot.)
خلنجان 2 kulungān (eg.) (rhizome of) galingale
(Polypodium Calaguala Kz.; bot.)
خلا (خلو ) kalā u (kulūw, خلاء kalā’) to be
empty, vacant; -- (kuluw) to be free ( من or
عن from); to be devoid ( من of s.th.), lack,
want ( من s.th.), be in need ( من of); to be
vacant (office); -- ( خلوة kalwa) to be alone
ب، الى، مع) with s.o., الى also: with or in
s.th.); to isolate o.s., seclude o.s.; to
withdraw, retire ( للمداولة li-l-mudāwala for
deliberation; court, jury); to withdraw for
spiritual communion, in order to take
counsel ( الى with); to devote o.s., apply
o.s.. give one's attention ( ل to s.th.); خلا به
to forsake, desert s.o., leave s.o. in the
lurch; -- to pass ( ه s.o.), go by s.o. ( ه); to
pass, elapse, go by, be bygone, past, over
(time) │ خلا له الجو (jaww) to have free
scope. have freedom 259 of action; لا يخلو
من جمال (jamāl) it is not without a certain
beauty; لا يخلو من مبالغة (mubālaga) it is
slightly exaggerated; لا يخلو من فائدة it is not
quits useless; خلا الى نفسه to be alone with
o.s.; to commune with o.s., take counsel
with o.s., search one’s heart; منذ عشر سنوات
خلت mundu ‘ašri sanawātin kalat for the
past ten years II to vacate, evacuate ( ھ
s.th.); to leave, leave alone ( ه s.o.); to
release, let go ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to desist,
abstain, refrain ( عن from), give up ( عن
s.th.) │ خلى سبيله (sabīlahū) to let s.o. off,
let s.o. go, release s.o.; خلى بين فلان وبين
الشيء to give s.o. a free hand in, let s.o.
have his own way with or in, let s.o. alone
with; to open the way for s.o. to; خل عنك
ھذه الميول kalli ‘anka h. l-muyūla desist
from such desires! IV to empty, void,
drain, deplete ( من ھ s.th. of); to vacate,
leave uninhabited or untenanted ( ھ a
place); to evacuate ( ھ a city) │ اخلى سبيله
(sabīlahū) to let s.o. off, let s.o. go, release
s.o.; اخلى السبيل ل to open the way for ...;
اخلى طرف (ṭarafahū) to dismiss, discharge
s.o., send s.o. away; to exonerate,
exculpate, clear s.o.; اخلى سمعه ل (sam‘ahū)
to be all ears for ..., listen intently to ...;
اخلى بينه وبين ما يقول to let s.o. say whatever
he likes, let s.o. talk freely V to give up,
relinquish, forgo, abandon ( عن or من s.th.),
withdraw, resign ( عن or من from); to cede,
leave, surrender ( ل عن s.th. to s.o.); to lay
down ( عن an office) VIII to retire,
withdraw, step aside, be alone ( ب or مع
with)
خلو kilw free ( من from), devoid ( من of)
خلو kulūw emptiness, vacuity; freedom
من) from)
خلا kalā and ما خلا (with foll. acc. or
genit.) except, save, with the exception of
خلاء kalā’ emptiness, vacuity; empty
space, void, vacancy, vacuum; open
country │ تحت الخلاء or في الخلاء under the
open sky, outdoors, in the open air; بيت
الخلاء bait al-k. toilet, water closet
خلوة kalwa pl. kalawāt privacy,
solitude; seclusion, isolation, retirement;
place of retirement or seclusion, retreat,
recess; secluded room; hermitage;
religious assembly hall of the Druses;
booth, cabin │ على خلوة alone; in
retirement, in seclusion; خلوة الحمام k. al-
ḥammām bathhouse
خلوي kalawī lonely, solitary, secluded,
isolated, outlying; located in the open
country, rural, rustic, country │ بيت خلوي
(bait) country house
خلى kalīy pl. اخلياء akliyā’2 free ( من
from), void, devoid ( من of) │ خلى البال
carefree, easygoing, happy-go-lucky
خلية kalīya pl. خلايا kalāyā beehive; cell
(biol.) │ الخلية الحيوية الأولى (al-ḥayawīya lūlā)
protoplasm; من خلايا from within ...,
from inside ..., out of ...
مخلاة miklāh nosebag
تخلية takliya vacating, evaluation
اخلاء iklā’ emptying, voiding, draining;
clearing; vacating, evacuation │ اخلاء سبيله
i. sabīlihī; his release
تخل takallin relinquishment,
abandonment, surrender, renunciation,
resignation ( عن of s.th.)
اختلاء iktilā’ privacy, solitude
خال kālin empty, void; open, vacant (office,
position); free, unrestrained, untrammeled,
unencumbered; free ( من from), devoid ( من
of) │in numerous compounds
corresponding to Engl. -less or un-, e.g.,
خال من الفائدة useless, خال من السكان (sukkān)
uninhabited, untenanted, unoccupied; خالي
الدين kālī d-dain not bound by, without
obligation to, free ( من from); خالى البال
carefree, easygoing, happy-go-lucky; --
(pl. خوال kawālin) 260 past, bygone (time)
│ القرون الخالية the past centuries; في الايام
الخوالي fī l-ayyāmi l-kawālī in the days past
خم kamma u (kamm) to sweep ( ھ a room); -- i
u (kamm, خموم kumūm) to exude a rotten,
foul smell; to rot, putrefy, decay
خم kumm pl. اخمام akmām coop, chicken
coop, brooder; poultry pen
خمة kamma putrid smell, stench
خام kāmm stinking, rotten, putrid, foulsmelling;
kām look up alphabetically
مخم mukimm stinking, rotten, putrid,
foul-smelling
خمج kamija a (kamaj) to spoil, rot,
decay
خمد kamada u ( خمود kumūd) to go out, die
(fire); to abate, subside, let up, calm
down, cease, die down IV to extinguish,
put out ( ھ fire); to calm, appease, placate,
soothe, lull, still, quiet ( ھ s.th.); to
suppress, quell ( ھ s.th.); to subdue, soften,
deaden, dull ( ھ s.th.); to stifle, smother,
kill ( ھ s.th.; fig.)
خمود kumūd extinction; decline,
degeneration, deterioration; quietness,
stillness, tranquility, calm; immobility,
motionlessness
اخماد ikmād extinction, putting out;
calming, soothing, placation,
appeasement, lulling, stilling; subduing,
softening, dulling; settlement;
suppression, quelling (of a riot)
خامد kāmid dying; abating, subsiding;
calm, tranquil, still, quiet
خمر kamara u (kamr) and II to cover, hide,
conceal ( ھ ٨ .th.); to leaven, raise ( ھ
dough); to ferment ( ھ s.th.), cause
fermentation ( ھ in) III to permeate,
pervade ( ھ s.th.), mix, blend ( ھ with); to
possess, seize, overcome ( ه s.o., e.g., an
idea, a feeling) IV to leaven, raise ( ھ
dough); to ferment ( ھ s.th.), cause
fermentation ( ھ in); to harbor, entertain ( ھ
s.th.); to bear a grudge, feel resentment ( ل
against s.o.) V to ferment, be in a state of
fermentation; to rise (dough); to veil the
head and face (woman) VI to conspire,
plot, collude, scheme, intrigue ( على
against) VIII to ferment, be in a state of
fermentation; to rise (dough); to become
ripe, ripen (also fig.: an idea in s.o.’s
mind)
خمر kamr m. and f., pl. خمور kumūr
wine; pl. alcoholic beverages, liquor
خمرة kamra wine
خمري kamrī golden brown, reddish
brown, bronze-colored (actually, winecolored)
خمرية kamrīya pl. -āt wine poem,
bacchanalian verse
خمار /fimar pl. اخمرة akmira, خمر kumur
veil covering head and face of a woman
خمار kumār aftereffect of intoxication,
hang-over
خمير kamīr leavened (dough); ripe,
mature, mellow; leaven; leavened bread
خميرة kamīra pl. خمائر kamā’ir2 leaven;
ferment; barm, yeast; enzyme (chem.);
(fig.) starter, nucleus, basis (from which
s.th. greater develops)
خمار kammār wine merchant, keeper of
a wineshop
خمارة kammāra wineshop, tavern
خمير kimmīr winebibber, drunkard,
tippler, sot
تخمير takmīr leavening, raising (of
dough); fermenting, fermentation
اختمار iktimār (process of) fermentation
مخمور makmūr drunk, intoxicated,
inebriated
مختمر muktamir fermenting, fermented;
alcoholic 261
خمس II to quintuple, make fivefold, multiply
by five ( ھ s.th.); to make pentagonal ( ھ
s.th.); to divide into five parts ( ھ s.th.)
خمس kums pl. خمس akmās one fifth │
ضرب اخماسه في اسداسه ḍaraba akmāsahū fī
asdāsihī and ضرب اخماسا لأسداس (liasdāsin)
to rack one’s brain in search of a
way out; to be at one’s wit’s end; to
scheme, intrigue
خمسة kamsa (f. خمس kams) five
خمسة عشر kamsata ‘ašara (f. خمس عشرة
kamsa ‘ašrata) fifteen
خمسون kamsūn fifty │ عيد الخمسين ‘īd alk.
Whitsuntide, Pentecost; احد الخمسين aḥad
al-k. Whitsunday; أيام الخمسين ayyām alkamsīn
the period of about 50 days
between Easter and Whitsuntide; □ خمسين
and خماسين khamsin, a hot southerly wind
in Egypt
عيد خمسين ‘īd kamsīn 50th anniversary
خميس kamīs and يوم الخميس yaum al-k.
Thursday │ خميس الجسد k. al-jasad Corpus
Christi Day (Chr.); خميس الفصح k. al-fiṣḥ,
خميس الأسرار k. al-asrār, and خميس العھد k.
al-‘ahd Maundy Thursday (Chr.)
خماس kammās pl. خماسة kamāmisa
(magr.) sharecropper receiving one fifth
of the crop as wages
خماسي kumāsī fivefold, quintuple;
consisting of five consonants (gram.) │
خماسي (zawāyā) pentagonal, five-cornered
خميسة kumaisa (mor. Pronounced
kmīsa) ornament in the shape of a hand
(worn by women and children as a
talisman against the evil eye)
الخامس al-kāmis the fifth
مخمس mukammas pentagonal, fivecornered;
pentagon; fivefold, quintuple; O
pentameter
خمش kamaša i u (kamš) and II to scratch ( ھ
e.g., the face, the skin, with the nails)
خمش kamš pl. خموش kumūš scratch,
scratch mark, scar
خماشة kumāša pl. -āt scratch, scar
خمص kamaṣa u and kamiṣa a to be empty,
hungry (stomach)
خميص kamīs خميص البطن k. al-baṭn,
خميص الحشا k. al-ḥašā with an empty
stomach, hungry
اخمص القدم akmaṣ al-qadam pl. اخامص akāmiṣ2
hollow of the sale (of the foot) │ من الرأس
الى اخمص القدم from head to toe
خمع kama‘a a (kam‘, خموع kumū‘) to limp,
walk with a limp
خمل kamala u ( خمول kumūl) to be unknown,
obscure, undistinguished; to be weak,
languid
خمل kami and خملة kamla nap, the
rough, hairy surface of a fabric; fibers
خمل kamil languid, sluggish, dull,
listless
خمول kumūl obscurity; weakness
lassitude, languor, lethargy; indolence,
sluggishness, inactivity; apathy,
indifference; sleepiness, drowsiness
خميلة kamīla pl. خمائل kamā’il2 place
with luxuriant tree growth; thicket, brush,
scrub
خامل kāmil unknown, obscure,
undistinguished, unimportant, minor;
weak, languid, sluggish
مخمل mukmal velvet-like fabric, velvet
مخملي mukmalī velvety │ جلد مخملي (jild)
deerskin, buckskin
خمن II to guess, conjecture, surmise; to make
conjectures ( ھ as to); to assess, appraise,
estimate ( ھ s.th.) 262
تخمين takmīn appraisal, assessment,
estimation; تخمينا takmīnan and على تخمين
approximately, roughly
خمن mukammin appraiser, assessor
خن 1 kanna i ( خنين kanīn) to speak nasally,
nasalize; to twang, speak through the nose
خنة kunna nasal twang
خنين kanīn twanging, nasal twang
اخن akann2, f. خناء kanna’2 twanging,
speaking through the nose
خن 2 kunn (= خم kumm) pl. اخنان aknān coop.
chicken coop, brooder
خنث kanita a to be soft, effeminate V to
display effeminate manners, become or be
effeminate
خنث kanit oft, effeminate
خنثى kuntā pl. خناث kināt, خناثى kanatā
hermaphrodite
خنوثة kunūta effeminacy
تخنث takannut effeminacy
مخنث mukannat bisexual; effeminate;
powerless, impotent, weak
خنجر kanjar pl. خناجر kanājir2 dagger
خنخن kankana to nasalize, speak, nasally; to
twang, speak through the nose
خندق kandaqa to dig a ditch or trench ( خندقا ); to
take up positions, prepare for battle
خندق kandaq pl. خنادق kanādiq2 ditch; trench
خنزوانية kunzuwānīya megalomania
خنزب kanzab Satan, Devil
خنزير kinzīr pl. خنازير kanāzir2 swine, pig, hog;
خنزير بري (barrī) wild hoar; خنازير scrofula,
scrofulosis (med.)
خنزيرة kinzīra sow
خنازيري kanāzīrī scrofulous
الخناس al-kannās epithet of the Devil (properly
speaking, he who withdraw, when the
name of God is mentioned)
اخنس aknas f. خنساء kansā’2, pl. خنس
kuns pug-nosed
خنشار kinšār fern (bot.)
خنوص kinnauṣ pl. خنانيص kanānīṣ2 piglet
خنصر kinṣir pl. خناصر kanāṣir2 little finger │
عقد الخنصر (الخناصر) على to give s.th. toprating
because of its excellence, put s.th.
above everything else
خنع kana‘a a ( خنوع kunū‘) to yield, surrender,
bow, stoop ( ل or الى to s.o.). humble o.s.,
cringe ( ل or الى before s.o.)
خنوع kanū‘ submissive, servile, meek,
humble; treacherous, perfidious, disloyal
خنوع kunū‘ submissiveness, meekness,
servility
خنف kanaf (eg.) twanging, nasal twang
خنفر kanfara to snuffle, snort
خنفس kunfus and خنفساء kunfusā’2 pl. خنافس
kanāfis2 dung beetle, scarab
خنق kanaqa u (kanq) to choke ( ه s.o.); to
suffocate, stifle, smother, strangle,
throttle, choke to death ( ه s.o.); to throttle
down (techn.; ھ s.th.); to slow down, cut,
check, suppress ( ھ s.th.) III to quarrel,
have a fight ( ه with s.o.) VI to quarrel,
dispute, have a fight ( مع with s.o.) VII
pass. of I; VIII to he throttled, be
suppressed; to be tight, constricted
(throat); to be strangled, be choked to
death
خنق kanq strangling, strangulation; throttling,
suppression │ خنق الأنوار k. al-anwāar dimout
خنقة اليد kanqat (kunqat) al-yad wrist
خناق kunāq suffocation; angina (med.); kunāq
and خانوق kānūq quinsy, diphtheria 263
(med.); pl. خوانق kawāniq2 and خوانيق
kawānīq2 do.
خناق kannāq choking, throttling, strangling
مخنق maknaq neck, throat │ أخذه بمخنقه to grab
s.o. by the throat, bear down on s.o.; to
have power over s.o.
خناق kināq strangling cord; neck, throat │ ضيق
الخناق على (ḍayyaqa) to tighten the grip
around s.o.’s throat, tread on s.o.’s neck,
oppress s.o., beset s.o. grievously; أخذ بخناقه
to grab s.o. by the throat
خناق kināq and خناقة kināqa quarrel,
fight, row
اختناق iktināq suffocation, asphyxiation;
constriction; asphyxia (med.)
خانق kāniq choking, strangling;
suffocating, asphyxiating, stifling,
smothering; throttling, throttle· (in
compounds; tech.); (pl. خوانق kawāniq2)
choke coil, reactor (radio); gorge, ravine,
canyon │ غاز خانق asphyxiating gas;
خانق الذئب k. ad-di’b wolfsbane,
monkshood, aconite (bot.)
مخنوق maknūq strangled; suffocated,
stifled, smothered; suppressed, choking
(voice, laughter, etc.); constricted;
strangulated; throttled
مختنق muktaniq crammed, jammed, crowded,
chock-full ( ب with)
خنو) and خنى) خنا kanā u, خني kaniya a ( خنى
kanan) to use obscene language IV to hit
hard, afflict grievously, wear down, ruin,
destroy, crush ( على s.o., s.th.; said of fate)
خنى kanan obscene language; s.th.
indecent or obscene; prostitution;
fornication
خواجة kawāja pl. -āt sir, Mr. (title and form of
address, esp., for Christians and
Westerners, used with or without the
name of the person so addressed)
خوان kuwān, kiwān pl. اخونة akwina, اخاوين
akāwīn2 table │ خوان الزينة k. az-zīna
dressing table
خوجة kōga (eg.) teacher, schoolmaster
خوخ II (eg.) to rot, decay, spoil
خوخ kauk (coll.; n. un. ة) peach (eg.);
plum (syr.)
خوخة kauka pl. kuwak skylight,
windowlike opening; wicket (of a canal
lock, of a gate); (eg.) alley connecting two
streets
خوذة kūda pl. -āt, خوذ kuwad helmet
خار (خور 1 ) kāra ( خوار kuwār) to low, moo
(cattle); -- خور kawira a ( خور kawar) and
خار kāra u to decline in force or vigor; to
grow weak, spiritless, languid, to
languish, flag; to dwindle, give out
(strength)
خور kaur pl. اخوار akwār, خيران kīrān
inlet, bay
خور kawar weakness, fatigue,
enervation, languor, lassitude
خوار kuwār lowing, mooing
خوار kawwār weak, languid,
strengthless
خوري 2 kūrī pl. خورنة kawārina parson, curate,
priest; see also under خير
خورس kūrus choir (of a church)
خوزق kauzaqa to impale ( ه s.o.); to comer,
drive into a comer, get into a bad fix ( ه
s.o.)
خازوق see خزق
ورق خوشق waraq kaušaq wrapping paper;
blotting paper
خوص 1 kūṣ (coll.; n. un. ة) palm leaves
خوصة kūṣa (eg.) plaitwork of palm
leaves (resembling that of Panama hats;
used as a tarboosh lining)
خواصة kiwwāṣa art of palm-leaf plaiting
264
خوص 2 kawaṣ and اخوص see خوص
خويصة 3 see خ ص
خاض (خوض 1 ) kāḍ  u (kauḍ, خياض kiyāḍ) to
wade ( ھ into water); to plunge, dive, rush
ھ) into s.th.), tackle courageously ( ھ
s.th.), embark boldly ( ھ on); to penetrate (
ھ or في into), become absorbed, engrossed
ھ) or في in); to go into a subject ( في ), take
up ( في ھ subject), deal ( في with) │ خاض
المعركة (ma‘raka) to rush into battle; خاض
غمار الحرب (gimāra l-ḥarb) to enter the war
خوض kawḍ, plunge, rush (into);
entering, entry (into, e.g., into war, into
negotiations); penetration; search ( في
into), examination, discussion, treatment (
في of a subject)
مخاضة makāḍa pl. -āt, مخاوض makāwiḍ2
ford
مخاض 2 see مخض
خاف (خوف ) kāfa (1st pers. perf. kiftu) a (kauf,
مخافة makāata, خيفة kīfata) to be frightened,
scared; to be afraid ( ھ، ه or من . of), dread (
ھ، ه or من s.o. or s.th.); to fear ( ھ، ه or من
s.o., s.th.; على for s.o., for s.th.; ان that) II
and IV to frighten, scare, alarm, fill with
fear ( ه s.o.) V = I
خوف kauf fear, dread ( من of); خوفا
kaufan for fear ( من of), fearing ( على for)
خيفة kīfa fear, dread ( من of)
خواف kawwāf, خويف kawīf fainthearted,
fearful, timid, timorous; coward, poltroon
اخوف akwaf2 more timorous; more
dreadful, more to be feared
مخافة makāfa fear, dread │ مخافة ان
(makāfatan) for fear that ..., afraid that ...
مخاوف makāwif2 (pl. zu مخافة ) fears,
apprehensions, anxieties; horrors, dangers,
perils
تخويف takwīf and اخافة ikāfa
intimidation, bullying, cowing,
frightening, scaring
تخوف takawwuf fear, dread
خائف kā’if pl. خوف kuwwaf fearful,
timid, timorous; scared, frightened,
alarmed ( من by); afraid ( من of); anxious (
على about), apprehensive ( على for)
مخوف makūf feared, dreaded;
dangerous, perilous
مخيف mukīf fear-inspiring, frightful,
dreadful, terrible, horrible
خاكى look up alphabetically
خول II to grant, accord, give, concede ( ھ ه to
s.o. s.th., also ھ ل ; esp., the right, the
power to do s.th.), bestow, confer ( ھ ه
upon s.o. s.th., also ھ ل ), vest, endow ( ھ ه
s.o. with s.th., also. (ل
خال kāl pl. اخوال akwāl, خؤول ku’ūl, خولة
ku’ūla (maternal) uncle; -- (pl. خيلان kīlān)
mole, birthmark (on the face);
O patch, beauty spot
خالة kāla pl. -āt (maternal) aunt
خول kawal chattels, property, esp., that
consisting in livestock and slaves;
servants; (eg.) dancer; effeminate person,
sissy
خولى kaulī supervisor, overseer (of a
plantation); gardener
خؤولة ku’ūla relationship of the
maternal uncle
مخول mukawwal authorized ( ب to)
خام look up alphabetically
خان (خون 1 ) kana u (kaun, خيانة kiyāna) to be
disloyal, faithless, false, treacherous,
perfidious, act disloyally, treacherously,
perfidiously ( ه toward s.o.); to betray ( ه
s.o.); to cheat, dupe, gull, hoodwink ( ه
s.o.), impose ( ه upon), deceive ( زوجته
one’s wife); to fool, deceive, mislead 265
ه) s.o.; said, e.g., of the memory); to
forsake, let down, desert ( ه s.o.); to fail ( ه
s.o.; e.g., the voice, and the like); to fail to
keep ( ھ e.g., a promise), break ( عھدا
‘ahdan a contract) II to regard as or call
faithless, false, disloyal, treacherous,
dishonest, unreliable ( ه s.o.); to distrust,
mistrust ( ه s.o.) V to impair, harm, hurt,
prejudice ( ھ s.th.) VIII to dupe, gull,
cheat, deceive, double-cross, betray ( ه s.o.)
X استخون istakwana to distrust, mistrust ( ه
s.o.)
خيانة kiyāna faithlessness, falseness,
disloyalty, treachery, perfidy; breach of
faith, betrayal; treason; deception, fooling
│ خيانة الأمانة k. al-amāna breach of faith;
خيانة عظمى (‘uẓmā) high treason; خيانة الوعود
breach of promise
خؤون ka’ūn faithless, false, disloyal,
traitorous, treacherous, perfidious;
unreliable, tricky, deceptive
خوان kawwān unreliable, faithless,
disloyal, treacherous, perfidious; traitor
خائن kā’in pl. خوان kuwwān, خونة
kawana disloyal, faithless, false,
unreliable, traitorous, treacherous,
perfidious; traitor
خان 2 and خانة look up alphabetically
خوان 3 look up alphabetically
خوي 1 kawā i ( خواء kawā’, خوى kawan) to be
empty, be hungry; -- kawiya a ( خواء
kawā’) to be empty, bare, dreary, desolate,
waste
خواء kawā’ and خوى kawan
emptinessv(of the stomach), hunger
خاو kāwin empty, vacant; dreary, waste,
desolate │ خاو على عروشه (‘urūšihī)
completely devastated; خاوى الوفاض k. lwifāḍ
(= خالى الوفاض ) with an empty pouch,
empty-handed, without a catch
خوى III to join ( ه s.o.), join the company of ( ,(ه
accompany ( ه s.o.)
خوي kuwaiy little brother
خوة kuwa brotherliness, fraternity (=
اخوة ukūwa)
مخاو mukāwin brotherly, fraternal
خيار kiyār (coll.; n. un. ة) cucumber │ خيار شنير
k. šanbar (eg.) drumstick tree, purging
cassia (Cassia fistula; bot.); خيار قشة k.
qašša (eg.) gherkins, pickles
خاب (خيب ) kāba i ( خيبة kaiba) to fail, miscarry,
be without success, be unsuccessful; to be
frustrated, be dashed, be disappointed
(hopes); to go wrong II and IV to cause to
fail; to thwart, frustrate, fail, defeat ( ھ
s.th.); to disappoint, dash ( أماله āmālahū
s.o.’s hopes) V = I
خيبة kaiba failure, miscarriage, defeat,
frustration; fizzle, flop; disappointment │
ولد خيبة walad k., f. بنت خيبة bint k. (eg.) a
good-for-nothing, a ne’er-do-well
خائب kā’ib failing; abortive, unsuccessful;
disappointed
خار (خير ) kāra i to choose, make one’s choice;
to prefer ( على ھ s.th. to) II to make or let ( ه
s.o.) choose ( بين between, في from), give ( ه
s.o.) the alternative, option or choice ( بين
between, في in); to prefer ( على ھ s.th. to)
III to vie, compete ( ه with s.o.); to make or
let ( ه s.o.) choose, give ( ه s.o.) the choice,
option or alternative V to choose, select,
pick ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) VIII to choose, make
one’s choice; to choose, select, elect, pick
ھ، ه) s.o., s.th.), fix upon s.o. or s.th. (، ھ
ه); to prefer ( على ھ s.th. to) │ اختار لله الى
جواره ... (jiwārihī) approx.: the Lord has
taken ... unto Himself X to seek or request
what is good or best ( ھ ) for o.s. ( ه from
s.o.); to consult an oracle, cast lots │ استخار
لله في to ask God for proper guidance in
خير kair pl. خيار kiyār, اخيار akyār good;
excellent, outstanding, superior,
admirable; better; best; - (pl. خيور ٢٦٦
kuyūr) good thing, blessing; wealth,
property; -- good, benefit, interest,
advantage; welfare; charity │ خير الناس the
best of all people; خيار الناس، اخيار الناس the
beat people, the pick of the human race; ھو
خير منك he ill better than you; ھو خير لك it is
better for you; الخير كل الخير the very best;
الخير العام (‘āmm) the commonweal, general
welfare; دولة الخير العام welfare state; لخير
for the benefit of; لخير انفسھم li-k. anfusihim
for their own good; اعمال الخير charitable
deeds; صباح الخير ṣabāḥ al-k. and صباحك
بالخير good morning! ذكره بالخير (dakarahū)
to retain a good impression. of s.o.; to
speak well of s.o.
خيري kairī charitable, beneficent,
benevolent, philanthropic │ جمعية خيرية
(jam‘īya) charitable organization
خيرية kairīya charity, charitableness,
benevolence, beneficence
خير kayyir generous, liberal,
openhanded, munificent; charitable,
beneficent, benevolent; benign, gracious,
kind
خيرة kaira pl. -āt good deed, good
thing; pl. خيرات resources, treasures (e.g.,
of the earth, of a country), boons,
blessings
خيرة kīra and kiyara the best, choice,
prime, flower, pick, elite
خيري kīrī gillyflower (bot.)
اخير akyar 2, f. خيرى kīrā, خورى kūrā pl.
اخاير akāyir2 better, superior
خيار kiyār choice; option, exercise of
the power of choice (Isl. Law); refusal,
right of withdrawal (Isl. Law); the best,
choice, prime, flower, pick, elite; see also
alphabetically
خياري kiyārī optional, facultative;
voluntary
اختيار iktiyār choice; election (also pol.;
pl. -āt); selection; preference ( على to);
option; free will (philos.); اختيارا iktiyāran
of one’s own accord, spontaneously,
voluntarily
اختياري iktiyārī voluntary, facultative,
elective (studies)
مخير mukayyar having the choice or
option
مختار muktār free to choose, having the
choice or option ( في in), volunteering,
مختارا muktāran (adv.) voluntarily,
spontaneously, of one’s own accord;
choice, select, exquisite; chosen,
preferred, favorite; a favorite; مختارات
selection, selected writings, anthology;
(pl. مخاتير makātīr2) village chief, mayor of
a village (šyr., Leb., Ir.)
خيزران see خزر
خاس (خيس ) kāsa i ( خيس kais, خيسان kayasān) to
break ( ب an agreement, a promise)
خيش kaiš sackcloth, sacking, canvas
خيش kaiš place of sackcloth; (pl. -āt,
خيش kiyaš) sack; straw mattress, pallet;
Bedouin tent
خيشوم see خشم
خاط (خيط ) kāṭa i (kaiṭ) and II to sew, stitch ( ھ
s.th.)
خيط kaiṭ pl. خيوط kuyūṭ, اخياط akyāṭ,
خيطان kīṭān thread; twine cord; packthread,
string; fiber │ خيط امل k. amal a
spark of hope, a thread of hope
خيطي kaiṭī threadlike; fibrous
خياط kiyāṭ needle
خياط kiyāṭa swing; needlework,
tailoring, dressmaking │ آلة الخياطة sewing
machine
خياط kayyāṭ pl. -ūn tailor
خياطة kayyāṭa pl. -āt dressmaker; seamstress
مخيط mikyaṭ needle
خائط kā’iṭ tailor 267
خال (خيل 1 ) kāl  to imagine, fancy, think,
believe, suppose ( ان that); to consider,
deem, think ( ه ه s.o. to be …, ھ ھ s.th. to
be ...), regard ( ه ه s.o. as, ھ ھ s.th. as) II to
make ( الى s.o.) believe ( ان that), suggest (
الى to s.o., ھ s.th.), give s.o. ( الى ) the
impression that ( خيل اليه (له) ان │ ( ھ
(kuyyila) he imagined, fancied, thought
that it seemed, it appeared to him that …;
على مل خيلت (kayyalat; النفس being
understood) as the heart dictates, i.e., as
chance will have it, at random,
unhesitatingly IV to be dubious, doubtful,
uncertain, intricate V to imagine, fancy ( ھ
s.th.); to present itself, reveal itself ( ل to
s.o.’s mind), become the object of
imagination. appear (= II kuyyila; ل to
s.o.) │ تخيل فيه الخير (kaira) to suspect good
qualities in s.o., have an inkling of s.o.’s
good qualities, think well of s.o., have ھ
good opinion of s.o. VI to pretend ( ب ل to
s.o. s.th., that ...), act ( ل toward s.o., ب as
if); to feel self-important, be conceited; to
behave in pompous manner, swagger,
strut about; to conceive eccentric ideas,
get all kinds of fantastic notions, have ھ
bee in one’s bonnet; to appear dimly, in
shadowy outlines; to appear, show ( على
on), hover ( على about; e.g., ھ smile about
s.o.’s lips) flit ( على across, e.g., ھ shadow
across s.o.’s face, etc.) VIII to feel selfimportant,
be conceited; to behave in ھ
pompous manner, swagger, strut about
خيال kayāl pl. اخيلة akyil  disembodied
spirit, ghost, specter; imagination;
phantom, apparition; phantasm, fantasy,
chimera, vision; shadow, trace, dim
reflection │ خيال الشك k. ašakk slightest
doubt; خيال الصحراء k. aṣ-ṣaḥrā’ scarecrow;
خيال الظل k. aẓ-ẓill shadow play
خيالة kayāl  pl. -āt ghost, spirit,
specter; phantom; phantasm, fantasy,
chimera
خيالي kayālī imaginary, unreal; ideal,
ideational, conceptual; utopian
اخيل akyal2 more conceited, haughtier,
prouder
اخيل akyal pl. خيل kīl, اخايل akāyil2 green
woodpecker
خيلاء kuyalā’2 (f.) conceit,
conceitedness, haughtiness, pride; الخيلاء
al-kuyalā’  haughtily, proudly
خيلولة kailūl  conceit, conceitedness,
snobbery, arrogance, haughtiness
مخيلة makī l  conceit, conceitedness,
snobbery, arrogance, haughtiness; (pl.
مخايل makāyil2) indication, sign, symptom,
characteristic; pl. مخايل visions, mental
images, imagery
تخييل takyīl playacting │ فن التخييل fann
at-t. dramatic art
تخيل takayyul pl. -āt imagination,
phantasy; delusion, hallucination, fancy,
whim, fantastic notion
تخيلي takayyulī fantastic, fanciful,
imaginary
اختيال iktiyāl pride; arrogance,
haughtiness
مخيلة mukayyil  imagination, phantasy
مخيل mukīl dubious, doubtful, uncertain,
intricate, tangled, confused; confusing,
bewildering
مختال muktāl conceited, haughty,
arrogant
خيل 2 II to gallop (on horseback)
خيل kail (coll.) pl. خيول kuyūl horses;
horsepower, H.P. │ سباق الخيل horse racing,
horse race
خيال kayyāl pl. ة, -ūn horseman, rider
خيالة kayyā l  cavalry (Ir.; Eg. 1939)
سرية خيالة sarī y  kayyāl  cavalry
squadron (Eg. 1939) 268
خال 2 see خول
خيم 1 II to pitch one’s tent, to camp; to settle
down; to stay, linger, rest, lie down, lie (
على on, فى or ب at ھ place); (fig.) to reign
(e.g., calm, silence, peace, etc.; فى or ب at,
in), settle ( على over) V to pitch one’s tent;
to camp
خيمة ḳaim pl. -āt, خيام ḳiyām, خيم
ḳiyam tent; tarpaulin; arbor, bower;
pavilion
خيم ḳayyām tentmaker
خيم muḳayyam pl. -āt camping ground,
camp, encampment
خيم 2 ḳīm natural disposition, nature, temper,
character; inclination, bent, tendency│ اخذ
خيمه (eg.) to fool s.o.’s pulse, sound s.o.
out
خام 3 look up alphabetically
□ خية ḳayya pl. -āt noose
د
دأب da’aba a (da’b, da’b, دؤوب du’ūb) to
persist, persevere, be indefatigable,
untiring, tireless ( فى or على in s.th.); to go
in for s.th. ( على ), apply o.s., devote o.s. (
على to), practice eagerly ( على s.th.)
دأب da’b pl. ادؤب ad’ub habit
دأب da’b, da’ab and دؤوب du’ūb
persistence, perseverance, tirelessness,
indefatigability, assiduity, eagerness
دئب da’ib and دائب dā’ib addicted,
devoted, persistent, assiduous, eager,
indefatigable, untiring, tireless ( على in)
دؤوب da’ūb untiring, tireless,
indefatigable, persevering, persistent
ادأب ad’ab2 more persistent, more
assiduous
دادة dāda governess, dry nurse, nurse
داغ dāg pl. -āt brand (made on cattle, etc.)
دال dāl name of the letter د
داليا dāliyā dahlia(s) (bot.)
داما dāmā checkers│ لوحة الداما lauḥat ad-d.
checkerboard
دامجانة see دمجانة
دانتيلا (Fr. dentelle) dantilla lace
دانق dānaq, dāniq pl. دوانق dawāniq2 an ancient
coin. = 1/4 dirham; small coin; a square
measure (Eg.; = 4 sahm = 29.17 m2)
دانمارك dannmark Denmark
دانماركى danmarkī Danish
الداننوب ad-dānūb the Danube
داية dāya pl. -āt wet nrse; midwife
دب dabba i (dabb, دبيب dabīb) to creep, crawl
(reptile); to proceed, advance, or move
slowly; to go on all fours; to enter ( فى
s.th.), come ( فى into); to steal, creep ( فى
نفسه into s.o.’s heart; of a feeling, e.g.,
doubt); to spread ( فى over, in, through),
fill, pervade, invade ( فى s.th.) ; to gain
ground; to gain ascendancy ( فى in s.o.; of
a condition, an idea, a sensation); to
stream in, ruah in (of sensations, فى upon
s.o.)│ دب فيه دبيب الحياة (d. al-ḥayāh) to gain
vitality II to sharpen, point, taper ( ھ s.th.)
دب dubb pl. ادباب adbāb, دببة dibaba
bear│ الدب الاصغر (aṣgar) Little Bear, Ursa
Minor (astron.); الدب الاكبر (akbar) Great
Bear, Ursa Major (astron.) 269
دبي dubbī ursine
دبة dabba sand hill, mound
دبيب dabīb creeping, crawling;
infiltration; influx, inflow, flow (e.g., of
sensations, of life, of vigor); reptile
دباب dabbāb creeping, crawling, repent,
reptant
دبابة dabbāba pl. -āt tank, armored car
مدب midabb: من مدب النيل الى مصبه
(maṣabbihī) from the lower Nile to its
mouth
دابة dābba pl. دواب dawābb2 animal,
beast; riding animal (horse, mule, donkey)
دويبة duwaibba tiny animal, animalcule;
insect
مدبب mudabbab pointed, tapered
دبج II to embellish, decorate, adorn, ornament (
ھ s.th.); to put in good style, formulate,
compose, write down, put down in writing
ھ) s.th.)
ديباج dībāj pl. دبابيج dabābīj2 silk
brocade
ديباجة dībāja (n. un. of ديباج ) brocade;
introductory verses or lines, proem,
preamble; face, visage; style, elegance of
style; renown, repute, standing, prestige
تدبيج tadbīj embellishment, adornment,
ornamentation; composition, writing (of a
book)
مدبجات mudabbajāt embellishments of
speech, fine figures of speech
دبدب dabdaba to tread, tap
دبدبة dabdaba sound of footsteps,
footfall, pitapat; pattering or clattering
noise; snapping, flapping noise
دبدوبة dabdūba pl. دباديب dabādīb2 point,
tip, tapered end
دبر 1 dabara u ( دبور dubūr) to turn one’s back;
to elapse, pass, go by (time) II to make
arrangements, make plans ( ھ for),
prepare, plan, organize, design, frame,
devise, concert, arrange, get up, bring
about ( ھ s.th.); to hatch ( ھ a plot, etc.); to
contrive, work up ( ھ a ruse); to direct,
conduct, manage, run, engineer, steer,
marshal, regulate ( ھ s.th.), be in charge ( ھ
of); to manage well, economize ( ھ s.th.) │
دبر خطة (kiṭṭatan) to devise a plan; دبر
الشؤون to conduct the course of business,
be in charge IV to turn one’s back ( عن or
على on s.o.); to flee, run away; to escape,
dodge; to slip away V to be prepared,
planned, organized, managed; to reflect,
ponder ( في or ھ on); to consider, weigh,
contemplate ( في or ھ s.th.); to treat or
handle with care, with circumspection ( في
s.th.) VI to face in opposite directions,
stand back to back; to be contrary,
opposite, opposed; to be inconsistent,
incompatible X to turn the back ( ه on s.o.)
دبر dubr, dubur pl. ادبار adbār rump
backside, buttocks, posteriors; rear part,
Rear, hindpart; back; last part, end, tail │
من دبر behind, at the back, in the rear; from
behind, from the rear; ولى دبره wallā
duburahū to turn one’s back; to flee, run
away
دبري dabarī trailing behind, belated,
late
دبرة dabra turn (of fate)
دبور dabūr west wind
دبور dabbūr pl. -āt dabābīr2 hornet;
wasp
تدبير tadbīr pl. -āt planning,
organization; direction, management,
disposal, regulation; economy,
economization; -- (pl. تدابير tadābīr2)
measure, move, step │ تدبير المنزل t. almanzil
housekeeping, household
management; تدبير منزلي (manzilī) do.; قام
بالتدابير اللازمة and اتخذ التدابير اللازمة
(ittakada,qāma) to take the necessary
measures
ادبار idbār flight, retreat
تدبر tadabbur reflection, meditation ( في
on), thinking ( في about); consideration,
contemplation ( في of)
تدابر taddbur disparity, dissimilarity,
contrast
دابر dābir past, bygone (time); the
ultimate, utmost, extremity. end; root │
قطع دابر الشيء (dābira š-šai’) to eradicate,
root out s.th., suppress s.th. radically;
بالأمس الدابر (amsi) sometime in the past;
ذھب كأمس الدابر (ka-amsi d-dābiri) to vanish
into thin air, disappear without leaving a
trace (actually: like yesterday gone by)
مدبر mudabbir manager, director; ruler,
disposer; leader; ringleader │ مدبر المكائد
schemer, intriguer, intrigant
مدبر mudbir: مدبرا ومقبلا mudbiran wamuqbilan
from the rear and from in front
دبارة 2 dubāra (= دوبارة ) packthread, string,
twine, cord, rope j thread
دبس 1 dibs sirup, molasses, treacle, esp. of
grapes
دبوس 2 dabbūs pl. دبابيس dabābīs2 pin; safety pin
│ دبوس انكليزي safety pin
دبش dabaš junk, rubbish, trash; -- dabš
rubblestone, rubble; crushed rock (used as
substratum in macadamizing)
دبغ dabaga a i u (dabg) to tan ( ھ a hide)
دباغة dibāga tanning, tanner’s trade
دباغ dabbāg tanner
مدبغة madbaga pl. مدابغ madābig 2
tannery
دبق dabiqa a (dabaq) to stick, adhere ( ب to); to
cleave, cling ( ب to) II to catch with
birdlime ( ھ a bird)
دبق dibq birdlime
دبق dabiq sticky, gluey, limy
دبك dabaka u (dabk) to stamp the feet; to dance
the dabka (see below)
دبكة dabka (syr.) a group dance in
which the dancers, lined up with looked
arms or holding hands, stamp out the
rhythm and sing
دبلة dibla pl. دبل dibal ring
دبلوم diblōm and دبلومة diblōma pl. -āt diploma
دبلوماسي diblōmāsī diplomatic; diplomat
دبلوماسية diblōmāsīya diplomacy
دثر datara u ( دثور dutūr) to fall into oblivion,
be forgotten, become obsolete, antiquated,
extinct; to be blotted out, wiped out,
effaced, obliterated (track by the wind) II
to cover, envelop ( ه s.o.); to destroy,
annihilate ( ھ s.th.) V to wrap o.s. ( في in),
cover o.s. ( في with) VII to be or become
wiped out, blotted out, effaced,
obliterated; to be old; to be forgotten, have
fallen into oblivion, be obsolete VIII
iddatara to wrap o.s. ( ب in), cover o.s. ( ب
with)
دثار ditār pl. دثر dutur blanket, cover
مدثور madtūr past, bygone, ancient
(time)
دج dajja i (dajj, دجيج dajīj) to walk slowly II
دججه بالسلاح to arm s.o. to the teeth
دج dujj (syr.) thrush (zool.)
دجة dujja intense darkness, pitchdarkness
دجاج dajāj (coll.) chickens; fowl (as a
generic designation)
دجاجة dajāja (n. un.) hen; chicken │
دجاجة الحبش d. al-ḥabaš guinea fowl
مدجج بالسلاح mudajjaj bi-s-silāḥ heavily
armed, bristling with arms 271
دجر dajira a (dajar) to be embarrassed, be at a
loss
ديجور dajūr pl. دياجير dayājīr2 gloom,
darkness, dark
ديجوري daijūrīi dark, gloomy
دجل dajala u to deceive, dupe, cheat, take in (
على s.o.); to be a swindler, a charlatan, a
quack II to coat, smear ( ھ s.th.); to gild ( ھ
s.th.); to deceive, dupe, cheat, take in ( على
s.o.), impose ( على on)
دجل dajl deceit, trickery, humbug,
swindle
دجال dajjāl pl. -ūn, دجاجلة dajājila
swindler, cheat, imposter; quack,
charlatan (fem. دجالة ); Antichrist
تدجيل tadjīl imposture, humbug;
charlatanry, quackery
دجلة 2 dijla the Tigris river
دجن dajana u (dajn, دجن dujūn) to be dusky,
murky, gloomy (day); -- (dujūn) to
remain, stay; to get used, become
accustomed, become habituated; to
become tame, be domesticated II to tame;
to domesticate ( ھ an animal) │ دجنه لخدمة
فلان (li-kidmati f.) to put s.th. or s.o. to use
for s.o., make s.th. or s.o. of service to s.o.
III to flatter, cajole, coax, wheedle, try to
win or entice by gentle courtesy ( ه s.o.) IV
to be murky, gloomy, overcast (day); to be
dark (night)
دجنة dujna, dujunna darkness,
gloominess, gloom
ادجن adjan2 dark
داجن dājin tame, tamed, domesticated
(animal); dark, gloomy │ حيوانات داجنة
(ḥayawānāt) domestic animals
دواجن dawājin2 poultry
دجا (دجو ) dajā u to be dark, gloomy, dusky; to
overshadow, cover, veil, shroud, blanket (
ھ s.th.), spread ( ھ over) III to play the
hypocrite, JlOIl'l as a friend ( ه of s.o.); to
cajole, flatter ( ه s.o.)
دجى dujan gloom, darkness, duskiness
دياج الليل dayājī l-lail dark of night
مداجاة mudājāh hypocrisy; flattery,
adulation, sycophancy
داج dājin dark, gloomy
دحدح II tadaḥdaḥa to waddle
دحدح daḥdaḥ and دحداح daḥdāḥ dumpy,
squat, stocky
دحر daḥara a (daḥr, دحور ) to drive away, chase
away ( ه s.o.); to dislodge, remove ( ه s.o.);
to defeat ( ه an army) VIII to be driven
away, be routed, be repelled, be thrown
back; to be defeated (army); to go under,
go to ruin, succumb, break down, collapse
اندحار indiḥār banishment, rejection;
(pl. -āt) defeat (mil.); ruin, fall, breakdown,
collapse; catastrophe │ اندحار الكون
ind. al-k. end of the world
مدحور madḥūr routed, repelled;
expelled, cast out; ostracized, banished
دحرج daḥraja to roll ( ھ s.th.) II tadaḥraja to
roll, roll along; to roll down
داحس dāḥis pl. dawāḥis whitlow, felon (med.)
دحس daḥasa a (daḥs) to insert, thrust in, shove
in, foist in, smuggle in VII to interfere,
meddle; to mix
دحض daḥāḍa a to be invalid, void, untenable
(argument); to disprove, refute, invalidate
ھ) an argument) II and IV to disprove,
refute, invalidate ( ھ an argument)
دحض daḥḍ refutation, disproof
دحوض duḥūḍ: invalidity, shakiness,
weakness, refutability (of an argument or
a claim)
مدحاض miḍḥāḍ: دعوى مدحاض (da‘wā) an
invalid, unjustified claim 273
دحا (دحو ) daḥā u (daḥw) to spread out, flatten,
level, unroll
O مدحى midḥan pl. مداح madāḥin roller,
steamroller
ادخر iddakara, مدخرة see ذخر
دخس dukas dolphin
دخل dikala u ( دخول dukūl) to enter ( ھ , less
frequently في , also الى , s.th.), go, step,
walk, move, come, get ( ھ، في، الى into); to
penetrate, pierce ( ھ، في، الى s.th.); to take
possession of s.o. ( ه), befall, seize ( ه s.o.;
e.g., doubt); to take up ( خدمة a post), start
at a job; to enter s.o.’s ( على ) room or
house, drop in on s.o. ( على ), come to see
s.o. ( على ); to call on s.o. ( على ); to
consummate the marriage, cohabit, sleep
(", or على with a woman); to come ( على
over s.o.; e.g., joy); (gram.) to be added (
على to); to supervene, enter as a new
factor, aspect, element, etc. ( على upon
s.th.), be newly introduced ( على into s.th.);
to make one’s own, acquire ( على s.th.); to
join, enter ( ھ or في e.g., a religious
community); to participate, take part ( ھ
in); to set in, begin (time, event); to be
included ( في in; ضمن ḍimna), fall, come (
في، ضمن, تحت under), belong, pertain (، في
ضمن، تحت to), be within s.th. (, في، ضمن
تحت ); pass.: dukila to be sickly, diseased,
abnormal │ دخل على الأمر تعديل (ta’dīlun) the
matter has undergone modification; دخل
الخدمة (kidma) to take up one’s post, start
at a job, report for work; دخل المدرسة
(madrasa) to enter school; دخل الميناء
(mīnā’) to enter the harbor, put in; دخل
الموضوع to come to the point; دخل في عقله
في جسمه ) ) dukila fī ‘aqlihi (fī jismihī) to
suffer from a mental (physical)
disturbance II to make or let enter, bring
in, let in ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to enter, insert,
include ( ه s.th., في or ھ in) III to come
over s.o. ( ه), befall, seize ( ه s.o.; e.g.,
doubt, suspicion, despair) IV to make or
let enter, bring in, let in, admit, lead in,
show in ( ه s.o.); to move, take, haul ( على
or في ھ s.th. into); to incorporate, include,
embody, insert ( في or ھ ھ s.th. in); to
cause to set in, bring about, produce, set
off, trigger ( على ھ s.th. in); to introduce ( ھ
s.th., e.g., an innovation, an improvement,
على in or on s.th.) │ ادخله المدرسة (madrasa)
to send s.o. to school; ادخل تغييرا على to
bring about a change in ...; ادخلت عليه
تعديلات (udkilat) the matter was subjected
to modifications V to meddle ( في in),
interfere ( في in, with); to interpose,
intervene ( في in); to invade ( في s.th.),
intrude, obtrude ( في on), disturb ( في s.th.);
to interlock, mesh, gear VI to meddle ( في
in, e.g., في شؤونه in s.o.’s affairs), butt in (
في الحديث on a conversation); to interfere (
في in, with), interpose, intervene ( في in); to
interlock, mesh, gear; to be superimposed;
to intergrade, shade, blend ( ببعض or بعضه
في بعض one into the other); to come over
s.o. ( ه), befall, strike, seize ( ه s.o.; e.g.,
doubt. grief)
دخل dakl income; revenues, receipts,
returns, takings (as opposed to karj);
interference, intervention; doubt,
misgiving │ ضريبة الدخل income tax; ليس له
اي دخل فيه (ayyu daklin) and لا دخل به or له
فيه (dakla) he should not meddle in ..., he
has nothing to do with ..., it is none of his
business
دخل dakal disturbance, derangement,
disorder, imbalance, or defect of the mind;
defect, infirmity
دخلة dikla intrinsic nature, essence;
inner self, innermost, heart, soul (of a
person); secret intention │ راجع دخلته rāja‘a
diḳlatahū to commune with o.s., search
one’s soul
دخلة dukla: ليلة الدخلة lailat ad-d.
wedding night
دخلة dukkala a variety of warbler 273
دخيل dakī1 inner, inward, internal; inner
self, heart, core; -- (pl. دخلاء dukalā’2)
extraneous; foreign, alien; exotic;
foreigner, alien, stranger; not genuine,
false, spurious; newly added ( على to);
novice; (new) convert; guest; protégé,
charge, ward │ كلمة دخيلة (kalima), لفظ دخيل
(lafẓ) foreign word or expression; (syr.-
pal.) دخيلك (dakīlak) please, if you please
دخيلة dakīla pl. دخائل dakā’il2 inner self,
inmost being, intrinsic nature, essence;
heart, soul │ في دخيلة نفسه inwardly, inside,
in his heart; دخائل نفوسنا our inmost being;
دخائل الأمور the underlying nature of things,
the factors at the bottom of things; دخائل
شؤونه d. šu’ūnih his private affairs, (of a
country, etc.) its internal affairs
دخول dukūl entry, entranoe, admission;
entering, ingress; beginning, setting in;
penetration; intrusion, invasion; first
coition in marriage (Isl. Law) │ دخول الحرب
d. al-ḥarb entry into war
دخولية dukūlīya octroi, city toll
دخل madkal pl. مداخل madākil2 entrance;
hallway, vestibule, anteroom; entrance
hall, lobby, foyer; mouth (of a port, of a
canal); O anode (el.); introduction (to a
field of learning); behavior, conduct │
مدخل السيارات (sayyārāt) driveway; مدخل
لدراسة القانون introduction to the study of
law; حسن المدخل ḥusn al-m. good manners,
good conduct
مداخلة mudākala interference,
intervention; participation, interest ( في in)
ادخال idkāl leading in, showing in,
bringing in, taking in, hauling in;
involvement, implication; insertion,
interpolation, incorporation, inclusion;
introduction (e.g., of a constitution; of an
improvement, على on an apparatus, or the
like)
تدخل tadakkul entry, entrance; invasion;
interference ( في with, in), intervention;
intrusion, obtrusion │ عدم التدخل ‘adam att.
noninterference, nonintervention (pol.)
تداخل tadākul interference, intervention;
interlock, meshing, gearing;
superimposition; intergradations;
permeation, pervasion; O interference
(phy.)
داخل belonging, pertaining ( في to), falling ( في
under), included ( في in); inner, inward,
inside, interior, internal; inside, interior
(of s.th.); dākila (prep.) within, inside, in;
داخلا dākilan inside (adv.) │ من الداخل from
within; from the inside
داخلة dākila pl. دواخل dawākil2 interior, inside,
inmost, hidden part; الداخلة the Dakhla
oasis (in central Egypt)
داخلي dākilī inner, inward; internal; interior,
inside; domestic, home, inland (as
opposed to خارجي kārijī external, foreign;
pol.); indigenous, native; private;
belonging to the house; داخليا dākilīyan
inside (adv.) │ تلاميذ داخلية boarding
students (as opposed to خارجية day
students); حرب داخلية (ḥarb) civil war;
مدرسة داخلية (madrasa) boarding school;
ملابس داخلية underwear; ملاحة داخلية inland
navigation
داخلية dākilīya interior │ داخلية البلاد the interior
of the country, the inland; وزارة الداخلية
ministry of the interior; وزير الداخلية
minister of the interior
مدخول madkūl sickly, diseased, abnormal;
(mentally) disordered; of weak character,
spineless; (pl. مداخيل madākīl2) revenue,
receipts, takings, returns
دخمس dakmasa ( دخمسة , dakmasa) to fool ( على
s.o.) about one’s real intentions, pull the
wool over s.o.’s ( على ) eyes; to cheat; to be
sly, crafty, artful
دخمسة dakmasa deception, fooling, trickery;
cunning, craft, slyness 274
دخن dakina a to be smoky; to taste or smell of
smoke; -- dakina a u to smoke, emit
smoke (fire) II to fumigate, fume ( ھ s.th.);
to smoke, cure with smoke ( ھ foodstuffs);
to smoke ( ھ a cigarette, tobacco, a pipe)
IV to smoke, emit smoke (tire) V to be
smoked, be cured with smoke; to be
fumigated
دخن dukn pearl millet, dukhn
دخن dakan smoke, fume, vapor
دخان dukān (dukkān) pl. ادخنة adkina
smoke, fume, vapor; tobacco
دخنة dukna smoke color; a kind of
incense (Calamus aromatious)
O دخينة dakīna cigarette
دخاخني dakākinī (eg., tun.) tobacconist
دخن madkana pl. مداخن madākin2
chimney, smokestack, funnel
تدخين tadkīn fumigation; smoking (e.g.,
of fish); (tobacco) smoking
داخنة dākina pl. دواخن dawākin2
chimney, smokestack, funnel
مدخن mudakkin smoker
ديدبان look up alphabetically
ديدن daidan habit, practice
ددى III to pamper, spoil ( ه a child)
در darra i u (darr) to flow copiously; to
stream, flow, well; to accrue ( على to s.o.;
profit, wealth); to be abundant, plentiful
IV to cause to flow; to bestow lavishly,
heap ( على ه s.th. upon s.o.), shower,
overwhelm ( على ه with s.th. s.o.); to yield (
ھ a profit, على to s.o.) X to stream, flow;
to be abundant; to cause or try to bring
about the abundant flow of ( ھ ); to cause
s.th. ( ھ ) to yield in abundance; to be out
for s.th. ( ھ ), seek to gain ( ھ a profit), try
to make ( ھ a living)
درر darr milk; achievement,
accomplishment │ دره 􀍿 li-llāhi darruhū
(literally: his achievement is due to God)
how capable, how good, how excellent he
is!
در durr (coll.) pearls
درة durra (n. un.) pl. -āt, درر durar
pearl; -- a variety of parrot (Psittacus
A1exandri L.)
دري durrī glittering, twinkling, brilliant
(star)
درة dirra, darra pl. درر dirar teat; udder
مدرار midrār showering abundant rain
(sky, cloud); spouting, pouring forth,
welling out
دار dārr flowing copiously; productive,
rich, lucrative; profitable
مدر mudirr: مدر البول (baul) diuretic(al),
pl. مدرات البول diuretics; مدر العرق (‘araq)
sudorific
درأ dara’a (dar’) to reject ( ھ s.th.); to avert,
ward off ( ھ s.th., e.g., خطرا kaṭaran a
danger, عن from) VI iddāra’a to contend (
في for)
درء dar’ repulsion, prevention,
averting; warding off, parrying
دريئة darī’a pl. -āt target
درابزين darābazīn railing, parapet, banisters,
balustrade
دراج Durrës (It. Durazzo, seaport in W
Albania)
دراق durrāq (syr.) peach
درامي dərāmī dramatic
درب dariba a (darab, درب durba) to be
accustomed, be used ( ب to), be practiced,
trained, skilled ( ب in) II to habituate,
accustom ( ھ، ه s.o.) s.th., في or ب or على
to); to practice, drill ( ه s.o., على ب or على
in); to school, train, coach, tutor ( ه s.o., ، في
ب or على in) V to be accustomed, be used (
على or في to); to be or become 275
practiced, skilled, trained, drilled,
schooled ( على or فى in); to train (athlet.)
درب darb pl. دروب durūb narrow
mountain pass; path, trail, track; road;
alley, lane│ درب التبانة d. at-tabbāna the
Milky Way
دربة durba habituation, habitude, habit;
familiarity (with s.th.), experience; skill,
practice
دريبة darība court of first instance (Tun.)
تدريب tadrīb habituation, accustoming;
practice; drill; schooling, training,
coaching, tutoring│ التدريب العسكري
(‘askarī) military training
مدرب mudarrib pl. -ūn instructor, drill
instructor; trainer, coach (atthlet.); tamer
(of wild animals)
مدرب mudarrab experienced; practiced,
skilled; trained; schooled
درازين darābazīn and درزين darbazīn railing,
parapet, banisters, balustrade
دربس darbasa to bolt ( ھ a door)
درباس dirbās pl. درابيس darābīs2 bolt,
doorbolt
دربكة darabukka (eg.), dirbakka (syr.) pl. –āt
darabukka, a conical, one-headed hand
drum, open at the small end
دربكة darbaka banging or rattling noise,
din, uproar, turmoil
درج daraja u ( دروج durūj) to go, walk, move,
proceed, advance (slowly); to approach
gradually, step by step ( الى s.th.); to follow
a course ( على ), proceed along the lines of (
على ), proceed in such and such a manner (
على ); to go away, leave, depart; to outgrow
من) a nest, a habitation); to be past,
bygone, over (time); to have passed away,
be extinct; to circulate, be in circulation,
be current, have currency; to grow up
(child); -- (darj) to roll up, roll together ( ھ
s.th.); to wrap, wind, twist ( على ھ s.th.
around); -- darija a to rise or advance step
by step│ درج العرف على daraja l-‘urfu ‘alā
it has become the general practice to ... II
to make ( ه s.o.) rise or advance by steps,
promote ( ه s.o.) by degrees; to move or
bring ( ھ s.th.) gradually closer ( الى to); to
approximate ( الى ھ s.th. to); to roll up, fold
up ( ھ s.th.); to circulate, put into
circulation ( ھ s.th.), give currency ( ھ to
s.th.), make ( ھ s.th.) the general practice;
to divide into degrees, steps or grades,
graduate, grade, gradate ( ھ s.th.); to insert,
include, enter ( فى ھ s.th. in) III to go, keep
up ( ھ with, e.g., with the time, with a
fashion) IV to insert, include, incorporate,
embody ( فى ھ s.th. in); to enter, register (
فى ھ s.th., e.g., in a list), book ( ھ s.th.) V
to progress by steps, advance gradually; to
proceed step by step ( الى to); to make
progress ( فى in); to graduate, grade, be
graded, graduated, gradated VII to be
inserted, entered, incorporated, embodied,
included ( فى in); to be classified ( فى in,
تحت under) X to make ( ه s.o.) advance or
rise gradually, promote ( ه s.o.) by degrees;
to lead ( ه s.o.) gradually ( الى to), bring ( ه
s.o.) around to ( الى، ل ); to bait, allure ( ه
s.o.); to entice, tempt, lure into destruction
ه) s.o.)
درج darj entry, entering, registering,
registration, recording; a rolled or folded
paper; roll, scroll│ فى درج الكتاب in the
book; فى درج الكلام d. il-kalām in the course
of the talk
درج durj pl. ادراج adrāj drawer (of a
table, desk, etc.); desk (e.g., for pupils in
school)
درج daraj pl. ادراج adrāj way, route,
course; flight of steps, stairs, staircase│
رجع ادراجه raja‘a adrājahū (also (عاد ادراجه
to retrace one's steps, go back the way one
came; to go back, turn back; ذھب ادراج 276
الرياح (adrāja r-riyāḥ) to go the ways of
the winds, i.e., to pass unnoticed, without
leaving a trace; to end in smoke, come to
nothing, be futile, be in vain
درجة daraja pl. -at step, stair; flight of
steps, stairs, staircase; degree, step, tone
(of a scale; mus.); degree (math., geogr.;
of temperature); grade, fate; degree, order,
rank; club (also, e.g., in trains, of a
decoration); phase state, stage (of a
development); mark, grade (in school)│
درجة الحرارة d. al-ḥarāra (degree of)
temperature; الدرجات العليا (‘ulyā) the
maximal temperatures; الدرجات السفلى
(suflā) the minimal temperatures; درجة
الطول d. aṯ-ṯūl degree of longitude
(geogr.); درجة علمية (جامعية ) (‘ilmīya,
jāmi’īya) academic degree; درجة العقل d.
al-'aql level of intelligence, IQ; دفتر
الدرجات report card (in school); ( من (فى
الدرجة الاولى (ūlā) first-rate, first-class; ذو
درجة of superior quality, high-grade, highclass;
لدرجة ان (li-darajati) to the extent
that ... ; to such an extent that ...; to much
that ...
دراج durrāj pl. دراريج darārīj2 francolin
(zool.); see also alphabetically
تدرج tadruj تدرجة , 2 tadruja pheasant
دراجة darrāja pl. -at bicycle│ دراجة نارية
motorcycle
مدرج madraj pl. مدارج madārij2 way that
one follows or pursues; course, route;
road, path; starting point, outset, rise,
growth, birth, dawn, beginning(s); tarmac,
runway (of an airfield); (as also mudarraj)
amphitheater; (amphitheatered)
auditorium or lecture room; grandstand,
bleachers│ منذ مدرجه since its beginnings;
مدرج نشأته naš’atihī the place where he
grew up; سار فى مدارج الرقي (m. ir-ruqīy) to
travel the road of progress
تدريج tadrīj graduation; classification,
categorization; gradation│ على التدريج، مع
التدريج، بالتدريج gradually, by and by, by
degrees, by steps, step by step, more and
more
تدريجى tadrījī gradual, gradatory,
progressive; تدريجيا tadrījīyan gradually,
by and by, by steps, by degrees, in stages
ادراج idrāj insertion, interpolation,
incorporation; entry, registration,
recording ( فى in a list)
تدرج tadarruj gradual advance or
progress; gradation, graduation│ بالتدرج
gradually, by and by; تدرج ارتقائه t.
irtiqā’ihi his gradual rise
استدراج istidrāj capability of gradually
winning s.o. over, persuasiveness, art of
persuasion
دراج darrāj current, prevalent,
widespread, popular, common, in vogue,
circulating, in circulation│ الكلام الدراج
(kalām) and اللغة الدارجة (luga) the popular
language, colloquial language
مدرج mudarraj graded, graduated; -- (pl.
-āt) open staircase, open-air stairs, fliers,
stoop; grandstand, bleachers;
amphitheater; (amphitheatered)
auditorium or lecture room
مدرج mudrai inserted, interpolated,
incorporated; entered, registered;
contained, included ( فى, ب in), comprised (
فى, ب by)
درد darida a (darad) to become toothless, lose
one’s teeth
ادرد adrad2 toothless
دردى durdī sediment, dregs, lees
دردبيس dardabīs ugly old woman. hag
دردرة dardara roar, rush (of water); idle talk,
prattle, chatter
دردار dardār elm (bot.)
دردور durdūr eddy, whirlpool, vortex
دردش dardaša idle talk, prattle, chatter 277
درز 1 daraza u to sew, stitch
درز darz pl. دروز durūz seam, hem;
suture
درزى 2 durzī pl. دروز durūz Druse│ جبل الدروز
jabal ad-d. the Jebel ed Druz, the
mountainous homeland of the Druses in S
Syria
درس darasa u (dars) to wipe out, blot out,
obliterate, efface, extinguish ( ھ s.th.); to
thresh ( ھ grain); to learn, study ( ھ s.th.,
على under s.o.), درس العلم على (‘ilm) to study
under (a teacher, a professor); -- u ( دروس
durūs) to be effaced, obliterated, blotted
out, extinguished II to teach; to instruct ( ه
s.o., ھ in s.th.); III to study ( ه together
with s.o.) VI to study ( ھ s.th.) carefully
together VII to become or he wiped out,
blotted out, effaced, obliterated,
extinguished
درس dars effacement, obliteration,
extinction; -- (pl. دروس durūs) study,
studies; lesson, chapter (of a textbook);
class, class hour, period; lecture; lesson
(taught by experience, etc.)│ القى دروسا عن
(alqā) to lecture on ... ; اعطى دروسا (a‘ṯā)
to give lessons; دروس منزلية (manzilīya)
homework (of a pupil or student)
دراس dirās threshing (of grain)
دراسة dirasa pl. -āt studies; study│ دراسة
عالية (‘āliya) collegiate studies; دراسة ثانوية
(tānawīya) attendance of a secondary
school, secondary education, high-school
education; دراسة متوسطة (mutawassiṯa)
secondary education, high-school
education (Syr.)
دراسى dirāsī of or pertaining to study or
studies; scholastic, school; instructional,
educational, teaching, tuitional│ رسوم
دراسية tuition fees; سنة دراسية (sana)
academic year; scholastic year, school
year
دريس darīs dried clover
عمال الدريسة ‘ummāl ad-darīsa (eg.)
railroad section gang, gandy dancers
دراس darrās pl. -ūn (eager) student
O دراسة darrāsa flail; threshing
machine│O حصادة دراسة (ḥaṣṣāda)
combine
درواس dirwās mastiff
مدرسة madrasa pl. مدارس madāris2
madrasah (a religious hoarding school
associated with a mosque); school│ مدرسة
ابتدائية (ibtidā’īya) the lower grades of a
secondary school, approx. = junior high
school; مدرسة اولية (awwalīya) elementary
school, grade school; مدرسة ثانوية
(tānawīya) secondary school, high school;
مدرسة تجارية (tijārīya) commercial college
or school; مدرسة حربية (ḥarbīya) military
academy; مدرسة داخلية (dāḳilīya) boarding
school; مدرسة عالية (عليا ) (‘āliya, ‘ulyā)
college; مدرسة الفنون والصنائع school of
industrial arts, school of applied art and
handicraft; مدرسة كبرى (kubrā) college;
المدرسة القديمة the old “school” (=
intellectual or artistic movement)
مدرسي madrasī scholastic, school
تدريس tadrīs teaching, instruction, tuition
│ ھيئة التدريس hai’at at-t. teaching staff;
faculty, professoriate (of an academic
institution)
دارس dāris pl. دوارس dawāris2 effaced,
obliterated; old, dilapidated, crumbling │
تجدد دارسه tajaddada dārisuhū to rise from
one’s ashes
مدرس mudarris pl. -ūn teacher,
instructor; lecturer │ مدرس مساعد (musā‘id)
assistant professor
درع II to arm; to armor, equip with armor ( ھ
s.th.) V and VIII iddara‘a to arm o.s., take
up arms, put on armor
درع dir‘ m. and f., pl. دروع durū‘, ادرع
adru‘, ادراع adrā‘ coat of mail, hauberk;
(suit of) plate armor; armor plate; armor;
armature; (pl. ادراع adrā‘) chemise 278
دراعة darrā‘a pl. -āt armored cruiser
دراعة durrā‘a pl. درارع darārī‘2 loose
outer garment with sleeves, slit in front
دارع dāri‘ armored, armor-clad, ironclad
دارعة dāri‘a pl. دوارع dawārī‘2 armored
cruiser
مدرع mudarra‘ armored; armadillo
(zool.) │ قوة مدرعة (qūwa) tank corps; سيارة
مدرعة (sayyāra) armored car; مشاة مدرعون
(mušāh) armored infantry (mil.)
مدرعة mudarra‘a pl. -āt armored cruiser
درف darf side, flank, wing; protection
درفة darfa pl. درف diraf leaf (of a double door
or window)
درفيل darfīl dolphin
درقة 1 daraqa (leather) shield
O درق daraq thyroid gland
درقي daraqī shield-shaped; thyroid │ الغدة
الدرقية (gudda) thyroid gland
دراق 2 look up alphabetically
درك 1 II to last, continue, keep up (rains) III to
reach, get, catch, overtake, outdistance,
outrun ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), catch up, come up
ھ, ه) with); to keep up, continue without
interruption ( ھ s.th.) IV to attain, reach ( ھ
s.th.), arrive ( ھ at); to get, catch, overtake
ه) s.o., ھ s.th.), catch up, come up ( ھ, ه
with); to come suddenly, unexpectedly ( ه
upon s.o.), overtake ( ه s.o.; death); to
obtain ( ھ s.th.); to grasp, comprehend ( ھ
s.th.); to perceive, discern, notice ( ھ s.th.);
to realize, understand ( ھ s.th.), become
aware, become conscious ( ھ of s.th.); to
mature, ripen (e.g., a fruit); to attain
puberty, reach sexual maturity (boy) V
تداركت الشمس الى المغيب (šams, magīb) the
sun prepared to set VI to reach and seize
one another; to continue without
interruption, go on incessantly; to face,
meet, obviate, take steps to prevent ( ھ
s.th.); to put in order, set right, correct ( ھ
s.th.), make amends ( ھ for), provide
compensation or indemnity ( ھ for a loss,
or the like) X to correct, rectify, emend ( ھ
s.th.); to set right, put in order, straighten
out ( ھ s.th.); to make good, repair, redress
ھ) a damage, a mistake, etc.), make up ( ھ
for); to supplement, supply ( ھ that which
is missing); to anticipate, forestall, obviate
ھ) an event)
درك darak attainment, achievement,
accomplishment; overtaking, catching up;
police; (pl. ادراك adrāk) bottom, lowest
level
دركي darakī policeman
دركة daraka lowest level; pl. –āt
descending steps (as opposed to درجات ; cf.
درجات الحيات ودركات الموت darajāt al-ḥayāh
wa-d. al-maut)
دراك darrāk much-accomplishing,
efficient, successful
مدارك madārik2 mental faculties, mental
powers, intelligence, intellectual
capacities, perception, discernment │
المدارك الخمس the five senses
دراكا dirākan (adv.) constantly,
incessantly, without interruption
ادراك idrāk reaching, attainment,
achievement, accomplishment; realization,
perception, discernment, awareness,
consciousness ( فقد الادراك faqd al-i.
unconsciousness); comprehension,
understanding, grasp; reason, intelligence;
sexual maturity, puberty; age of maturity
│ سن الادراك of sinn al-i. age of discretion
(Isl. Law)
تدرك tadarruk gradual decline
استدراك istidrāk redress, reparation;
correction, emendation, rectification 279
مدرك mudrik rational, reasonable,
endowed with reason, intelligent;
(sexually) mature, pubescent, at the age of
puberty
مدركات mudrakāt realizations;
cognitions; fixed notions, established
concepts
درك 2 (Engl.) derrick, derrick crane
درم darima a to fall out (teeth) II to clip, trim (
ھ nails)
درن darina a (daran) to be dirty, filthy IV do.
V to suffer from tuberculosis
درن darn pl. ادران adrān dirt, filth;
tubercles; tuberculosis │ درن رئوي (ri’awī)
pulmonary tuberculosis
درنة darana (n. un.) pl. -āt tubercle;
small tumor, outgrowth, excrescence,
tuberculc, nodule
درني daranī tubercular, tuberculous
تدرن tadarrun tuberculosis │ تدرن رئوي
(ri’awī) and تدرن الرئة t. ar-ri’a pulmonary
tuberculosis
تدرني tadarrunī tuberculous
متدرن mutadarrin affected with
tubercles, tuberculated
مدره midrāh pl. مداره madārih2 spokesman
درھم dirham pl. دراھم darāhim2 dirhem,
drachma (Ir. = coin of فلس 50 ); a weight
(Eg. = 1/ اوقية 12 = ca. 3.12 g); دراھم
money, cash
دريھمات duraihimāt (dimin. with a
derogatory sense; approx.:) pennies
دروة dirwa pl. -āt (eg.) protecting screen or
wall; parapet
درواس dirwās mastiff
درويش darwīš pl. دراويش darāwīš2 dervish
درى 1 darī ī ( دراية dirāya) to know ( ب or ھ s.th.
or of s.th.); to be aware, be cognizant ( ب
or ھ of); to understand, comprehend ( ب or
ھ s.th.) │ وما يدري الا و ... all of a sudden
there was ... III to flatter, treat with
flattery or gentle courtesy, cajole, coax ( ه
s.o.); to deceive, fool, mislead ( ه s.o.); to
dissemble; to conceal, hide, mask,
disguise ( ه s.th.) IV to let ( ه s.o.) know ( ب
s.th. or about s.th.), inform, notify, advise
ب ه) s.o. of) │ وما ادراك ما ... (adrāka), also
وما ادراك ب do you realize what ... is? you
don’t even know what ... means! VI to
hide, conceal o.s.
دراية dirāya knowledge, cognizance,
acquaintance
ادرى adrā more knowledgeable, better
informed, knowing better ( ب s.o., s.th.),
better acquainted ( ب with)
لا ادري lā-adrī a skeptic
مداراة mudārāh sociability, affability,
companionableness
دار dārin knowing, aware, cognizant ( ب
of s.th.)
مدرى 2 midran, مدرة midra (= مردى mirdan),
مدراة midrāh pl. مدار madārin pole (esp.
one for punting boats)
درياق diryāq (= ترياق ) theriaca; antidote
دزينة (It. dozzina) dazzīna dozen
دس dassa u (dass) to put, get, slip, shove,
thrust, insert ( في ھ s.th. into); to bury ( في
ھ s.th. in the ground); to instill, infuse ( في
ب، ھ s.th. in); to administer surreptitiously
السم) as-samma poison, ل to s.o.); to foist (
في ھ s.th. into); to smuggle ( في ھ s.th. into,
بين ه s.o. among); to interpolate ( ھ s.th.); to
intrigue, scheme, plot ( على, ل against s.o.)
│ دس الدسائس to engage in secret
machinations, intrigue scheme II to put in,
get in, slip in, shove in, thrust in, insert ( ھ
s.th.); to hide, conceal ( ھ s.th.) V to
engage (secretly, الى in); to be hidden ( في
in) VII to slip ( بين between or among, في
into), creep, steal, sneak ( بين among, في
into), 280 infiltrate ( في s.th.); to ingratiate
o.s., insinuate o.s. ( في or الى to s.o., into
s.o.’s confidence); to be hidden
دسيسة dasīsa pl. دسائس dasā’is intrigue,
machination, scheme, plot │ دس الدسائس
dass ad-d. machinations, intrigues,
scheming, plotting ( ضد against); plot,
conspiracy
دساس dassās pl. -ūn intriguant,
intriguer, schemer, plotter, conspirator;
sand snake (Eryx jaculus)
دست 1 dast pl. دسوت dusūt place of honor, seat
of honor, seat of office; council │ دست الحكم
d. al-ḥukm (a ruler’s) throne
دست 2 dist pl. دسوت dusūt kettle, boiler, caldron
made of copper (eg., syr.)
دستة 3 dasta dozen; pack, packet, package
دستور dustūr pl. دساتير dasātīr2 statute;
regulations; by-laws; (basic) constitutional
law; constitution (pol.); -- (colloq.) dastūr
permission
دستوري dustūrī constitutional │ النظام
الدستورى constitutional form of government
دستورية dustūrīya constitutionality │ عدم
الدستورية ’adam ad-d. unconstitutionality
دسر dasara u (dasr) to push, shove, push off (
ھ s.th.)
O داسر dāsir propeller, airscrew
دسكر daskara pl. دساكر dasākir2 village
دسم dasam fatness (of meat); fat, grease
دسم dasim fat; fatty, greasy, grimy,
grubby; rich, abundant, substantial; meaty,
pithy, full of thoughts (e.g., reading
material)
ادسم adsam2, f. دسماء dasmā’2, pl. دسم
dusm very fat; fatty, greasy, grimy,
grubby; -- richer, more substantial, pithier
دسامة dasāma fattiness, greasiness,
griminess, grubbiness
دسومة dusūma fatness; richness,
substantiality
دسام dassām plug, stopper
ديسم daisam amaranth (bot.)
دسمبر disembir, disambir December
دسو II to introduce, bring in ( ھ s.th.) V to be
hidden, concealed; to penetrate ( الى into)
دش (Fr. douche) duš shower, douche
دشيش dašīš and دشيشة a kind of porridge made
of crushed wheat and butter
دشت dašt junk, trash, rubbish, refuse
دشن II to hand over, present ( ھ s.th.); to
consecrate, dedicate, inaugurate ( ھ s.th.)
تدشين tadšīn consecration, dedication,
inauguration │ تدشين الكنيشة consecration of
the church
دشو V to belch, burp, eruct
دعة da‘a see ودع
دع da‘‘ to rebuff, turn down (contemptuously,
II the poor, an orphan)
دعب da‘aba a ( دعابة du‘āba) to joke, jest, make
fun ( ه with s.o.) III to play, toy ( ه، ھ with
s.th., with s.o.); to joke, jest, make fun ( ه
with s.o.); to give ( ه s.o.) a good-natured
slap or smack ( ب); to flirt ( ھا with a
woman) ; to dally, philander, play around
ھا) with a woman); to play ( ه about s.o.;
e.g., waves); to stroke gently, caress,
fondle ( ه s.th.); to beguile, tempt, delude ( ه
s.o.; said of hopes); to play ( ھ a musical
instrument) │ داعب البيانو to play on the
piano VI to make fun, have fun together,
have a good time
داعب dā‘ib joking, jocose, playful, jolly,
gay, funny 281
دعابة du‘āba pl. -āt joking, jesting, funmaking,
fun; joke, jest
دعاب da‘‘āb jocose, playful, jolly, gay
مداعبة mudā‘aba pl. -āt play, funmaking,
fun; joke, jest; pleasantry;
dalliance, flirtation, philandery
داعب dā‘ib joking, jocose, playful, jolly,
gay, funny
مداعب mudā‘ib joking, jesting
دعبل di‘bil frog spawn, frog’s eggs
مدعبل muda‘bal indisposed, out of sorts;
round, ball-shaped
ادعج ad‘aj2, f. دعجاء da‘jā’2, pl. دعج du‘j blackeyed;
deep-black and large (eye)
دعر da‘ira a (da‘ar) to be immoral
دعر da‘ar immorality, indecency
دعر da‘ir unchaste, lewd, licentious,
dissolute, obscene, bawdy, immoral,
indecent
دعارة da‘āra, di‘āra indecency,
immorality, licentiousness, debauchery │
بيت الدعارة bait ad-d. brothel
داعر dā‘ir pl. دعار du‘‘ār unchaste,
lewd, licentious, dissolute, obscene,
bawdy, indecent, immoral
دعس da‘asa a (da‘s) to tread underfoot,
trample down, crush ( ھ s.th.); to knock
down, run over ( ه s.o.; automobile) VII
pass. of I
دعك da‘aka a (da‘k) to rub ( ھ s.th.); to scrub,
scour ( ھ s.th.); to scrub on a washboard (
ھ laundry); to crush, squash, mash ( ھ
s.th.); to crumple ( ھ paper)
دعم da‘ama a (da‘m) and II to support, hold up
ھ) s.th.); to prop, shore up, stay, buttress,
underpin ( ھ s.th.); to cement, consolidate,
strengthen ( ھ s.th.) VIII ادعم idda‘ama to
be supported; to rest, be based ( على on)
دعمة da‘ma pl. دعم di‘am support, prop
دعامة di‘āma pl. -āt, دعائم da‘ā’im2
support, prop, stay, shore; pier; buttress;
pillar (esp. fig., e.g., دعائم السيادة pillars of
authority)
تدعيم tad‘īm support, strengthening,
reinforcement, consolidation,
underpinning
دعو ) and دعي) دعا da‘ā u ( دعاء du‘ā’) to call ( ه
s.o.); to summon ( ب or ه s.o.), call or send
for s.o. ( ب or ه); to call up ( ب s.o., الى، ل
for); to call upon s.o. ( ه), appeal to s.o. ( (ه
for s.th. or to do s.th. ( ل، الى ), invite, urge (
ل، الى ه s.o. to do s.th.); to invite, ask to
come ( الى ه s.o. to; e.g., to a banquet); to
move, induce, prompt ( ل، الى ه s.o. to do
s.th.), prevail ( ل، الى ه on s.o. to do s.th.);
to call ( ب، ھ ه s.o. by a name), name ( ب، ھ
ه s.o. so and so), pass.: دعي du‘iya to be
called, be named; to invoke ( لله God = to
pray to); to wish ( ل s.o.) well, bless ( ل
s.o.; properly: to invoke God in favor of
s.o.), invoke a blessing ( ب) upon s.o. ( ,(ل
pray ( ب for s.th., ل on behalf of s.o.),
implore ( ب ل for s.o. s.th.); to curse ( على
s.o.; properly: to invoke God against s.o.),
call down evil, invoke evil ( على upon s.o.);
to propagate, propagandize ( ل s.th.), make
propaganda, make publicity ( ل for); to
demand, require ( الى s.th.), call for ( الى ); to
call forth, bring about, cause, provoke,
occasion ( الى s.th.), give rise ( الى to) │ دعي
للاجتماع (du‘ya) to be summoned, be called
into session (parliament); دعي الى حمل
السلاح du‘iya ilā ḥamli a-silāḥ to be called
up for military service, be called to the
colors; رجل يدعى ... (yud‘ā) a man
called ..., a man by the name of ...; دعا له
بطول العمر (ṭūli l-‘umr) he wished him a
long life III to challenge ( ه s.o.); to pick a
quarrel ( ه with); to proceed judicially ( ه
against), prosecute ( ه s.o.) VI to challenge
each other, call each 282 other forth or
out, summon each other; to evoke one
another (thoughts, reminiscences,
sentiments); to be dilapidated, be tumbledown,
threaten to fall (walls); to sink,
subside, cave in; to fall down, sink to the
ground (person); to collapse, break down,
decline, degenerate (fig., of a cultural
phenomenon); to dock together, rally VIII
ادعى idda‘ā to allege, claim, maintain ( ھ
s.th., ان that); to lay claim ( ھ to s.th.),
demand, claim ( ھ s.th.); to make undue
claims ( ھ to s.th.), arrogate (to o.s.),
assume unduly or presumptuously ( ھ
s.th.); to effect, feign, simulate, pretend,
purport ( ب s.th.); to testify (in court); to
accuse ( ب or ھ على s.o. of), charge ( ب or ھ
على s.o. with), blame ( ب or ھ على s.o. for),
hold s.th. ( ب or ھ ) against s.o. ( على ) X to
call or send ( ه for s.o.), summon ( ه s.o.); to
cite, summon for examination or trial ( ه
s.o.; court, police); to recall ( ه s.o., e.g., a
diplomatic envoy); to call, appoint ( ه s.o.,
e.g., a professor to a chair); to invoke ( ه
s.o.); to invite, urge ( الى ه s.o. to do s.th.),
suggest ( الى ه to s.o. s.th. or to do s.th.),
call upon s.o. ( ه) to do s.th. ( الى ), appeal (
الى ه to s.o. for s.th. or to do s.th.); to call
for ( ھ ), require, demand, necessitate,
make necessary or requisite ( ھ s.th.)
دعوة da‘wa call; appeal; bidding,
demand, request; call, convocation,
summons ( الى to), calling up, summoning;
(official) summons, citation; invitation;
claim, demand, plea; missionary activity,
missionary work (also نشر الدعوة našr add.),
propaganda; -- (pl. دعوات da‘awāt)
invocation, imploration, supplication,
prayer; good wish │ دعوات صالحات good
wishes; دعوة بالشر (šarr) imprecation,
curse; صاحب الدعوة host
دعوى da‘wā pl. دعاوى da‘āwā, دعاو
da‘āwin allegation, pretension; claim;
lawsuit, case, action, legal proceedings
(Isl. Law) │ بدعوى ان on the pretext that ...
دعي da‘īy pl. ادعياء ad‘iyā’2 adopted
son; bastard; braggart, bigmouth, showoff;
pretender; swindler, impostor
دعاء du‘ā’ pl. ادعية ad‘iya call;
invocation of God, supplication, prayer;
request, plea; good wish ( ل for s.o.);
imprecation, course ( على against s.o.)
ادعى ad‘ā more conducive, more
stimulating, of greater incentive ( الى، ل to),
causing or provoking to a greater extent (
الى، ل s.th.)
دعاوة da’āwa, di‘āwa pl. -āt propaganda
(pol.); publicity ( الى for)
دعاوى da‘āwī, di‘āwī propagandistic
دعاية di‘āya propaganda (pol.)
دعائي di‘ā’ī propagandistic
مدعاة mad‘āh determining factor,
decisive motive or incentive, cause,
occasion
تداع tadā‘in imminent collapse,
impending breakdown; mutual
summoning │ تداعى المعانى tadā‘ī l-ma‘ānī
association of ideas
ادعاء iddi‘ā’ pl. -āt claim; arrogation,
undue assumption, presumption;
allegation; pretension, pretense;
accusation, charge; الادعاء the prosecution
(in a court of justice)
استدعاء istid‘ā’ summons, summoning;
recall, calling back; official summons,
citation
داع dā‘in pl. دعاة du‘āh one who invites,
inviter; propagandist; host; motive,
reason, cause │ لا داعي (dā‘iya) it is not
necessary, there is no need, there is no
cause ( ل for)
داعية dā‘iya one who calls for s.th. ( الى ), invites
to s.th. ( الى ); propagandist (with foll. genit.
or الى : of s.th.), herald; 283 (pl. دواع
dawā‘in) motive, reason, cause, occasion;
pl. دواع requirements, exigencies │ داعية
حرب warmonger; لدواع صحية li-dawā‘in
ṣiḥḥīya for reasons of health; من دواعي
سروري it gives me great pleasure ...
مدعو mad‘ūw one invited, guest; called,
named, by the name of
متداع mutadā‘in evoking one another,
one leading to the other (reminiscences,
thoughts); frail. shaky (constitution);
dilapidated, tumble-down; ready to fall,
threatened with collapse; declining, in a
stage of decline, on the downgrade
مدع muda‘in one who makes an
allegation or pretension, alleger,
pretender; claimer, claimant; plaintiff;
prosecutor (jur.); arrogant, presumptuous,
bumptious │ المدعي العمومي (‘umūmī) the
public prosecutor; المدعى العام (‘āmm) do.
(Mor.)
مدعى muda‘an claimed; المدعى عليه the
defendant (jur.); pl. مدعيات muda‘ayāt
claims, pretensions
مستدع mustad‘in applicant, petitioner
دغدغ dagdaga to tickle ( ه s.o.); to crush; to
chew, munch ( ھ s.th.)
دغر 1 dagara a (dagr, دغرى dagrā) to attack (
على s.o.). fall upon s.o. ( (على
دغر dagr attack, assault
دغرى dagrā attack, assault
دغرى 2 dugrī (eg., syr.) direct, straight; straight
ahead
دغش IV ادغشت الدنيا adgašat id-dunyā it became
dark, twilight fell
دغش dagaš darkness, dusk, twilight
دغيشة dagīša darkness, dusk
دغص dagiṣa a (dagaṣ) to be chock-full, on tile
point of bursting
داغصة dāgiṣa pl. دواغص dawāgiṣ knee-pan,
kneecap, patella
دغل dagal pl. ادغال adgāl, دغال digāl place with
luxuriant tree growth; thicket, bush,
jungle; -- defectiveness, faultiness,
corruption
داغل dagil covered with dense
undergrowth (place); impenetrable;
corrupted
مدغل mudgil covered with dense
undergrowth (place); false, perfidious,
insidious (in character)
دغم IV and VIII ادغم iddagama to put ( في ھ
s.th. into), insert, incorporate, embody ( في
ھ s.th. in); (gram.) to contract ( في ھ one
letter into another), assimilate ( في ھ s.th.
to) VII to be incorporated, embodied,
merged, amalgamated; to be assimilated,
contracted
دف daffa i ( دفيف dafīf) to flap the wings (bird)
II to hurry, rush
دف daff pl. دفوف dufūf side; lateral
surface
دف duff, daff pl. دفوف dufūf tambourine
دفة daffa side; leaf (of a double door or
window); cover (of a book), الدفتان the two
covers of a book; rudder, helm │ قائد الدفة or
مدير الدفة mudīr ad-d. steersman,
helmsman; قبض على دفة التنفيذ to take the
helm, make o.s. the leader; يد الدفة yad add.
tiller; من الدفة للشابورة (eg.) all together,
one and all, all without exception
دفية diffīya (eg.) loose woolen cloak
دفئ dafi’a a and دفؤ dafu’a u to be warm; to
feel warm II and IV to warm, heat ( ھ
s.th.) V, VIII ادفأ iddafa’a and X to warm
o.s.
دفء dif’ warmth, warmness, heat
دفئ dafi’ and دفيء dafī’ warm
دفآن daf’ān2, f. دفأى daf’ā warm
دفاء difā’ heating
دفاءة dafā’a warmth, warmness, heat
□ دفاية daffāya pl. -āt stove 284
مدفأ midfa’ and مدفأة midfa’a pl. مدافئ
madāfi’2 stove, heating stove
تدفئة tadfi’a heating, generation of heat
دفتر daftar pl. دفاتر dafātir 2 booklet; notebook,
copybook; daybook, journal; ledger
(com.); roster, register, official register │
دفتر حسابي (ḥisābī) account book; bankbook,
passbook; دفتر الحسابات d. al-ḥisābāt
letter file, letter book, folder, portfolio;
دفتر الشروط publication setting forth the
terms of a purchase, the conditions of a
lease, the stipulations of a contract, or the
like; دفتر الاشتراك subscription booklet; دفتر
الصندوق d. aṣ-ṣundūq cashbook (com.); دفتر
المساحة cadastre, land register; دفتر اليومية d.
al-yaumīya diary, journal; مسك الدفاتر mask
ad-d. bookkeeping
دفترخانة daftarkāna archives, public
records office (Eg.) │ دفترخانة الأملاك العقارية
d. al-amlāk al-‘aqārīya land-registry
office (Tun.)
دفتيريا diftēriyā diphtheria
دفر dafara to push, push back ( ه s.o.); dafira a
(dafar) to stink
دفر dafar stench
دفر dafir stinking, fetid
دفس dafasa to hide (A s.th.); to push
دفع dafa‘a a (daf‘) to push; to push away,
shove away, push back, drive back, repel,
remove, dislodge, drive away ( عن ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th. from); دفعه جانبا (jāniban) to push,
shove, or elbow, s.o. aside; to rid ( عن نفسه
o.s., ھ of s.th.), get rid of s.th.; to get the
better ( ھ، ه of s.o., of s.th.), conquer,
master control ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to fight ( ب
ھ s.th. with); to reject, repudiate ( ھ s.th.);
to rebut, refute, disprove ( ھ s.th.); to
propel, drive ( ھ s.th.); to move, cause,
urge, impel, egg on, goad ( ه or ب s.o., الى
or ل to do s.th.), induce, incite, force,
compel, oblige ( ه or ب s.o., الى or ل to),
make s.o. ( ب or ه) do s.th. ( الى or ل); to
band over, present, turn over ( ل or الى ھ
s.th. to s.o.); to pay ( ثمنا tamanan a price,
الى or ل to s.o.) │ دفع خطاه الى (kuṭāhū) to
wend one’s way to III to resist, withstand
ه) s.o., .s.th.). offer resistance ( ھ، ه to); to
contradict, oppose ( ه s.o., عن so as to make
him abstain from s.th.), dissuade ( ه s.o., عن
from); to suppress ( ھ s.th.); to defend ( عن
s.o., s.th.), uphold ( عن s.th.); to be
entrusted with the defense ( عن of s.th., of
s.o., also jur.) V to dash forward; to dart
off, rush off; to pour forth, flow, stream,
gush forth (water); to spring up, make
itself felt (an idea, a social tendency, and
the like) VI to shove or push one another;
to push or shove one another away or
aside; to push off, shove off ( عن from); to
issue in intermittent bursts, gush forth
intermittently; to burst forth, rush out,
sally ( من from); to be propelled, be driven
forward; to storm forward VII to dart off,
rush off; to proceed rashly, blindly,
without forethought; to be too impetuous,
be too hotheaded; to plunge headlong ( في
into s.th.); to rush, dart. make ( الى at s.th.),
pounce ( الى on s.th.); to rush off, hurry off,
go quickly ( الى to; with foll. imperf.: to do
s.th.); to give o.s. ( ل to s.o.); to burst forth,
gush out, pour forth, spurt, spout, flow,
run ( من from; water); to let o.s. be carried
away or be overcome ( وراء by s.th., e.g.,
وراء شھواته šahawātihī by one’s bodily
appetites, وراء شعوره by one’s feelings, وراء
العاجلة by worldly things); to proceed, set
out, begin (with foll. imperf.: to do s.th.)
X to try to ward off or stave off ( ھ s.th., ب
by)
دفع daf‘ pushing back, shoving aside;
repulsion. driving away, driving off;
dispelling; parrying, warding off, staving
off; repulse, rejection. repudiation;
rebuttal; handing over, turning in;
payment 285
دفعة daf‘a (n. vic.) pl. dafa‘āt shove,
push, thrust; impetus, impact, momentum,
forceful impulse, drive; ejaculation;
payment; deposit; disbursement; pl. issues
(stock market)
دفعة daf‘a pl. dufu‘āt, dafa‘āt that
which issues at anyone time, a burst, a
gush, a spurt, and the like; time, instance
│ دفعة واحدة (duf‘atan) all at one time, all at
once, in one stroke, in one fell swoop; ھذه
الدفعة this time; ست دفعات six times; على
دفعات متفاوتة (mutafāwita) at different times
دفاع daffā’ propelling, impelling, giving
impetus; O piston (techn.)
مدفع midfa’ pl. مدافع madāfi‘2 gun,
cannon │O مدافع بعيدة المرمى (ba‘īdat almarmā)
long-range guns; مدفع رشاش
(raššāš) machine gun; O مدافع ضخمة
(ḍakma) heavy artillery; O المدافع المضاد
للطائرات (muḍādda) or المدافع المقاومة للطائرات
(muqāwima) antiaircraft guns; O مدفع ثلاثي
مضاد للطائرات (tulātī, muḍādd) threebarreled
anti-aircraft gun (mil.); مدفع ھون
m. hāwun mortar; ضرب مدفع الظھر ḍarb m.
aẓ-ẓuhr marking of exact noon by cannon
shot
مدفعي midfa‘ī gun-, cannon-, artillery-
(in compounds); artilleryman, gunner,
cannoneer
مدفعية midfa‘īya artillery
دفاع difā‘ protection; defense ( عن of
s.th., of s.o., also jur.) │ خط الدفاع kaṭṭ ad-d.
line of defense; halfbacks (soccer); مجلس
الدفاع majlis ad-d. defense council; وزارة
الدفاع ministry of defense, war ministry;
الدفاع الوطني (waṭanī) national defense; الدفاع
المضاد للطائرات (muḍādd) anti-aircraft
defense; دفاع شرعي legitimate self-defense
دفاعي difā‘ī defensive, protective
مدافعة mudāfa‘a defense ( عن of s.th.)
اندفاع indifā‘ pl. -āt rush(ing), plunging,
plunge ( في into); outburst, outbreak
eruption; élan, dash, impetuosity,
rashness, hotheadedness, fire, exuberance,
effusiveness; self-abandon; اندفاعا
indifā‘an spontaneously
اندفاعة indifā‘a (n. vic.) sudden outburst,
outbreak (e.g., of wailing)
دافع dāfi‘ repellent, expellant; driving,
pushing, giving impetus, incentive,
impellent, propelling, propulsive, etc.;
repeller; payer, e.g., دافعوا الضرائب the taxpayers;
(pl. دوافع dawfi‘2) incentive,
impulse, impetus, spur, motive; بدافع (with
foll. genit.) motivated by ..., by reason
of ..., on the strength of …
مدفوعات madfū‘āt payments
مدافع mudāfi‘ defender ( عن of s.o., of
s.th.)
دفق dafaqa u i (dafq) to pour out, pour forth ( ھ
s.th.); -- u (dafq, دفوق dufūq) to be shed; to
flow, well out, spout, gush forth; to
overflow (0 with s.th.) V to pour forth,
spout forth, gush forth; to rush in; to break
forth, break out, burst out; to go off (shot);
to plunge blindly ( في، الى into s.th.); to
rush ( على against); to crowd ( على into) VII
= V
دفق dafq pouring out, effusion
دفقة dufqa pl. dufuqāt, dufaqāt, dufqāt =
دفعة duf‘a │ دفقة واحدة (dufqatan) = دفعة
واحدة؛ دفقات الريح d. ar-rīḥ gusts; دفقة من الماء
gush of water
دفاق dafāq bursting forth, darting out,
rushing out
تدفق tadaffuq outpour, outflow, issue,
effluence, efflux, effusion; influx, run,
rush, inrush, inpour; outbreak, outburst;
impulsiveness; exuberance, effusiveness
دافق dāfiq pl. دوافق dawāfiq2 bursting
forth, breaking out, erupting; gushing,
torrential
متدفق mutadaffiq impulsive; exuberant,
effusive 286
دفلى diflā oleander (Nerium oleander L.; bot.)
دفن dafana i (dafn) to bury, inter, inhume ( ه
s.o.); to hide, conceal, keep secret ( ھ s.th.)
دفن dafn burial, interment, inhumation
دفين dafn pl. دفناء dufanā’2 buried,
intend; hidden, secret
دفينة dafīna pl. دفائن dafā’in2 hidden
treasure, treasure-trove
مدفن madfan, مدفنة madfana pl. مدافن
madāfin 2 burying place, burial ground,
cemetery
دفاية see دفئ
دق daqqa i ( دقة diqqa) to be thin, fine, fragile,
frail; to be little, small, tiny, minute; to be
subtle, delicate; to be insignificant,
unimportant, trifling, inconsiderable; to be
too fine, too subtle ( عن for perception); --
u (daqq) to crush, bruise, bray ( ھ s.th.); to
grind, pulverize, powder ( ھ s.th.); to
pound ( ھ s.th., e.g., meat); to strike
(clock); to beat, throb (heart); to hammer,
throb (engine); to knock, rap, bang ( الباب
al-bāba on the door); to bump ( رأسه بالحائط
ra’sahū bi-l-ḥā’iṭ one’s head against the
wall); to drive ( ھ a nail); to ram in, drive
in (constr. eng.); to beat, strum, play ( على
a musical instrument); to type ( على on a
typewriter); -- to sound, resound, ring out
(said of musical instruments) │ دق
الجرس (jarasa) to ring the bell; دق جرس
الخطر (j. al-kaṭar) to sound the alarm; دق
الجرس على to call s.o. up, give s.o. a ring;
دق الجرس (jarasu) the bell rang; دقت الساعة
the clock struck II to triturate, pulverize,
reduce to powder (oil s.th.); to he precise,
exact, strict, meticulous, painstaking,
proceed with utmost accuracy or care ( في
in s.th.); to scrutinize, examine closely,
determine exactly ( ه s.th.); to do ( ه s.th.)
carefully, with precision! دقق البحث (baḥta)
to investigate carefully; دقق النظر (naẓara)
to watch attentively or carefully,
scrutinize, examine closely ( في s.th.); دقق
الملاحظة (mulāḥaẓa) to observe closely III
to deal scrupulously ( ه with s.o.) IV to
make fine, make thin ( ه s.th.) VII to be
crushed, brayed, pounded; to be broken │
اندق عنقه (‘unquhū) he broke his neck X to
be or become thin or fine
دق daqq crushing, bruising, braying,
pounding; pulverization, trituration;
grinding (down); beat(ing), throb(bing);
bang(ing), knock(ing), rap(ping);
tattoo(ing) │ دق الجرس d. al-jaras peal,
ringing, sound of a bell; دق الحنق d. al-
ḥanak chatter, prattle
دق diqq fine, thin; little, small, tiny,
minute; delicate, fragile, frail │ شجر دق
(šajar) shrubbery, brush, scrub; حمى الدق
ḥumma d-d. hectic fever
دقة daqqa (n. vic.) pl. -āt bang, knock,
rap; beat, throb; stroke, striking (of a
clock); hammer, hammering sound;
thumping, thump │ دقات القلب d. al-qalb
heartbeats; دقة الجرس d. al-jaras peal, or
ring, of a bell; telephone call, ring
دقة diqqa thinness; fineness; smallness,
tininess, minuteness; triviality, pettiness,
paltriness; subtlety, subtleness, finesse;
critical or precarious state, delicate
situation; accuracy, exactness, exactitude,
precision │ بدقة exactly, accurately,
precisely, minutely, painstakingly,
meticulously, sharply; دقة الشعور acuteness
of feeling, sensitivity, sensitiveness,
sensibility
دقة duqqa pl. دقق duqaq fine dust;
powder
دقاق duqāq crushed, brayed, or
pulverized, substance; powder; dour of
lupine
دقيق daqīq pl. دقاق diqaq, ادقة adiqqa
fine, thin; delicate, frail, fragile; little,
small, tiny, puny, minute; subtle; 287
paltry, petty, trifling, trivial; precise,
accurate, exact; painstaking, scrupulous,
meticulous; inexorable, relentless, strict,
rigorous; delicate (situation), critical,
trying, serious, precarious; -- flour, meal
│ دقيق الحساب keeping strict account, strict,
relentless, inexorable; دقيق الشعور sensitive;
دقيق الصنع d. aṣ-ṣan‘ finely worked, of
delicate workmanship; دقيق النظر d. annaẓar
clear-sighted, penetrating,
discerning, sensitive; ابو دقيق abū d.
butterfly; الأعضاء الدقيقة (a‘ḍā’) the genitals
دقيقة daqīqa pl. دقائق daqā’iq2 particle;
nicety; intricacy; detail, particular; minute
(time unit) │ دقائق الأمور the niceties,
intricacies, or secret implications of things
دقاق daqqāq grinder, crusher; flour
merchant; frequently or constantly
beating, striking, etc.; player of an
instrument │ ساعة دقاقة repeater (watch)
دقاقة daqqāqa knocker, rapper (of a
door)
ادق adaqq2 finer; more delicate;
smaller, tinier; more accurate, preciser;
stricter
مدق midaqq beetle; pounder, pestle;
(eg.) trail, footpath
مدقة midaqqa pl. مداق madāqq2 pounder,
pestle; beetle; clapper. tongue (of a bell)
تدقيق tadqīq accuracy, precision,
exactness, exactitude بتدقيق exactly,
precisely, accurately, minutely
مدقق mudaqqiq exact, accurate
(scholar), thorough (investigator),
painstaking, meticulous, strict, relentless
مدقق mudaqqiq precise, exact (data)
داقرة dāqira pl. دواقر dawāqir2 elay vessel 2
(tun.); -- stipend for underprivileged
students (tun.)
دقشوم daqšūm (eg.) rubblestone, crushed rock;
brickbats, gravel
دقع daqi‘a a (daqa‘) to grovel, cringe; to be
miserable, wretched, humble, abject; to
live in poverty IV do.; to make miserable (
ه s.o.; poverty)
ادقاع iddiqā‘ mass poverty
مدقع mudqi‘ miserable, wretched;
degrading, abasing (poverty)
دقل daqal mast (of a ship); mainmast; (coll.; n.
un. ة) a brand of dates of good quality
(magr.)
دك 1 dakka u (dakk) to make flat, level or even,
to smooth, level, ram, stamp, tamp ( ھ
earth, the ground, a road); to press down,
weigh down; to beat down; to devastate,
demolish, destroy, ruin ( ھ s.th.) II to mix,
mingle ( ه s.th.) VII to be crushed; to be
leveled
دك dakk pl. دكوك dukūk level ground; --
devastation, demolition, destruction
دكة dakka pl. -āt rubblestone, crushed
rock; hallast
دكة dikka pl. دكك dikak bench
دكان dukkān pl. دكاكين dakākīn2 bench;
store, shop
دكانجي dukkānjī storekeeper,
shopkeeper, retailer
مدك midakk pl. -āt ramrod; O tamper rammer
دك 2 II to provide ( ھ trousers) with a waistband
(dikka or tikka)
دكة dikka (= تكة tikka) waistband (in the
upper seam of trousers)
دكتاتورية diktātūrīya dictatorship
دكتاتورى diktātūrī dictatorial
دكتور duktūr pl. كاترة dakātira doctor │ دكتور في
الحقوق doctor of laws, LL.D.; دكتور في الطب
(ṭibb) doctor of medicine, M.D.
دكتوراة duktūrāh doctorate, doctorship,
doctor’s degree, title of doctor │ الدكتور
الفخرية (fakrīya) honorary doctorate 288
ادكر see ذكر
دكريتو (It. decreto) dikrītō pl. دكريتات decree
ادكن 1 adkan2, f. دكناء daknā’2 pl. دكن dukn
blackish, dark (color)
داكن dākin dark, dark-colored │ احضر
داكن dark green; اصفر داكن yellowish, of a
dingy yellow, mud-colored
دكان 2 see دك 1
دل dalla a ( دلالة dalāa) to show, demonstrate,
point out ( على ه to s.o. s.th.); to lead,
guide, direct, conduct ( الى or على ه s.o. to),
show s.o. ( ه) the way ( الى or على to); to
show, indicate, mark ( على s.th.); to point (
على to s.th.), evince, indicate, denote,
imply, bespeak, suggest ( على s.th.), be
indicative, be suggestive ( على of); to
furnish evidence ( على for s.th.), prove ( على
s.th.); -- (1st pers. perf. dalaltu) i ( دلال
dalīl) to be coquettish, flirt, dally (of a
woman; على with s.o.) II to prove ( على
s.th.), furnish the proof ( على for), confirm,
corroborate ( ب على s.th. with); to sell or
put up at auction, auction off ( على s.th.); to
pamper, coddle, spoil ( ه s.o.); to fondle,
caress, pet ( ه a child) IV to make free, take
liberties ( على with s.o.); to pride o.s. ( ب
on), be conceited ( ب of) V to be
coquettish, flirt, dally (of a woman; على
with s.o.); to be coy, behave affectedly; to
take liberties ( على with s.o.); to pamper,
coddle ( على s.o.) X to ask to be shown ( على
s.th.); to seek information, inform o.s. ( على
about); to obtain information; to be
informed ( على about); to be guided ( ب by),
act or proceed in accordance with ( ب); to
conclude, gather, infer ( على s.th., ب or من
from), draw conclusions ( ب or من from,
على with regard to), judge ( على s.th., ب or
من by)
دل dall proper, dignified conduct;
coquetry, flirtation
دلة dalla pl. دلال dilāl pot with long
curved spout and handle used for making
coffee (among Syrian nomads and in some
parts of Saudi Arabia)
دلال dalāl coquetry, coquettishness;
pampering, coddling, spoiling
دليل dalīl pl. ادلة adilla, دلائل dalā’l ادلاء , 2
adillā’2 (the latter of persons) indication (
على of); sign, token; symptom; proof,
evidence ( على of); guide; tourist guide,
cicerone; pilot (of a ship, of an airplane);
guidebook, guide manual, handbook;
directory, telephone directory; railroad
guide, timetable; guide rail (tech.); roller
path (in steel construction) │ اقام الدليل على
to furnish the proof for, demonstrate,
prove s.th.; دليل ظرفي (ẓarfī) circumstantial
evidence; دليل قاطع cogent proof,
conclusive evidence
دلال dallāl auctioneer; broker, jobber,
middleman, agent, commission merchant;
hawker
دلالة dalāla pl. -āt pointing; guidance;
leading, leadership; indication ( على of);
sign, token; sense, meaning
دلالة dilāla auction, public sale;
business of a broker or middleman;
brokerage commission; trade of a dealer,
jobber or agent
دلالة dallāla middlewoman, woman
broker
ادل adall2 proving more cogently ( على
s.th.), more indicative or suggestive ( على
of) │ ادل دليل على (dalīlin) the surest
evidence of, the best proof of
تدليل tadlīl reasoning, argumentation,
demonstration; proving ( على of),
furnishing of proof or evidence ( على for);
corroboration, substantiation,
confirmation; pampering, oeddling,
spoiling; fondling, petting, caressing; pet
form (of a name) │ اسم التدليل pet name; تدليلا
من a pet form of ...
تدلل tadallul coquetry, coquettishness;
pampering, coddling, spoiling 289
استدلال istidlāl reasoning, argumentation,
demonstration; conclusion, inference,
deduction; proof, evidence ( على of)
دالة dālla familiarity, chumminess; liberty (that
one takes with s.o.); audacity. boldness
مدلول madlūl proven; (pl. -āt) meaning,
sense │ مدلولات الكلمات m. al-kalimāt lexical
meanings
مدلل mudallal pampered, spoiled (child)
مدل mudill presumptuous, arrogant │ مدل
بنفسه (bi-nafsihī) conceited, self-important
دل 1 dulb plane tree, sycamore (bot.)
دولب 2 pl. دواليب look up alphabetically
دلتا Nile Delta, Lower Egypt
دلج IV to set out at nightfall
دلوح dalūḥ pl. دلح duluḥ moisture-laden cloud
دلدل daldala to set into a swinging motion,
dangle II tadaldala to hang loosely,
dangle
دلدل duldul and دلدول duldūl porcupine
(zool.)
دلس II to swindle, cheat; to counterfeit, forge,
falsify ( ھ s.th.) III to deceive, defraud ( ه
s.o.), impose ( ه on)
تدليس tadlīs deceit, fraud; swindle
تدليسي tadlīsī fraudulent
مدلس mudallas forged, counterfeit │ نقود
مدلسة counterfeit money; مفاتيح مدلسة forged
keys
دلع dala‘a a (dal‘) with لسانه lisānahū: to stick
out one’s tongue; to loll, let the tongue
hang out II to pamper, spoil ( ه a child); to
caress, fondle, pet ( ه s.o.) IV شيء يدلع نفسه
(eg.) a nauseating, disgusting thing VII to
stick out, be stuck out, hang out, loll
(tongue); to dart out, lick out, leap out.
dare up (dame), break out (fire); to be
pampered, spoiled (child)
دلع dal‘: اسم الدلع ism ad-d. pet name
دلاع dallā‘ (coll.; n. un. ة) watermelon
(magr.)
دلغان dilgan clay
دلف dalafa i (dalf, دلوف dulūf, دلفان dalafān) to
walk with short steps. toddle; to go or
walk slowly, saunter, stroll ( الى to); to
advance (Jo toward); to approach step by
step ( الى s.o. or s.th.); to penetrate, reach (
الى as far as); to grope ( الى for, of the
hand); to leak, drip, trickle (water)
O دالف dālif pl. دوالف dawālif2 ricochet
(mil.)
دلفين dulfīn pl. دلافين dalāfīn2 dolphin
دلق dalaqa u to spill, pour out ( ھ a liquid) VII
to be spilled (liquid)
دلك dalaka u (dalk) to rub ( ھ s.th.); to stroke (
ھ s.th.), pass the hand ( ھ over s.th.); to
knead ( العجين the dough); -- u ( دلوك dulūk)
to set, go down (sun) II to rub ( ھ s.th., ه
s.o.), embrocate ( ھ s.th.); to knead; to
massage ( ه s.o.)
دلك dalk rubbing; grazing, brushing,
touching, touch
دلوك dalūk liniment
دلوك dulūk, دلوك الشمس d. aš-šams sunset
تدليك tadlīk embrocation; massage
مدلكة mudallika pl. -āt masseuse
دله II to rob s.o. ( ه) of his senses, drive ( ه s.o.)
crazy (love) V to go out of one’s mind, go
crazy (with love) │ تدلھت في حبه (ḥubbihī)
she has fallen in love with him
مدله mudallah madly in love 290
دلھم IV idlahamma to be dark, gloomy; to be
deep-black
دلھم dalham dark, gloomy; deep-black
ادلھمام idlihmām a deep black
مدلھم mudlahimm dark, gloomy; deepblack
دلو II to let hang, dangle ( ھ s.th.); to hang,
suspend ( ھ s.th.); to lower ( ھ s.th.); to
drop, let down, let fall down ( ھ s.th.) IV =
II; to cast down ( ھ glances, الى on s.o.); to
let one’s glance ( بانظاره bi-anẓārihī) sweep
down; to express, utter, voice ( ب s.th.,
e.g., برأيه bi-ra’yihī one’s opinion); to
deliver, make ( بتصريح a statement; pol.); to
adduce, present, advance, offer ( بحجة bi-
ḥijjatin an argument); to inform, notify,
advise ( ب الى s.o. of), let ( الى s.o.) know ( ب
about); to offer, present ( ب الى to s.o.
s.th.); to grant, give ( بحديث ل an interview
to s.o.); to slander, defame: asperse ( في
s.o.) │ ادلى دلوه بين الدلاء (dalwahū, dilā’) or
ادلى بدلوه في الدلاء to make one’s
contribution (together with others), add
one’s touch, put in one’s two bits’ worth
V to hang down, be suspended, dangle ( ب
from); to be lowered, be let down; to be or
become low; to sink, descend │ تدلى للسقوط
to threaten to fall down, be ready to fall
دلو dalw usually f., pl. ادل adlin, دلاء
dilā’, ادلاء adlā’ leather bucket; bucket,
pail; Aquarius (astron.)
دلاية dallāya pendant
ادلاء idlā’ delivery (of a statement);
utterance, statement; presentation;
granting
دالية dāliya pl. دوال dawālin waterwheel
(for irrigation); trellis, espalier on which
grapevines are trained; varix, varicose
vein
متدل mutadallin pendent, suspended,
hanging, dangling; projecting,
overhanging, ready to fall down
داليا look up alphabetically
دم 1 dam pl. دماء dimā’ blood; دماء homicide
cases (jur.) │ دم الأخوين d. al-akawain
dragon’s blood (a dark-red, resinous
substance derived from the dragon tree,
Dracaena draco)
دمي damī blood- (in compounds),
sanguine
دموي damawī blood- (in compounds),
sanguine; sanguinary, bloody
دم 2 damma u (damm) to coat, smear, besmear (
ب ھ s.th. with); to paint, daub, color, dye,
tinge, tint ( ب ھ s.th. with) II to rub,
embrocate, anoint ( ب ھ s.th. with)
دم damm ointment, unguent, salve,
liniment, embrocation; paint; pigment,
dye, dyestuff; rouge
دمام dimām ointment, unguent, salve,
liniment, embrocation; paint; pigment,
dye, dyestuff; rouge
دميم damīm pl. دمام dimām ugly;
deformed, misshapen │ دميم الخلقة d. alkilqa
ugly to look at, of repulsive
appearance
دمامي damāma ugliness; ugly
appearance; abominableness, monstrosity
الدمام ad-dammām Dammam (seaport in
E Saudi Arabia, on the Persian Gulf)
دمث damuta u ( دماثة damāta) to be gentle, mild
(character) II to soften, mellow ( ھ s.th.)
دمث damit pl. دماث dimāt: دمث الأخلاق
gentle, mild-tempered
دماثة damāta mildness, gentleness,
tenderness (of character)
دمج damaja u ( دومج dumūj to enter ( في s.th.), go
or come into ( في ), be inserted,
incorporated ( في in) II to write shorthand
IV to twist tightly, twine firmly ( ھ s.th.);
to enter, insert, include, incorporate,
embody ( في ھ s.th. in); to 291 introduce,
interpolate, intercalate ( في ھ s.th. in); to
annex ( في s.th. to) VII to be inserted, be
incorporated ( في in); to be annexed ( في to);
to merge ( في with), be swallowed up, be
absorbed ( في by); to be fused, fuse,
amalgamate
تدميج tadmīj shorthand, stenography
ادماج idmāj insertion, incorporation,
interpolation; inclusion ( في in);
assimilation
اندماج indimāj incorporation, insertion (
في in); amalgamation, merger, merging ( في
with); absorption ( في by); annexation ( في
to); fusion; assimilation
مدمج mudmaj firm, compact
مندمج mundamij firm, compact, tight
دمجانة damajāna (also دامجانة ) pl. -āt demijohn,
carboy
دمدم damdama to mutter, grumble, growl, snarl
دمدم damdama pl. -āt growl, snarl;
rumbling noise, rumble
دمر 1 damara u to perish, he ruined, he
destroyed II to annihilate, destroy, ruin,
demolish, wreck ( ھ s.th.) V to he
destroyed, demolished, ruined, wrecked
VII to he destroyed, be annihilated
دمار damār ruin, destruction
تدمير tadmīr annihilation, destruction,
demolition
اندمار indimār utter defeat, rout,
destruction, annihilation
مدمرة mudammira pl. -āt destroyer
(naut.)
دمور 2 dammūr (eg.) a coarse calico-like fabric
دموري dammūrī (eg.) made of dammūr
(see above)
دميرة 3 damīra (eg.) flood season of the Nile
4□ لا دومرى lā dūmarī (= لا تدمري ) nobody, no
one, not a living soul
تدمر 5 tadmur2, usually pronounced tudmur,
Palmyra (ancient city in Syria, now a
small village)
تدمري tadmurī, usually pronounced tudmurī,
someone, somebody; لا تدمري nobody, no
one, not a living soul
دمس damasa u to hide, conceal, disguise ( ھ
s.th.); to bury ( ه في الأرض s.o. in the
ground) II do.
دمس dims (eg.) cinders, ashes
دماسة damāsa darkness
ادماس admās (pl.) hovels, shanties, huts
دموس dammūs pl. دماميس damāmīs2
cave, cavern
ديماس daimās, dīmās, ديموس daimūs pl.
دياميس dayāmīs2 dungeon; vault
دامس dāmis pitch-dark; dark, gloomy,
dusky
فول مدمس fūl mudammas stewed beans
دمشق dimašq2, dimišq2 Damascus (capital of
Syria)
مدمشق mudamšaq damascened,
damasked; (syr.) having adopted a
sophisticated style of living (imitating that
of Damascus), urbanized
دمع dama‘a a to water (eye) IV to cause to
weep, evoke tears, make (the eyes) water
دمع dam‘ pl. دموع dumū‘ tears
دمعة dam‘a (n. un.) tear, teardrop; (eg.)
dim‘a gravy
دمعي dam‘ī: قنبلة دمعية (qunbula) teargas
bomb
دمعة dam‘a and دميع damī’ pl. دمعى
dam‘ā, دمائع damā’i‘2 readily inclined to
weep, frequently weeping, tearful,
lachrymose (woman) 292
دموع damū‘ and دماع dammā‘ watering,
watery, tearful (eyes)
مدمع madma‘ pl. مدامع madāmi‘
lachrymal canal
دمغ 1 damaga a to refute, invalidate ( ھ a
falsehood, an error, a false accusation); to
triumph ( ھ over falsehood; said of truth)
دماغ dimāg pl. ادمغة admiga brain
دامغة dāmiga cogent argument; شھادة
دامغة (šahāda) irrefutable testimony
دمغ 2 damaga u (damg) to stamp, provide or
mark with a stamp ( ھ s.th.); to hallmark (
ھ gold and silver articles); to brand ( ھ an
animal)
دمغ damg stamping │ دمغ المصوغات d.
al-maṣūgāt hallmarking of gold and silver
articles
دمغة damga stamp; hallmark (on gold
and silver articles) │ ورق دمغة waraq d.
stamped paper
مدموغ madmūg stamped, bearing a stamp
دمقراطي dimuqrāṭī democratic; democrat
دمقراطية dimuqrāṭīya democracy;
democratic attitude or conviction
دمقس dimaqs raw silk
دمقسي dimaqsī silken, silky
مدموك madmūk and مدمك mudmak firm, tight,
taut
دمل damala u (daml, دملان damalān) to
fertilize, manure, dung ( ھ the soil); --
damila a (damal) to heal, heal up, scar
over, cicatrize (wound) VII to heal, heal
up, scar overt cicatrize (wound); to fester,
suppurate (sore)
دمل dummal (n. un. ة) pl. دمامل damāmil
دماميل , 2 damāmīl2 abscess, boil, sore,
tumor, ulcer; furuncle; bubo, plague boil;
inveterate evil
طاعون دملي ṭā‘ūn dummalī bubonic
plague
دملج dumluj pl. دمالج damālij2, bracelet, bangle
دمن 1 damana u (damn) to fertilize, manure,
dung ( ھ the soil) IV to give o.s. up, devote
o.s., apply o.s. ( على or ھ to), go in for ( على
or ھ ); to be addicted ( على e.g., to liquor)
دمن dimn (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. دمن diman
fertilizer, manure, dung
دمنة dimna pl. دمن diman vestiges or
remnants of a dwelling, ruins
دمان damān fertilizer, manure, dung
ادمان idmān addiction; excess; mania;
dipsomania │ ادمان المسكرات i. al-muskirāt
alcoholism
مدمن mudmin addicted, given up ( على
e.g., to wine); an addict ( على of)
دمان 2 dumān see دومان
دمنھور damanhūr2 Damanhur (city in N Egypt)
دموي see دم 1
دمى 1 damiya a to bleed II and IV to cause to
bleed
دام dāmin bleeding, bloody, gory
مدمى mudamman, f. مدماة bloody; bloodred
دمية 2 dumya pl. دمى duman statue, statuette;
image, effigy; dummy; doll
دمياط dimyāṭ2 Damietta (city in N Egypt)
دن danna u (dann, دنين danīn) to buzz, hum
(insect); to drone
دن dann and دنين danīn buzz(ing),
hum(ming), droning, drone
دن dann pl. دنان dinān earthen wine jug
293
دنأ dana’a a and دنؤ danu’a u ( دنوءة dunū’a,
دناءة danā’a) to be low, mean, base, vile,
contemptible, despicable
دنيء danī’ pl. ادنياء adniyā’ ادناء , 2 adnā’
low, base, mean, vile, despicable,
contemptible; inferior, second-rate, of
poor quality
ادنأ adna’2 lower, viler, meaner; more
inferior, of poorer quality
دناءة danā’a lowness, baseness,
meanness, vileness; inferiority
دنتلا, دنتلة (Fr. dentelle) dantilla lace, lacework
دنجل dinjil (eg.) pl. دناجل danājil2 axle, axle-tree
دندرمه (Turk. dondurma) dandurma ice cream
دنادشة danādiša common people, people of no
consequence
دندن dandana to buzz, hum; to drone; to hum
softly, croon (a song); to murmur
دندي dindī (eg.) turkey
دينار pl. دنانير look up alphabetically
دنس danisa a (danas) to be soiled, sullied,
defiled, polluted II to stain, soil, dirty,
befoul, sully, pollute, contaminate ( ھ
s.th.); to dishonor, disgrace ( ھ s.th.); to
desecrate ( ھ s.th.) V pass. of II
دنس danas pl. ادناس adnās uncleanness,
dirt, filth, squalor; stain, blemish, fault
دنس danis pl. ادناس adnās, دنساء dunasā’2
unclean, soiled, sullied, foul, polluted,
defiled, stained
تدنيس tadnīs pollution, defilement,
soiling, sullying, contamination;
dishonoring, disgracing; desecration,
profanation
دنف danifa a (danaf) to be seriously ill IV do.
دنف danif pl. ادناف adnāf seriouly ill
دنف danaf long illness; O cachexia,
marasmus (med.)
مدنف mudnif, mudnaf emaciated,
haggard, weak
دانق look up alphabetically
دنقلة dunqula Dongola (town in N Sudan, on
the Nile)
دنكل = دنجل
دنمرك danmark2 Denmark
دنو) and دنى) دنا danū u ( دنو dunūw, دناوة
danāwa) to be near, be close; to come or
go near s.o. or s.th. ( من or الى or ,(ل
approach ( من، الى، ل s.o., s.th.); to come
close, get close ( من، الى، ل to), approximate
من، الى، ل) s.th.); to draw near, be
imminent (time, event); دنا به من to bring
s.o. close to ...; -- دني daniya a ( دنا danan,
دناية danaya) to be low, lowly; to be or
become mean, base, vile, despicable,
contemptible II to bring close ( ھ s.th., ه
s.o., من to), bring, take or move ( ھ s.th., ه
s.o.) near ( من ), approximate ( ھ s.th., من
to); to apply o.s. ( في to s.th.), busy o.s. ( في
with s.th.), delve ( في into); دنى نفسه
(nafsahū) to lower o.s., abase o.s., humble
o.s. III to approach ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.), come
or get near s.o. or s.th. ( ه، ھ ), come or get
close ( ه ھ to); to approximate ( ھ s.th.); to
measure up ( ھ، ه to) │ شيء لا يدانى (yudānā)
an unequaled thing IV to be near, be
close; to approach ( من or الى or ل s.o. or
s.th.), come, go or draw near s.o. or s.th. (
من، الى، ل ), come close, get close ( من، الى، ل
to); to bring close ( ه s.o., ھ s.th., من to),
bring, take or move ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.) near (
من ), approximate ( ھ s.th., من to); to lower,
drop ( ھ s.th., e.g., the veil) V to approach
gradually ( الى s.th. or s.o.); to be debased,
sink low, sink, decline; to lower o.s.,
abase o.s., humble o.s. VI to come near
each other, get close to each other,
approach one another; to 294 be close
together; to approach, approximate ( من
s.th.) VIII ادنى iddanā to be near, be close,
come or draw near, approach X to wish to
be nearer or closer, try to come nearer or
closer; to seek to fetch or bring closer ( ھ
s.th., الى to, to o.s.), reach out ( ھ for s.th.),
wish ( اليه ه for s.th.)
دنو dunūw advent, approach; proximity,
nearness, imminence (of an event)
دنى danīy pl. ادنياء adniyā’ near, close;
low, lowly; mean, base, vile, despicable,
contemptible, inferior, infamous, depraved
دنية danīy pl. -āt, دنايا danāyā a base
quality or habit; s.th. disgraceful, infamy,
vile action
ادنى adnā, f. دنيا dunyā pl. m. ادان
adānin, ادنون adnūn pl. f. دنى dunan nearer,
closer; situated lower down, nether; lower,
inferior; lowlier; smaller, of less
significance; more appropriate, better
suited, more suitable │ الشرق الأدنى (šarq)
the Near East; المغرب الأدنى (magrib)
Algeria; ادنى من حبل الوريد (ḥabli al-warīd)
very near or close, imminent; الأقارب الأدنون
the closest relatives; من ادناه الى اقصاه
(aqṣāhū) from one end to the other;
wholly, entirely, completely, altogether;
الحد الأدنى (ḥadd) the minimum; ادناه
hereinafter, below (in writings,
documents, etc.) e.g., الموقعون ادناه
(muwaqqi‘ūn) those signed below, the
undersigned; لا ادنى (with foll. genit.) not
the least, not a single, not one
دنيا dunyā (f. of ادنى adnā) world; earth;
this world (as opposed to آخرة ); life in this
world. worldly existence; worldly.
temporal things or possessions; earthly
things or concerns │ الحياة الدنيا life in this
world; ام الدنيا umm ad-d. Cairo; اقام الدنيا
واقعدھا aqāma d-d. wa-aq‘adahā approx.:
to kick up a dust, make a stir, move
heaven and earth
دنيوي dunyawī, دنياوي dunyāwī worldly,
mundane, secular; earthly, temporal,
transitory, transient
دناوة danāwa nearness, closeness,
proximity, propinquity; lowness,
lowliness; meanness, baseness, vileness
دناية danāya lowness, lowliness;
meanness, baseness, vileness
تدن tadannin sinking, decline; low
level, nadir (fig.) │ التدني الأخلاقي (aklāqī)
the low level of morality, the moral
decline
دان dānin low; near, close
متدان mutadānin close together
دھر dahr pl. دھور duhūr, ادھر adhur time; long
time, age, epoch; lifetime; eternity; fate,
destiny │ بنات الدھر banāt ad-d. blows of
fate, trials, afflictions, misfortune; تصاريف
الدھر and صروف الدھر vicissitudes of fate.
changes of fortune; adversities, adverse
circumstances; دھر الداھرين dahra ddāhirīn
for all eternity, foever and ever;
الى أخر الدھر ilā ākir d-d. do.; لا ... الدھر كله
(ad-dahra kullahū) never in all one’s life
دھري dahrī an adherent of the dahrīya,
a materialistic, atheistic doctrine in Islam;
atheist, freethinker
دھري duhrī very old, far advanced in
years
دھس dahasa a (= داس ) to trample underfoot,
trample down, crush ( ھ s.th.), tread ( ھ on
s.th.); to run over ( ه s.o.)
دھش dahiša a and pass. duhiša to be
astonished, amazed, surprised ( من or ل at);
to wonder, marvel ( من at); to be baffled,
startled, puzzled, perplexed, taken aback (
من or ل by) II and IV to astonish, amaze,
surprise, baffle, puzzle, perplex, startle ( ه
s.o.) VII = dahiša دھش 295 dahaš
perplexity, surprise, consternation, alarm,
dismay
دھش dahiš astonished, amazed,
surprised; baffled, puzzled, nonplused,
perplexed, startled, disconcerted, alarmed,
upset; dazed, stunned
دھشة dahša astonishment, amazement,
surprise, wonder; perplexity,
consternation, bafflement, bewilderment,
dismay, alarm
اندھاش indihāš astonishment,
amazement; perplexity, consternation,
bafflement, bewilderment
مدھش mudhiš astonishing, amazing,
surprising, marvelous; pl. -āt amazing
things, marvels, wonders
مدھوش madhūš and مندھش mundahiš
astonished, amazed, surprised; perplexed,
baffled, puzzled, nonplused, startled;
overwhelmed
دھق 1 dahaq stocks (to hold the feet of an
offender by way of punishment)
دھاق diḥāq full (cup), brimful
دھقان 2 dihqān, pl. دھاقنة dahāqina, دھاقين
dahāqīn2 man of importance, one who
plays an important role, leading
personality; grandee (in ancient Persia) │
دھاقين السياسة d. as-siyāsa the political
leaders
دھك dahaka a (dahk) to crush; to mash ( ھ
s.th.)
دھلز II tadahlaza to stroll about, walk about (in
a hall)
دھليز dihlīz pl. دھاليز dahālīz 2 anteroom,
vestibule, lobby, foyer; corridor, hall-way
│ ابن الدھليز ibn ad-d. pl. ابناء الدھاليز
foundling
دھلي dihlī Delhi
دھم dahama a (dahm) and dahima a (daham)
to come or descend ( ه upon s.o.) suddenly;
to surprise, take unawares, take by
surprise ( ه s.o.), come unexpectedly ( ه to
s.o.); to enter suddenly, raid, invade ( ھ
s.th.) II to blacken ( ه s.th.) III to befall,
seize, grip, attack ( ه s.o.), come over s.o. (
ه; e.g., sickness, despair); to surprise, take
unawares, catch red-handed ( ه s.o.); to
attack suddenly ( ه s.o.), fall upon s.o. ( ,(ه
invade, raid ( ه e.g., a house); to overtake ( ه
s.o.; fate), catch up with ( ه) IX to be black
دھمة duhma blackness
ادھم adham2, f. دھماء dahmā’ 2, pl. دھم
duhm black, deep-black │ داھية دھماء
(dahiya) disaster, catastrophe
الدھماء ad-dahmā’ 2 the masses, the
common people, the populace, also دھماء
الناس
مداھمة mudāhama police raid; house
search
مدھم mudhamm very dark, pitch-dark
دھن dahana u (dahn) to oil ( ه، ھ s.th., s.o., ب
with); to anoint ( ه، ھ s.th., s.o., ب with); to
grease, smear ( ب، ھ s.th., s.o., ب with); to
rub, embrocate ( ه، ھ s.th., s.o., ب with); to
paint, daub ( ه s.th.); to varnish ( ھ s.th.) II
do. III to treat with gentleness ( ه s.o.); to
cajole, flatter ( ه s.o.), fawn ( ه on s.o.); to
cheat, dupe, gull, take in, outsmart ( ه s.o.)
V pass. of I
دھن dahn oiling, greasing; painting,
daubing
دھن duhn pl. ادھان adhān, دھون duhūn,
-āt, دھان dihān oil (edible, lubricating, for
the skin); fat, grease
دھن duhnī oily, oil, oleic, oleo- (in
compounds); fatty, greasy
دھنيات duhnīyāt fats, oils; fatty
substances
دھناء dahnā’ desert
دھان dahhān house painter, painter
دھينة dahīna pomade 296
دھان dihān pl. -āt, ادھنة adhina cosmetic
cream, cold cream, salve, ointment,
unguent; consecrated oil, anointing oil;
paint, varnish; hypocrisy, dissimulation,
deceit; -- (without pl.) painting, daubing;
whitewashing │ ورشة للدھان (warša)
paintshop
مداھنة mudāhana flattery, adulation,
sycophancy, fawning; hypocrisy,
dissimulation; deceit, trickery
مداھن mudāhin flatterer, adulator,
sycophant; hypocrite
مدھن mudhin oily; fatty, greasy
دھور dahwara to hurl down ( ھ s.th.); to tear
down, topple, overthrow ( ھ s.th.) II
tadahwara pass. of I; to fall, tumble; to
slump, sink; to be dragged down, sink to
the lowest level
تدھور tadahwur fall, downfall; decline,
slump
دھي dahiya a ( دھاء dahā’) to be clever, smart,
cunning, artful, wily; -- dahā a to befall,
overtake, hit, strike ( ه s.o.), come over s.o.
ه) ; misfortune) II = dahā VI to pretend to
be smart or cunning
دھاء dahā’ smartness, slyness,
shrewdness, subtlety, cunning, craft
ادھى adhā smarter, shrewder; craftier,
wilier; more skillful, subtler, more
resourceful; worse, more calamitous
داه dāhin pl. دھاة duhāh smart, sly,
shrewd, subtle, cunning, wily, artful;
resourceful person
داھية dāhiya smart fellow, old fox, sly
dog
داھية dāhiya pl. دواه dawāhin calamity,
disaster, catastrophe │ داھية دھياء (dahyā’)
and داھية دھماء (dahmā’) disaster,
catastrophe; فليذھب في داھية (fal-yadhab) let
him go to hell!
داء (دوء ) dā’ pl. ادواء adwā’ disease, malady │
داء الثعلب d. at-ta‘lab alopecia, loss of the
hair; O داء الرقص d. ar-raqṣ St. Vitus’s
dance; O داء الفيل d. al-fīl elephantiasis; داء
المنطقة d. al-minṭaqa shingles, herpes
zoster (med.)
دواء see دوى
دوب II to wear out, wear off ( ھ s.th.)
دوبرة dūbara packthread, string, twine, cord,
rope; thread
دوبيت dūbait a rhymed poem consisting of four
hemistichs
دوح VII to spread
دوح dauḥ branching trees, branches
دوحة dauḥa tall tree with many
branches; family tree, genealogical table
داحة dāḥa top (child’s toy)
داخ (دوخ ) dāka u (dauk) to conquer, subjugate (
الى a. country); to resign o.s., humble o.s.;
to be or become dizzy, have a feeling of
dizziness; to feel ill, be sick, feel nausea II
to conquer, subjugate ( ھ a people); to
make submissive, subdue, humble,
humiliate, degrade ( ه s.o.); to make ( ه s.o.)
dizzy; to molest, bother, trouble ( ه s.o.); to
daze, stun ( ه s.o.) │ دوخ رأسه (ra’sahū) to
make s.o.’s head go round, make s.o.
dizzy
دوخة dauka vertigo, dizziness; coma;
nausea
دائخ dā’ik dizzy
تدويخ tadwīk subjugation, conquest
دود 1 II to be or become worm-eaten
دود dūd (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. ديدان dīdān
worm; maggot; larva; caterpillar │ دودة
الحرير and دود القز d. al-qazz silkworm; دود
القرع d. al-qar‘, دود قرعي (qar‘ī) ascarids;
دود القرمز d. al-qirmiz cochineal; دود المش
٢٩٧ d. al-mišš cheese maggots; الدودة الوحيدة
tapeworm
دودي dūdī wormlike, worm-shaped,
vermiform.
مدود madūd, mudawwid wormy, wormeaten
2□ مدود midwad = مذود
دار (دور ) dāra u (daur, دوران dawarān)to turn,
revolve, rotate, move in a circle (، على
ب, حول around s.th. or s.o.), circle (، على
ب، حول s.th. or s.o.); to begin to turn or
rotate; to circulate; to go round, spread,
be current, make the rounds (of
rumors, etc.); to run, be in operation
(of a machine or engine); to start
running, start up (engine); to walk or
go about, run around; to roam, rove,
move about, wander about, gad about;
to make the rounds ( على among
people), turn successively ( على to
several people); to turn, turn one’s
face, wheel around; to veer, shift,
change its direction; to change, take a
different turn, become different; to turn
على) against s.o.); to have to do, deal (
حول or على with), treat ( حول or على of),
refer ( حول or على to), bear ( حول or على
on), concern ( حول or على s.th.); to take
place, be going on, be in progress, be
under way; to be discussed, be talked
about ( بين among); to circulate, pass
around ( ب s.th.); to lead, guide or
&how around ( ب s.o.); to let roam, let
wander ( بنظره، بعينه bi-naẓarihī,
bi-‘ainaihi one’s eyes, one’s glance, في
over) │ در dur! about face! (command;
mil.); دار رأسه (ra’suhū) to be or
become dizzy, giddy; دار مع الفرص
(furaṣ) to trim sail, adapt o.s. to the
situation; دارت رحى الحرب (raḥā l-ḥarb)
war broke out; المعارك التي دارت رحالھا
امس the battles that raged yesterday; دار
بنفسه (bi-nafsihī) it passed through his
mind; دار على الألسن (alsun) to be muchdiscussed,
be on everyone’s lips; دار
على الأفواه واسلات الأقلام (afwāh, asalāt
al-aqlāmi to be current in both the
spoken and written language, be in
general use, be generally accepted
(e.g., words); دار بلادا واكل اعيادا
(bilādan, a‘yādan) he had bean around
in the world and had seen a lot;
(colloq.) دار باله (bālahū) to pay
attention ( الى، على to), be careful (، الى
على with); دارت عليھم الدائرة calamity
overtook them II to turn in a circle,
spin, whirl, rotate, revolve ( ب، ھ s.th.);
to turn, turn around ( ب، ھ s.th.); to
invert, reverse ( ب، ھ s.th.); to make
round, to round ( ھ s.th.); to circulate,
pass around ( ھ s.th.); to set going, set
in motion, start ( ھ s.th.); to wind ( ھ a
watch, a clock); to look, search ( على
for s.th.) │ دور رأسه (ra’sahū) to turn
s.o.’s head, persuade s.o., bring s.o.
round III to go or walk around ( ه with
s.o.); to try to bring ( ه s.o.) round; to
ensnare, inveigle ( ه s.o.); to try to
ensnare ( ه s.o.); to try to deceive ( ه
s.o.); to cheat, trick ( على or عن ه s.o. out
of s.th.); to get away, escape, dodge,
duck out IV to turn, revolve, rotate,
spin, whirl ( ھ, ب s.th.); to turn around,
turn ( ھ، ب s.th., رأسه الى one’s head
toward); to direct ( على or الى ھ s.th. to,
toward), aim ( على or الى ھ s.th. at); to
circulate, pass around ( ھ s.th.); to set
in operation, set going, set in motion (
ھ a machine, an apparatus); to start,
start up ( المحرك al-muḥarrik the
motor); to play, play back ( ھ e.g.,
شرائط ناطقة tapes); to act upon s.th. ( ,(ھ
drive ( ھ s.th.); to get under way ( ھ a
job, a project); to take up ( ھ s.th.); to
initiate ( ھ s.th.); to divert, turn away (
عن ھ, ه s.o., s.th. from); to direct,
conduct, steer, manage, head, run ( ھ
s.th.), be in charge ( ھ of); to revolve in
one’s mind, think over, ponder ( ھ s.th.,
ان that) │ ادار بوجھه الى (bi-wajhihī) to
turn around to s.o., look back at s.o.;
ادار رأسه (ra’sahū) to turn s.o.’s head,
persuade s.o., bring s.o. round; ادار
الحديث في الموضوع to bring 298
conversation around to a topic, broach
or discuss a subject V to be or become
round; to be circular X do.; to circle,
rotate, revolve, spin, turn; to turn ( الى
to), face ( الى s.o.); to turn around; to
turn one’s head, look back; to circle (
حول s.th.), walk around s.th. (~ (حول
دار dār f., pl. دور dūr, ديار diyār, ديارات
diyārāt, ديرة diyara house; building,
structure, edifice; habitation, dwelling,
abode; residence, home; seat, side,
locality; area, region; land, country (esp.
pl. ديار see below │ دار الآثار museum (of
antiquities); دار البريد post office; دار البقاء d.
al-baqā’ the eternal abode, the hereafter;
الدار الباقية (bāqiya) do.; انتقل للدار الباقية to
pass away, die; ال دار البيضاء (baiḍā’)
Casablanca (seaport in W Morocco); the
White House (in Washington); دار التجارة
commercial house, business house; دار
الحرب d. al-ḥarb war zone, enemy territory
(Isl. Law: non-Muslim countries); دار
الرياسة seat of the chief executive of a
country; دار السعادة d. as-sa‘āda
Constantinople; دار السلطنة d. as-salṭana
Constantinople (designation before World
War I); دار السلام d. as-salām paradise,
heaven; epithet of Baghdad; Dar es
Salaam (seaport and capital of Tanganyika
Territory); دور السينما cinemas, movie
houses; دار السلطة d. aš-šurṭa police station;
دار الصنعة or دار الصناعة arsenal; دار صيني
(ṣīnī) cinnamon; دار الضرب d. aḍ-ḍarb and
دار السكة d. as-sikka mint (building); الديار
العراقية (‘irāqīya) Iraq; دار العلوم name of a
college in Cairo; دار الفناء d. al-fanā’ (as
opposed to دار البقاء see above) the
temporal world, this world; دار القضاء d. alqaḍā’
court of justice, tribunal; دار الكتب d.
al-kutub public library; دور اللھو d. al-lahw
amusement centers; night clubs; دار التمثيل
theater, playhouse; دار الملك d. al-mulk
(royal) residence; الديار المصرية (miṣrīya)
Egypt; دار الھجرة d. al-hijra Medina; دار
الأيتام d. al-aitām orphanage, orphans’
home
دارة dāra pl. -āt halo (of the moon);
circle; O (el.) circuit; O villa
دارى dārī domestic, native
دورى dūrī domestic (animal); عصفور
دوري (‘uṣfūr) and دوري house sparrow
دور daur pl. ادوار adwār round (of a
patrol; in sports); role, part (played by s.o.
or s.th.); film role, stage role; periodic
change, rotation, alternation; crop
rotation; period; (one’s) turn; phase, stage,
step, degree, station; epoch, age. era; fit,
attack, paroxysm (of a disease); floor,
story; musical composition; number,
single performance (within a program) │
دور وتسلسل (wa-tasalsul) vicious circle,
circulus vitiosus; دور نھائي (nihā’ī) final
round, finals (athlet.); دور الانعقاد d. alin‘
iqād session, term (parl.); الدور الأول
(awwal) or دور البطولة d. al-buṭūla leading
role, starring role; قام بدور or لعب دورا
(la‘iba) to play a part or role; دور ارضي
(arḍī) ground floor, first floor; كان دوره it
was his turn; الدور له it is his turn; ( ( انا
بدوري I for one; (I) for my part, ( ھو) بدوره
he in turn, (he) for his part; بالدور
alternately, by turns
دورة daura pl. -āt turn, revolution,
gyration, rotation; circulation; cycle;
circuit; round, patrol; procession (Chr.);
round trip; tour (in general, of an artist or
performer); detour; period (O also el.);
session (of parliament); course (of
instruction) (ir., syr.) │ الدورة الدموية
(damawīya) blood circulation; الدورة الجوية
(jawwīya) air circulation; ( دورة اجتياز ( تجاوز
الرتبة d. ijtiyāz (tajāwuz) ar-rutba officers’
training course (mil., Syr.); دورة زراعية
(zirā‘īya) crop rotation; دورة تشريعية
(tašrī‘īya) legislative period; دورة الفلك d.
al-falak revolution of celestial bodies; دورة
التفافية (iltifāfīya) flanking maneuver (mil.);
دورة مالية (mālīya) 299 financial period,
fiscal year; دورة المياه d. al-miyāh lavatory
(with running water), toilet, water closet
دوري daurī patrolling, patrol- (in
compounds); periodic, occurring at
regular stated times, recurring,
intermittent; circulatory, cyclic, etc., see
دور and دورة series (athlet.) الجھاز الدوري
(jahāz) the circulatory system
دورية daurīya pl. -āt patrol, round;
patrol, reconnaissance squad │ دوريات
الاستكشاف reconnaissance squads, patrols
□ داورية dāwirīya = دورية daurīya
دير dair pl. اديار adyār, اديرة adyira, ديورة
duyūra monastery, convent, cloister
ديري dairī monastic, ministerial,
cloistral
ديرة dīra region, area, land, homeland
(bedouin)
دوار duwār, dawār vertigo, dizziness,
giddiness; seasickness
دوار dawwār rapidly or constantly
turning, whirling, spinning, rotating,
circling, circulating; revolving, rotary,
rotatory; whirlpool, eddy, vortex;
itinerant, ambulant, roving; (eg.) farm
building, farm │ باب دوار revolving door;
بائع دوار peddler, hawker; جھاز حفر دوار
(jahāz ḥafr) rotary drilling rig; دار الشمس d.
aš-šams sunflower
ديار dayyār monastic, friar, monk
ديرانى dairānī monastic, friar, monk
دوارة dawwāra whirlpool, eddy, vortex;
compass, pair of dividers (syr.) │O دوارة
الھواء d. al-hawā’ weather vane
دياري diyārī domestic; native
دوران dawarān turn(ing), rotation,
revolution, gyration; circulation, circling,
circuiting; round trip, tour
ادور adwar2 (elative): ادور على الألسن
(alsun) more talked about, more
frequently expressed or discussed
مدار madār pl. -āt orbit; circling,
circuiting, circuit, revolution; axis; pivot;
(fig.) that upon which s.th. turns or
depends, the central, cardinal, or crucial
factor, the pivot; center; subject, topic,
theme (of a conversation, of negotiations);
scope, range, extent, sphere; tropic
(geogr.); O steering wheel │ مدار السرطان
m. as-saraṭān Tropic of Cancer, مدار الجدي
m. al-jady Tropic of Capricorn; كان مداره
على it (i.e., the dispute, or the like) was
about ..., it hinged on ...; على مدار السنة (m.
is-sana) throughout the year, all year
round
تدوير tadwīr recitation of the Koran at
medium speed (between tartīl and ḥadr; a
technical term of tajwīd)
مداورة mudāwara pl. -āt cheating,
humbug, trickery; outwitting; attempted
evasion or circumvention, shift, dodge;
persuasion, inveigling, ensnaring
ادارة idāra turning; turning around or
over, reverting, reversion, inversion;
starting, setting in operation; operation;
drive (techn.); direction, management;
administration; administrative agency,
department, office, bureau │ ادارة الأمن i.
al-amn the police; ادارة عرفية (‘urfīya)
military administration; سوء الإدارة sū’ al-i.
mismanagement, maladministmtion; مجلس
الإدارة Majlis al-i. board of directors,
administrative board, committee of
management; مرنز الإدارة markaz al-i.
administration center, headquarters
اداري idārī administrative,
departmental; administrative officer;
manager (athlet.); اداريا idāriyan through
administrative channels, administratively,
officially
استدارة istidāra roundness, rotundity,
circularity
دائر dā’ir turning, revolving, spinning;
circulating; current (e.g., expression),
common; ambulant, itinerant; in progress,
300 under way j working, in operation;
running (machine, engine); round
دائرة dā’ira pl. دوائر dawā’ir2 circle (also
math.); ring; circumference, perimeter,
periphery; sphere, scope, range, compass,
extent, circuit; field, domain (fig.); official
agency, department (esp. Ir., Syr., Leb.);
office, bureau; department of a court of
justice (Eg., Tun.); farm, country estate
(eg.); misfortune, calamity, affliction │ في
دائرة ... within the framework of ...; على شكل
نصف دائرة ‘alā šakli niṣfi d. semicircular;
نقطة الدائرة nuqṭat ad-d. essential factor,
pivot, crucial point, crux; O دائرة كھربائية
(kahrabā’īya) electric circuit; O دائرة قصيرة
short circuit (el.); دائرة المعارف
encyclopedia; دوائر الحكومة government
circles, (الدوائر الرسمية ( السياسية، العسكرية
(rasmīya, siyāsīya, ‘askarīya) official
(political, military) circles or quarters
(journ.); دائرة الاختصاص jurisdiction (of an
official agency, esp., of a court of justice);
الدائرة السنية (sanīya) civil list; دائرة استئنافية
(isti’nāfīya) appellate court (Eg.; jur.);
دائرة انتخابية (intikābīya) electoral district;
دارت عليه الدوائر to suffer adversities
دائري dā’irī circular, ring-shaped,
annular
مدور mudawwar round, circular
مدير mudīr head, chief, director;
administrator; manager; intendant,
superintendent; rector (of a university);
mudir, chief officer of a mudiria, approx.
= governor (Eg.); (pl. مدراء mudarā’2)
administrative officer at the head of a
county (Syr., Leb., Ir., Saudi Ar.) │ مدير
الجوق m. al-jauq bandleader, conductor of
an orchestra
مديرة mudīra directress; administratress
مديرية mudīrīya direction;
administration; management; -- (pl. -āt)
mudiria, province (Eg.); approx.: main
department of a ministry (Ir.)
مستدير mstadīr round; circular │ مؤتمر
المائدة المستديرة (mu’tamar al-mā’idat al-m.)
roundtable conference
دورق dauraq pl. دوارق dawāriq2 (eg.) bulging
vessel with a long, slender neck, carafe
دوزن dauzana to tune (a musical instrument);
O to tune in (radio)
دوزان dūzān and دوزنة dauzana tuning
(of a musical instrument); دوزنة O tuning
(radio)
دوزينة (It. dozzina) dōzīna dozen
داس (دوس ) dāsa u (daus, دياس diyās) to tread,
step ( ھ on); to tread ( ھ s.th.); to tread
down, trample down, trample underfoot,
crush ( ھ s.th.); to thresh (grain); to treat
with disdain, humiliate ( ه s.o.); to run over
ه) s.o.; automobile) VII pass. of I
دوس daus treading, trampling, tread,
step
ديسة dīsa dense forest, jungle, thicket
دواسة dawwāsa pedal
مداس madās shoe, sandal
مدوس madūs, مداس mudās trodden,
trampled down; crushed; run over
دوسنطاريا dusinṭāriyā, دوسنتاريا dysentery
دوسية (Fr. dossier) dosyē, دوسيه dōsē pl. -āt
dossier, file
دوش 1 (eg.) dawaš to irritate ( ه s.o.) or drive s.o.
crazy by noise
دوشة dauša (eg.) din, noise, clamor, uproar,
hubbub, hullabaloo
دوش 2 (Fr. douche) dūš pl. -āt shower, douche
دوطة (It. dote) dōṭa dowry
دوغ II to imprint a mark, to brand
داغ dāg pl. -āt brand (on cattle) 301
داف (دوف ) dāfa u (dauf) to mix, mingle ( في ھ
s.th. with); to add, admix ( في ھ s.th. to)
دوق dūq duke
دوقة dūqa duchess
دوقي dūqī ducal
دوقية dūqīya dukedom, duchy
دوك II to chatter, prattle
دوك dauka din, row, hubbub, turnult,
confusion
دال (دول 1 ) dāla u" ( دولة daula) to change
periodically, take turns, alternate, rotate;
to change, turn (time, fortune) │ دالت دولة
الاستبداد the time of absolutism is over,
belongs to the past; دالت له الدولة fortune has
turned in his favor ( عليه against him) III to
alternate, rotate ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to cause
to succeed by turns or to follow one
another ( الأيام al-ayyāma the days; God); to
alternate ( بين between); to confer, talk ( ه
with s.o., في about), discuss ( في ه with s.o.
s.th.) IV to give ascendancy, afford
superiority, give the upper hand ( من ه to
s.o. over); to make victorious, let triumph
على ه) s.o. over), grant victory ( على ه to s.o.
over); to replace ( ب ھ or من s.th. with),
exchange, substitute ( ب ھ or من for s.th.
s.th.) │ اديل لبني العباس من بني امية udīla libanī
1-‘abbās min banī umayyata the rule
passed from the Ommaiads to the
Abbasides VI to alternate, take turns ( ھ
with or in s.th., e.g., in some work); to
hand each other s.th. ( ھ ), pass s.th. ( (ھ
alternately between themselves; to handle
alternately ( ھ different things), take now
this, now that; to exchange ( الرأى ar-ra’y
views); to make frequent use ( ھ of s.th.);
to confer, have a discussion, take counsel,
deliberate; to parley, negotiate; to
circulate, be in circulation, be current,
have currency │ تداولته الأيدي tadāwalathu laidī
it passed from hand to hand, it made
the rounds, it circulated; تداولته الألسن
(alsun) it passed from mouth to mouth, it
was the talk of the town, it was on
everybody’s lips
دولة daula pl. دول duwal alternation,
rotation, change; change of time, turn of
fortune; dynasty; state, country; power,
empire │ صاحب الدولة title of the Prime
Minister; دولة رئيس الحكومة daulat r. al-ḥ.
His Excellency, the Prime Minister; فخامة
الدولة fakāmat ad-d. title of the President of
the Republic (Syr., Leb.); الدولة العلية
(‘alīya) name of the ancient Ottoman
Empire; الدول الكبرى (العظمى ) (kubrā, ‘uẓmā)
the big powers; دولة منتدبة (muntadaba)
mandatory power
دولة (dam., pronounced dōle = ركوة
rakwa) metal vessel with long curved
handle used for making coffee
دولي daulī state (adj.); duwalī
international
دولية duwalīya internationality;
internationalism; the International
دويلات duwailāt petty states, small
countries
دواليك dawālaika alternately, by turns;
successively, one by one, one after the
other │ وھكذا دواليك (wa-hākadā) and so
forth, and so on
تدويل tadwīl internationalization
مداولة mudāwala pl. -āt parley,
negotiation; deliberation, consultation;
discussion; mudāwalatan alternately, one
after the other, one at a time
تداول tadāwul alternation, rotation;
circulation, currency; circulation of
money │ بالتداول alternately, by turns, one
by one
متداول mutadāwal current, circulating,
in circulation; valid; common, in common
use, prevailing │ الكلام المتداول (kalām) the
colloquial language 302
دوال 2 dawālin see دول
دولاب dūlāb pl. دواليب dawālīb2 wheel; tire;
gearing, gears, wheels, mechanism,
machine, machinery; closet, looker,
cabinet, cupboard │ دولاب الملابس wardrobe
دولار dūlār pl. -āt dollar
دام ( دوم 2 ) dāma u (daum, دوام dawām) to last,
continue, go on; to persevere, persist │ ما
دام mā dāma as long as; (the more so)
since, inasmuch as, as, because; while he
is ..., when he is ... ; ما دام حيا (ḥayyan) as
long as he is alive; ما دمت معك (dumtu) so
long as (or while) I am with you II to
move in a circle, turn, spin, revolve,
rotate, gyrate, circle; to turn, revolve, spin,
twirl ( ھ s.th.) III to persevere, persist ( على
in), apply o.s. diligently and steadily ( على
to), pursue with diligence and
perseverance ( على s.th.); to continue IV to
cause to last or continue, perpetuate, make
lasting, make permanent ( ھ s.th.) X to
make ( ھ s.th.) last or continue; to
continue, go on ( ھ with s.th.)
دوم daum continuance, permanence,
duration; دوما dauman constantly, at all
times, ever, always; -- doom palm (bot.)
ديمة dīma pl. ديم diyam, ديوم duyūm
continuous rain
دوام dawām duration, continuance,
permanence, perpetuity; uninterrupted
succession; endurance, perseverance;
abiding, stay (of s.o., في at a place); دواما
dawāman and على الدوام permanently,
perpetually, at all times, ever, always │
وقت الدوام، اوقات الدوام، ساعات الدوام working
hours, office hours (Ir., Syr.)
ديمومة daimūma = دوام
دوامة duwwāma top (child’s toy);
whirlpool, eddy, vortex
مداومة mudāwama perseverance,
endurance, persistence; continuance,
duration; continuation
دائم dā’im lasting, enduring; endless,
eternal, perpetual, everlasting; perennial;
continued, continuous, continual,
incessant, unceasing, constant; permanent,
standing, established; durable │ دائم التقدم
والنمو d. at-taqaddum in a state of constant
progress and growth
دائما dā’iman always │ دائما ابدا (abadan)
always and ever
دائمي dā’imī = دائم
مدام mudām wine
مستديم mustadīm constant, continuous,
continual, incessant, uninterrupted
دومان 2 dūmān rudder, helm
دومانجي dūmānjī steersman, helmsman
دون 1 II to record, write down, set down, put
down in writing ( ھ s.th.); to enter, list,
register, book ( ھ s.th.); to collect ( ھ
poems) │ دون شرطا (šarṭan) to stipulate a
condition V to be recorded, be written
down, be put down in writing
ديوان dīwān pl. دواوين dawāwīn2 account
books of the treasury (in the older Islamic
administration); divan, collection of
poems written by one author;
governmental office, administrative
office; chancellery, office, bureau,
secretariat; council or state, cabinet;
council, consultative assembly, board of
advisers, executive committee;
government; court or justice, tribunal;
hall; davenport, divan; (railway)
compartment │ لغة الدواوين lugat ad-d.
official jargon, officialese; ديوان التفتيش
inquisitional court; the Inquisition
ديواني dīwānī administrative,
administrational, official; an Ottoman
style of cursive (used by the secretaries of
the State Chancellery for treaties,
diplomas, firmans, etc.)
تدوين tadwīn recording, writing down;
entry, listing. booking; registering,
registration 303
مدونة mudawwana pl. -āt record, note;
entry: body of laws; pl. مدونات writings,
literature (on a given subject)
دون 2 dūn low, lowly; bad, poor, inferior;
meager, inadequate │ عامله بالدون
(‘āmalahū) he snubbed him
دون dūna (prep.) below, beneath, under
(in rank, value, etc.); this side of, short of;
before; without more than; with the
exclusion of, leaving ... aside,
disregarding ...; and not by any means, but
not │ دون ذلك (with foll. nominative) on
the way to that, there is ... , before
accomplishing that one must …, دون ذلك
خرط القتاد (karṭ al-qatad) before one can do
that, one must strip the tragacanth of its
leaves, i.e., accomplish the impossible;
بدون، من دون (dūni) without; with the
exclusion of, excluding; بدون ان and من دون
ان without (+ foll. gerund in Engl.); دونك
dūnaka (with foll. acc.) here you are!
take ...! watch out ( ھ for)! beware ( ھ of)!
ھو دون he is below him, he doesn’t
measure up to him; كان دونه أھمية
(ahammīyatan) to be of less importance
than ...; اثم دونه كل اثم itmun dūnahū kullu
itmin a sin to end all sins; الذين ھم دون السن
العسكرية (sinn, ‘askarīya) those below the
age for military service; دون ما نظر الى
(naẓarin) regardless of, irrespective of;
دون ما فائدة with no benefit at all;
completely useless; تخشى ان يسعدن دونھا
(takšā an yas‘adna) she is afraid they will
be happier than she is; تلك الكتب دون غيرھا
(kutub, gairihā) those books and no
others; ان متعجب من فضلك دون علمك
(muta‘ajjib, faḍlika, ‘ilmika) I admire
your virtue, but not your knowledge, or, I
admire your virtue more than your
knowledge; كم الأفواه دون دون التذمر والشكوى
(kamma, tadammur, šakwā) he stopped
their mouths to keep them from muttering
and complaining; اذا كان الغصن دون ما يحتمله
(guṣnu, yaḥtamiluhū) if the branch is not
strong enough to carry him; وصل دونھم الى
الغاية it was he, not they, who reached the
goal; اشاحت بوجھھا دونه (ašāḥat· bi-wajhihā)
she averted her face so that he could not
see her; حال دون الشيء to prevent s.th.; الأشعة
دون الحمراء (aši‘‘a, ḥamrā‘) the infrared
rays; الموجات دون القصيرة (maujāt) ultrashort
waves (radio)
دونم dūnum a square measure (Ir. = about 2500
m2; Pal. = roughly, 900 m2)
دوى 1 dawā and II to sound, resound, ring out;
to drone; to echo, reverberate III to treat ( ه
a patient, ھ a disease) VI to treat o.s. (with
a medicine); to be cured
دوى dawan pl. ادواء adwā’ sickness,
illness, disease, malady
دوي dawīy sound, noise, ring, clang,
roar, thunder, drone; echo, reverberation
دواة dawāh (□ دواية dawāya) pl. دوي
duwīy, diwīy, دويات dawayāt inkwell
دواء dawā’ pl. ادوية adwiya remedy,
medicament, medication, medicine, drug
دوائي dawd'i medicinal, medicative,
curative
داء see دوء
دواء diwā’ treatment, therapy (med.)
مداواة mudāwāh treatment, therapy
(med.)
تداو tadāwin cure
دوى 2 (Fr. douille) dūy socket (of a light bulb)
ديالوج diyalōg (Eg. spelling) pl. -āt dialogue
ديباج and ديباجة see دبج
ديوث dayyūt (□ ديوس ) cuckold; procurer, pimp;
a variety of warbler (zool.)
ديجور see دجر
الديجوليون ad-dēgōlīyūn (Eg. spelling) the
Gaullists 304
ديدبان daidabān, daidubān pl. -āt, ديادبة
dayādiba guard, sentry: sentinel │ ديدبان
المراكب ship’s pilot
ديدن see ددن
دير، ديرة، اديار، اديرة، ديرى، ديار، ديراني see دور
ديس dīs diss (Ampelodesma tenax; bot.)
ديسم see دسم
ديسمبر disembir, disambir December
ديك dīk pl. ديكة dīka, ديوك duyūk, ادياك adyāk
cock, rooster │ ديك الحبش d. al-kabaš
turkey, turkey cock; ديك رومي (rūmī) do.;
وزن الديك wazn ad-d. bantam weight
السعال الديكي as-su‘āl ad-dīkī whooping
cough
ديكتاتوري = دكتاتوري
ديكور (Fr. décor) pl. -āt décor, stage decoration
ديماس daimās, dīmās, ديموس daimūs pl. دياميس
dayāmīs2 dungeon, vault
ديمة، ديم، ديمومة see دوم
ديموطيقي dīmūṭīqī demotic (writing)
ديموقراطي، ديمقراطي dimuqrāṭī democratic;
democrat
ديموقراطية, ديمقراطية dimuqrāṭīya pl. -āt
democracy; democratic attitude or
conviction
دان (دين 1 ) dāna i to borrow, take up a loan; to
be a debtor, be indebted; to owe ( ب ل s.o.
s.th., also, e.g., دان له بالشكر (šukr) d. lahū
bi-š-šukr to owe s.o. one’s thanks; ب s.th.,
e.g., بالحياة bi-l-ḥayāh one’s life, ل to s.th.
or s.o.); to be indebted ( ب ل to s.o. for); to
be subject, subject o.s., bow, yield, ( ل to
s.o. or s.th.), be under s.o.’s ( ل) power,
owe allegiance ( ل to s.o.), obey ( ل s.o.); to
grant a loan, lend money ( ه to s.o.); to
subject, subjugate ( ه s.o.): to requite, repay
ه) s.o.): to condemn ( ه s.o.), pass judgment
ه) on s.o.) III to have a debt ( ه with s.o.),
be indebted ( ه to s.o.): to be the creditor ( ه
of s.o.), have a money claim ( ه on s.o.) │
داينه بمبلغ خمسة قروش (bi-mablag kamsat q.)
he had a claim of five piasters on him IV
to lend money ( ه to s.o.): to sell on credit (
ه to s.o.); to convict, find guilty,
pronounce guilty ( ه s.o.) V to be indebted,
have debts; to subject o.s. ( ل to) VI تداينوا
بدين (dain) to contract a mutual loan,
borrow money from each other X to make
or incur debts, take up a loan
دين dain pl. ديون duyūn debt; pecuniary
obligation, liability: obligation (Isl. Law);
claim (Isl. Law), financial claim │ بالدين on
credit; رب الدين rabb ad-d. creditor; ديون
الحرب d. al-ḥarb war debts: دين مضمون
bonded, or funded, debt; دين ممتاز
(mumtāz) preferred, or privileged, debt;
دين موحد (muwaḥḥlad) consolidated debt;
دين مطلق (muṭlaq) debt not bound to the
physical person of the debtor, but
outliving him (Isl. Law); دين مستغرق
(mustagriq) claims against an estate which
exceed or equal the assets (Isl. Law)
دينونة dainūna judgment; Last Judgment
الديان ad-dayyān the Judge (attribute of
God)
مدينة madīna pl. مدائن madā’in مدن , 2
mudun town, city; المدينة Medina (city in W
Saudi Arabia); see مدن
ادانة idāna verdict of guilty: conviction
│ صدر الحكم بإدانته ṣadara l-ḥukmu biidānatihī
he was convicted
استدانة istidāna incurrence of debts
دائن dā’in creditor
مديون madyūn indebted, in debt:
obligated, under obligation 305
مديونية madyūnīya indebtedness
obligation
مدين madīn owing; indebted, obligated,
under obligation; debtor │ مدين بالشكر (šukr)
owing gratitude, much obliged; كان مدينا ل
to be indebted to s.o., stand in s.o.’s debt
مدين mudīn moneylender, creditor
مدان mudān convicted, found guilty;
guilty; judged, condemned
دان (دين 2 ) dāna i to profess ( ب a religion, a
conviction. etc.) │ دان بالإسلام to profess
Islam; دان بعاداته (bi-‘ādātihī) to adhere to
one’s customs V to profess ( ب a religion)
دين dīn pl. اديان adyān religion, creed,
faith, belief │ يوم الدين yaum ad-d. the Day
of Judgment
ديني dīnī religious; spiritual │ لاديني irreligious;
O العلم الديني science of religion
دين dayyin religious, pious, godly,
devout
ديانة diyāna pl. -āt religion;
communion, confession, denomination,
sect │ صاحب الديانة founder of a religion
ديان dayyān pious, godly, devout,
religious
تدين tadayyun piety, godliness,
devoutness, religiousness, religiosity
متدين mutadayyin pious, godly, devout,
religious
متدينة mutadayyina religious community
دينار pl. دنانير danānīr2 dinar, a monetary unit
(Ir., Jord.); pl. دنانير money
ديناري dīnārī diamonds (of a deck of
cards)
دينامو dīnāmō dynamo, generator
ديناميت dīnāmīt dynamite
O دينم dainam pl. ديانم dayānim2 dynamo,
generator
دية see ودى
ديوان pl. دواوين and ديواني see دون 1
ذ
ذا (demonstr. pron.) pl. اولاء ulā’i this one, this;
بذا bi-dā by this, by this means, thereby; لذا
li-dā therefore; كذا ka-dā so, thus, in this
manner; so and so, so and so much; ھكذا
hā-ka-dā so, thus, in this manner; serves
as intensifier after interrogative pronouns
(roughly corresponding in English to such
phrase as: ... on earth, ... then, or the like):
ماذا what on earth? لماذا why then? why in
heaven’s name? – ھو ذا huwa dā, f. ھي ذي
hiya dī that one; look at that one; why,
that is ..., now if that isn’t ...!; ھاءنذا
hā’anadā behold, it is I, here I am, pl. ھا
نحن اولاء hā naḥnu ulā’i; -- used as an
accusative in the construct state: master,
owner, or possessor of, with ذو nominative
(q.v.), ذي as genitive; -- ذاك dāka, f. تاك
tāka, تيك tīka, pl. اولائك ulā’ika this, this
one; اذ ذاك (id) then, at that time; in those
days; -- ذلك dālika f. تلك tilka, pl. اولائك
ulā’ika that, that one; بذلك bi-dālika by
that, by that means, in that manner; لذلك lidālika
therefore; بعد ذلك ba‘da dālika after
that, upon that, thereafter, thereupon; مع
ذلك ma‘a dālika yet, still, 306 nevertheless,
for all that; وذلك ان (anna) that is (to say),
namely, to wit; وذلك لأن (li-anna) and that
is because ..., for the one reason that ...;
ذلك بأن (bi-anna) this is due to the fact
that ...; كذلك ka-dālika so, thus, in that
manner; equally, likewise, in the lame
manner; -- ذلكم dālikum f. تلكم tilkum, pl.
اولائكم ulā’ikum that one; -- ھذا hādā f. ھذه
hādihī, ھذي hādī, pl. ھؤلاء hā’ulā’I, dual m.
ھذان hādāni, f. ھاتان hātāni this, this one,
see ھذا (alphabetically)
ذأب X to be wolflike, be fierce or cruel like a
wolf
ذئب di‘b pl. ذئاب di’āb, ذؤبان du’bān dieb
(Canis anthus), jackal; wolf │ مرض الذئب
الأحمر maraḍ ad-d. al-aḥmar name of a
noncontiguous skin disease
ذؤابة du’āba pl. ذوائب dawā’ib2 lock,
strand (of hair); tuft, wisp
ذات، ذاتي and ذاتية see ذو
ذا see ذا
ذال dāl name of the letter ذ
ذب dabba u to drive away, chase away ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to defend ( عن s.o., s.th.)
ذباب dubāb (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اذبة
adibba, ذبان dibbān flies, fly │ ذباب قارض
gadfly, horsefly
ذبابة dubāba pl. -āt (n. un. of ذباب ) fly;
tip (of the sword, or the like)
ذبانة dubbāna, dibbāna fly; sight, bead
(on a firearm)
مذبة midabba fly whisk, fly swatter
ذبح dabaḥa a (dabḥ) to kill (by slitting the
throat); to slaughter, butcher; to massacre;
to murder, slay; to sacrifice, offer up,
immolate ( ھ an animal) II to kill,
slaughter, butcher, massacre, murder
ذبح dabḥ slaughtering, slaughter
ذبح dibḥ sacrificial victim, blood
sacrifice
ذبحة dibḥa, dubḥa angina (med.);
diphtheria │ الذبحة الصدرية (ṣadrīya) angina
pectoris (med.); O الذبحة الفؤادية (fu’ādīya)
do.
ذباح dabbāḥ slaughtering, killing,
murdering; slaughterer, butcher
ذبيح dabīḥ slaughtered
ذبيحة dabīḥa pl. ذبائح dabā’iḥ2 slaughter
animal; sacrificial victim, blood sacrifice;
sacrifice, immolation; offering, oblation
مذبح madbaḥ pl. مذابح madābiḥ2
slaughterhouse; altar (Chr.)
مذبحة madbaḥa massacre, slaughter,
carnage, butchery
ذبذب dabdaba to set into a swinging motion,
swing, dangle ( ھ s.th.) II tadabdaba to
swing, pendulate; to oscillate (el.); to be
deflected (magnetic needle); to vibrate; to
fluctuate; to waver, vacillate, hesitate
ذبذبة dabdaba pl. -āt pendulous motion,
pendulation; oscillation (el.); vibration
تذبذب tadabdaba pendulous motion,
pendulation, swinging; oscillation (el.);
deflection (of a magnetic needle)
O مذبذب mudabdib oscillator (el.)
مذبذب mudabdab fluctuating, variable;
vacillating, wavering, hesitant, unsteady
متذبذب mutadabdib: تيار متذبذب (tayyār)
oscillating current (el.)
ذبل dabala, dabula u (dabl, ذبول dubūl) to be
wilted, to wilt, wither; to fade; to become
dry, dry up; to waste away; to become
dull, lose its luster (eye)
ذبل dabl mother-of-pearl, nacre
ذبالة dubāla wick
ذابل dābil pl. ذبل dubul wilted, withered;
dry, dried up; faded (color); languid, dull,
lackluster, languishing (glance); feeble,
weak, tired 307
ذحل daḥl pl. اذحال adḥāl, ذحول duḥūl
resentment, rancor, hatred;
revengefulness, vindictiveness; blood
revenge
ذخر dakara a to keep, preserve, store away,
put away ( ھ s.th.); to save, lay by ( ھ s.th.)
VIII ادخر iddakara to keep, preserve, store
away, put away ( ھ s.th.); to store,
accumulate, gather, hoard, amass ( ھ s.th.);
to lay by ( ھ s.th.); to save ( ھ s.th., also
strength, trouble, etc.) │ ادخر حبا ل
(ḥubban) to harbor love for; لا يدخر جھدا
(juhdan) he spares no effort
ذخر dukr pl. اذخار adkār s.th. stored
away, put by, hoarded, or accumulated;
stores, supplies; treasure
ذخيرة dakīra pl. ذخائر dakā’ir2 treasure;
stores, supplies; provisions, food;
ammunition (mil.); (holy) relic
ادخار iddikār storage; hoarding,
amassing, accumulation; storing,
gathering; saving
مذخر mudakkir pl. -ūn assistant gunner,
ammunition passer (mil., Syr.)
مذخر mudakkar pl. -āt supply
مدخرة muddakira pl. -āt (Syr.) storage
battery, battery
ذرة 1 dura see ذرو
ذر 2 darra u (darr) to strew, scatter, spread ( ھ
s.th.); to sprinkle ( ب ھ on s.th. s.th.) │ ذر
الرماد في عينيه (ar-ramāda fī ‘ainaihī) to
throw dust in s.o.’s eyes; -- u ( ذرور durūr)
to rise, come up, rise resplendent over the
horizon (sun) │ ذر قرنه (qarnuhū) it began
to show, it emerged
ذر darr strewing, scattering, sprinkling;
(coll.) tiny particles, atoms, specks, motes
ذرة darra (n. un.) pl. -āt atom; tiny
particle; speck, mote │ مثقال ذرة mitqāl d.
the weight of a dust particle, a tiny
amount; a little bit; مقدار ذرة miqdār d. a
tiny amount, a jot, an iota; ذرة من الشك
(šakk) the least doubt
ذري darrī atomic │ قنبلة ذرية (qunbula)
atomic bomb; النشاط الذري (našāṭ) and طاقة
ذرية (ṭāqa) atomic energy
ذرور darūr powder
ذروري darūrī powdery, powdered,
pulverized
ذريرة (darīra pl. ذرائر darā’ir2 fragrant
powder, cosmetic scented powder
ذري durrī of or pertaining to the
offspring or progeny
ذرية durrīya pl. -āt, ذراري darārīy
progeny, descendants, children, offspring
يذر 3 yadaru see ( (وذر
ذرب dariba a (darab) to be sharp,
cutting
ذرب darab diarrhea (med.)
ذرب darib pl. ذرب durb sharp, cutting │
جرح ذرب (jurḥ) a malignant, incurable
wound
ذراح durrāḥ pl. ذراريح darārīḥ2 Spanish fly,
blister beetle (zool.)
ذرع dara‘a a (dar‘) to measure ( ھ s.th.); to
take the measure or measurements ( ھ of
s.th.); to cover ( ھ a distance); to cross,
travel ( ھ a country), travel through ( ھ ); to
intercede, intervene, mediate, put in a
word ( ل for s.o., on behalf of s.o., عند with
s.o. else) V to use, employ, apply ( بذريعة
bi-darī‘a or بوسيلة bi-wasīla a means, an
expedient); to use as a pretext, as an
excuse ( ب s.th.); to use as a means ( ب
s.th., الى to an end) VII to proceed,
advance; to intervene
ذرع dar‘ power, ability, capability ( ب to
do s.th.) │ ضاق ذرعا ب and ضاق عنه ذرعا
(dar‘an) not to be up to s.th., be unable to
do or accomplish s.th.; to be unable to
stand or bear s.th., be fed up with, be tired
of, feel uneasy about, be oppressed by 308
ذراع dirā‘ f. and m., pl. اذرع adru‘, ذرعان
dur‘ān arm; forearm; connecting rod;
cubit, in Syria = .68 m │in Egypt: ذراع
بلدي (baladī) = .58 m, ذراع استانبولي
(istanbūlī) = .665 m, ذراع ھندازة (hindāza)
= .656 m, ذراع معماري (mi‘mārī) = ca. .
75 m, ذراع معماري مربع (murabba‘) = .
5625 m; in Iraq: ذراع حلبي (ḥalabī) =
ca. .68 m, ذراع بغدادي (bagdādī) or ذراع
بلدي (baladī) = ca. .80 m, ذراع معماري
see 800 above
ذريع darī‘ stepping lively, walking
briskly; rapid, quick; torrential; rapidly
spreading, sweeping (death); devastating;
intercessor
ذريعة darī‘a pl. ذرائع darā’i‘2 medium,
means, expedient; pretext, excuse
ذرف darafa i (darf, ذريف darīf, ذروف durūf,
ذرفان darafan) to flow, well forth (tears);
to shed ( ھ tears; said of the eye) II to
exceed ( على an age) X to let flow, shed ( ھ
tears)
ذرق daraqa i u (darq) to drop excrement
(bird) IV do.
ذرق darq droppings, excrement (of a
bird)
ذرو) and ذرى) ذرا darā u (darw) to disperse,
scatter ( ھ s.th.); to carry off, blow away (
ھ dust; said of the wind); to winnow, fan (
ھ grain); -- ذرى darā i (dary) do. II do. IV
= I; to throw down, throw off ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.) │ اذرت العين الدمع (dam‘a) the eye
shed tears V to be winnowed, be fanned;
to climb ( ھ on), scale ( ھ s.th.); to seek
shade or shelter ( ب in, at, under); to take
refuge ( ب with), flee ( ب to) X to take
refuge ( ب with), place o.s. under s.o.’s ( (ب
protection, flee ( ب to s.o.)
ذرة dura durra, a variety of sorghum │
ذرة شامي (eg.) Indian corn, maize (Zea
mays L.); ذرة صفراء (ṣafrā’) do. (syr.);
ذرة عويجة (eg.) a variety of millet
(Andropogon Sorghum Brot. var. Schwein
furtianus Kcke.); ذرة بيضاء (baiḍā’)
millet (syr.)
ذرى daran protection, shelter
ذروة durwa, dirwa pl. ذرى duran
summit; top; peak; culmination, climax,
acme, apex
مذرى midran and مذارة midrāh pl.
مذار madārin winnow, winnowing fork
ذعر da‘ara a (da‘r) to frighten, scare, alarm,
terrify ( ه s.o.); pass. du‘ira to be
frightened ( ل by), get alarmed ( ل at); --
da‘ira a (da‘ar) to be terrified, alarmed,
dismayed IV to frighten, scare, alarm,
terrify ( ه s.o.) V and VII to be frightened,
become alarmed
ذعر du‘r fright, terror, alarm, panic
ذعر da‘ar fright, alarm, dismay,
consternation
ذعاف du‘āf lethal, deadly, immediately killing
(poison) │ موت ذعاف (maut) a sudden,
immediate death
ذعق da‘aqa a (da‘q) to frighten ( ه s.o.) by
screaming
ذعن da‘ana a (da‘an) and IV to submit, yield,
give in ( ل to s.o.), obey ( ل s.o., an order,
etc.); to concede voluntarily, grant
willingly ( ب ل to s.o. s.th.)
اذعان id‘ān submissiveness, pliability,
compliance, obedience
مذعن mud‘in submissive, pliable,
tractable, obedient
مذعان mid‘an pliable, tractable, docile,
obedient, obliging, compliant
ذفر dafar pungent smell, stench
ذقن daqan, diqan pl. اذقان adqān, ذقون duqūn
chin; -- daqn f., pl. ذقون duqūn beard,
whiskers │ ذقن الشيخ d. aš-šaik; wormwood,
absinthe; خروا لأذقانھم karrū liadqānihim
they prostrated themselves;
غرق في العمل حتى الذقن 309 (gariqa fī
l-‘amal) to be up to one’s neck in work, be
swamped by work (properly: to drown in
work); ضحك على ذقنه (ḍaḥika) pl. على ذقونھم
(eg., syr.) to fool s.o., make fun of s.o.,
lead s.o. around by the nose ( ب with s.th.);
to put on an act for s.o.; ضحك في ذقنه to
laugh in s.o.’s face
ذكر dakara u (dikr, تذكار tadkār) to
remember, bear in mind ( ھ s.th.), think ( ھ
of); to keep in mind ( ھ s.th.); to recall,
recollect ( ھ s.th.); -- (dikr) to speek, talk (
ھ of, about); to name, mention, cite, quote
ھ) s.th.); to state, designate, indicate ( ھ
s.th.); to give ( ھ e.g., foots, data); to point,
refer ( ھ to s.th.); to report, relate, tell ( ل ھ
s.th. to s.o.) │ تقدم يذكر taqaddumun
yudkaru notable progress; لا يذكر
(yudkaru) inconsiderable, not worth
mentioning; ذكره بخير (بالخير ) (kair) to
have pleasant memories of s.o., hold s.o.
in fond remembrance; to speak well of
s.o.; ذكره بشر (šarr) to have unpleasant
memories of s.o.; to speak ill of s.o. II to
remind ( ب ه s.o. of s.th.), point out ( ب ه to
s.o. s.th.), call s.o.’s ( ه) attention ( ب to); to
make ( ھ a word) masculine (gram.) III to
parley, negotiate, confer, have a talk, take
counsel ( ه with s.o.); to memorize, commit
to memory, learn, study ( ھ one’s
assignment, one’s lesson) │ ذاكر دروسه
(durūsahū) to study one’s lessons, do
one’s homework IV to remind ( ھ ه s.o. of
s.th.), call ( ھ s.th.) to s.o.’s ( ه) mind V to
remember, bear in mind ( ھ s.th.), think ( ھ
of s.th.) VI to remind each other ( ھ of),
revive each other’s memory of ( ھ ); to
confer (together), have a talk, take counsel
VIII ادكر iddakara = V; X to remember,
recall, keep in mind, know by heart ( ھ
s.th.)
ذكر dikr recollection, remembrance,
reminiscence, memory, commemoration;
reputation, repute, renown; naming,
stating, mention(ing), quoting, citation;
report, account, narration, narrative;
invocation of God, mention of the Lord’s
name; (in Sufism) incessant repetition of
certain words or formulas in praise of
God, often accompanied by music and
dancing │ على ذكر (with foll. genit.)
apropos of, speaking of ...; وعلى ذكر ذلك
speaking of that, incidentally, in that
connection; الذكر الحكيم the Koran;
سالف الذكر abovementioned, aforementioned;
سعيد الذكر of blessed
memory, deceased, late; اشاد بذكره
(ašāda) to celebrate, praise, commend s.o.
or s.th., speak in glowing terms of s.o. or
s.th.; ما زال على ذكر من (dikr min) he
still remembered ..., he could still recall ...
ذكر dakar pl. ذكور dukūr, ذكورة
dukūra, ذكران dukrān male; (pl. (ذكور
penis
ذكرة dukra reputation, repute, renown
ذكرى dikrā pl. ذكريات dikrayāt
remembrance, recollection, memory; pl.
reminiscences, memoirs
ذكير dakīr steel
تذكار tadkār, tidkār remembrance;
reminder, memento; memory,
commemoration; souvenir, keepsake;
memorial day │ تذكار جميع القديسين t.
jamī‘ al-qiddīsīn All Saints’ Day (Chr.)
تذكاري tadkārī, tidkārī serving to
remind, helping the memory; memorial,
commemorative
تذكرة tadkira reminder; memento
تذكرة tadkira, mostly pronounced
tadkara, pl. تذاكر tadākir2 message, note;
slip, paper, permit, pus; card; ticket;
admission ticket │ تذكرة بريد postcard;
تذكرة اثبات الشخصية t. itbāt aš-šakṣīya
identity card; تذكرة ذهاب واياب t. dahāb
wa-iyāb round-trip ticket; تذكرة الرصيف
(eg.) platform ticket; تذكرة اشتراك
subscription ticket; تذكرة طبية (ṭibbīya)
medical prescription; تذكرة مرور permit,
pass, laissez-passer; passport; تذكرة
النفوس ٣١٠ (Syr.) identity card (= بطاقة
شخصية Eg.); تذكرة الانتخاب t. al-intikāb
ballot
تذكرجي tadkarjī, تذكري tadkarī ticket
seller, ticket clerk; (streetcar) conductor
تذكير tadkīr reminding (of s.o., ب of
s.th:). reminder, memento; fecundation,
pollination (of female blossoms; in
pomiculture)
مذاكرة mudākara pl. -āt negotiation,
consultation. conference; deliberation (of
a court; Syr.); learning, memorizing,
memorization; study
تذكر tadakkur memory, remembrance,
recollection
استذكار istidkār memorizing,
memorization, committing to memory
ذاكرة dākira memory
مذكور madkūr mentioned; said, abovementioned;
celebrated │ لم يكن شيئا
مذكورا lam yakun šai’an m. it was of no
importance, it was nothing
مذكر mudakkar masculine (gram.)
مذكرة mudakkira pl. -āt reminder;
note; remark.; notebook; memorandum,
memorial, aide-mémoire, (diplomatic)
note; ordinance, decree; treatise, paper,
report (of a learned society, = Fr.
mémoires); pl. reminiscences, memoirs │
مذكرة الاتهام m. al-ittihām bill of
indictment (jur.); مذكرة الجلب m. al-jalb
writ of habeas corpus; مذكرة شفاهية
(šifāhīya) verbal note (dipl.)
ذكو) and ذكى) ذكا dakā u (dukūw, ذكا dakan,
ذكاء dakā’) to blaze, flare up (fire); to
exude a strong odor; -- ذكي dakiya ( ذكاء
dakā’) to be sharp-witted, intelligent II
and IV to cause to blaze, fan ( ھ the fire);
to kindle ( ھ s.th.) II to immolate an
animal X = dakā
ذكاء dakā’ acumen, mental, acuteness,
intelligence, brightness; -- dukā’2 the sun
ذكي dakīy pl. اذكياء adkiyā’2
intelligent, sharp-witted, clever, bright;
redolent, fragrant; tasty, savory, delicious
ذل dalla i (dall, dull, ذلالة dalāla, ذلة dilla, مذلة
madalla) to be low, lowly, humble,
despised, contemptible II to lower, debase,
degrade, humiliate, humble ( ھ, ه s.o.,
s.th.); to subject, break, subdue, conquer ( ه
s.o.); to overcome, surmount ( ھ
difficulties, obstacles) IV to lower,
debase, degrade, humiliate, humble ( ھ, ه
s.o., s.th.); to subject, break, subdue,
conquer ( ھ, ه s.o. s.th.) V to lower o.s,
humble o.s., cringe ( الى or ل before s.o.);
to be humble, obsequious X to think ( ه
s.o.) low or despicable; to think little ( ه
of), disesteem ( ه s.o.); to deride, flout,
disparage, run down ( ه s.o.)
ذل dull lowness, lowliness,
insignificance; ignominy, disgrace, shame,
degradation, humiliation; humility,
humbleness, meekness, submissiveness
ذلة dilla lowness, baseness, vileness,
depravity; submissivness, obsequiousness
ذليل dalīl pl. اذلاء adillā’ اذلة , 2 adilla low,
lowly; despised, despicable, contemptible;
docile, tractable, pliable; humble,
submissive, abject, servile; obsequious,
cowering, cringing ذلول dalūl pl. ذلل dulul
docile, tractable, gentie (animal); female
riding camel
مذلة madalla humbleness, meekness,
submissiveness; humiliation
تذليل tadlīl derogation, degradation,
bemeaning; overcoming, conquering,
surmounting (of difficulties, of an
obstacle, and the like)
اذلال idlāl degradation, debasement,
humiliation
تذلل tadallul self-abasement 311
ذلذل duldul pl. ذلاذل dalādil2 lowest, nethermost
part of s.th.; train, hem (of a garment) │
ذلاذل الناس the mob, the riffraff
اذلف adlaf2, f. ذلفاء dalfā’, pl. ذلف dulf having a
small and finely chiseled nose
ذلق dalq tip, point; tip of the tongue
الحروف الذلق al-ḥurūf ad-dulq, الحروف
الذلقية and الحروف الذوللقية (dulaqiya) the
liquids r, l, n (phon.)
ذلق dalq, daliq, ذليق dalīq eloquent, glib,
facile (tongue)
ذلاقة dalāqa eloquence, glibness (of the
tongue)
ذلك etc., see ذا
ذم damma u (damm, مذمة madamma) to blame,
find blameworthy, dispraise, criticize ( ه
s.o.), find fault ( ه with s.o.) II to rebuke,
censure sharply ( ه s.o.)
ذم damm censure, dispraise, derogation,
disparagement
ذمة dimma pl ذمم dimam protection,
care, custody; covenant of protection,
compact; responsibility, answerableness;
financial obligation, liability, debt;
inviolability, security of life and property;
safeguard, guarantee, security; conscience
│؟ بالذمة honestly? really? seriously? في
ذمتي and على ذمتي upon my word, truly;
بذمته, في ذمته in s.o.’s debt, indebted to s.o.;
ما بذمته his debt; على ذمته under s.o.’s
protection; at s.o.’s disposal; for the
benefit of s.o. or s.th., for s.o. or some
purpose (allocation of funds); ھي على ذمته
she is financially dependent on him, he
has to support her; اھل الذمة ahl ad-d. the
free non-Muslim subjects living in
Muslim, countries who, in return for
paying the capital tax, enjoyed protection
and safety; طاھر الذمة of pure conscience,
upright, honest; برأ ذمته (barra’a) to relieve
one’s conscience, meet one’s obligation
ذمي dimmī a zimmi, a free non-Muslim
subject living in a Muslim country (see ذمة
dimma: (اھل الذمة
ذمام dimām pl. اذمة adimma right, claim,
title; protection, custody; security of life
and property │ في ذمام الليل fī d. al-lail
under cover of darkness
ذميم damīm censured; blameworthy,
objectionable, reprehensible; ugly, unfair,
nasty
ذميمة damīima pl. ذمائم damā’im2 blame,
censure
مذمة madamma pl. -āt blame, censure
مذموم madmūm censured; blameworthy,
objectionable, reprehensible
ذمر V to grumble, complain ( من or على about)
ذمار dimār sacred possession, cherished
goods; honor
تذمر tadammur pl. -āt grumbling,
complaint, grievance
ذمي damiya a ( ذماء damā’) to be in the throes
of death
ذماء damā’ last remnant; last breath of
life │ ذماء من الحياة (ḥayāh) last breath of
life
ذنب IV to do wrong, commit a sin, a crime, an
offense; to be guilty, be culpable X to find
or declare ( ه s.o.) guilty of a sin, of a
crime, of an offense
ذنب danb pl. ذنوب dunūb offense, sin,
crime, misdeed
ذنب danab pl. ذنب adnāb tail; end;
adherent (pol.), follower, henchman
ذنبي danabī caudal, tail- (in
compounds); append aged, appendant,
dependent
ذنيب dunaib petiole, leafstalk (bot.)
مذنب mudannab comet
مذنب mudnib culpable, guilty; sinner;
evildoer, delinquent, criminal 312
ذھب dahaba a ( ذھاب dahāb, مذھب madhab) to
go ( الى to); to betake o.s., travel ( الى to); to
go away, leave, depart; to disappear,
vanish, decline, dwindle; to perish, die, be
destroyed; with ب: to carry s.th. off, take
s.th. away, abduct, steal s.th., sweep s.th.
or s.o. away, annihilate, destroy s.th. or
s.o.; ذھب به الى to lead or conduct s.o. to,
take s.o. along to; to think, believe ( الى
s.th.), hold the view, be of the opinion ( الى
that); to escape ( عن s.o.; fig.), slip ( عن
s.o.’s mind), ذھب عنه ان to lose sight of the
fact that ..., forget that ... ; to ignore, skip,
omit ( عن s.th.); (with imperf.) to prepare
to ..., be about to ... │ ذھب وجاء to go back
and forth, walk up and down; ذھب الى ابعد
من (ab‘ada) to go beyond ... (fig.); ما يذھب
في نزعته (naz‘atihī) what follows along
these lines; اين يذھب بك ! (yudhabu) the idea
of it! you can’t mean it! ذھب سدى (sudan)
to be futile, be in vain, be of no avail; ذھب
ادراج الرياح (adrāja r-riyāḥ) to go the ways
of the winds, i.e., to pass unnoticed,
without leaving a trace; to end in smoke,
come to nothing, be futile, be in vain; ذھب
كأمس الدابر (ka-amsi d-dābir) to vanish into
thin air, disappear without leaving a trace
(lit.: like yesterday gone by); ذھب ببھائه (bibahā’ihi)
to take the glamor away from
s.th.; ذھب بنفسه (bi-nafsihī) to kill s.o. (joy,
terror, etc.); ذھب بخياله (bi-kayālihī) to let
one’s imagination wander ( الى to); ذھب
مذھبه (madhabahū) to embrace s.o.’s
madhab (see below); to follow s.o.’s
teaching, make s.o.’s belief one’s own,
embrace s.o.’s ideas; to adopt s.o.’s
policy, proceed exactly like s.o.; ذھب كل
مذھب (kulla madhabin) to do everything
conceivable, leave no stone unturned, go
to greatest lengths II to gild ( ھ s.th.) IV to
cause to go away, make disappear,
remove, eliminate ( ھ s.th.); to take away (
ھ s.th., عن from s.o.)
مذھب II tamadhaba (deriv. of مذھب
madhab) to follow, adopt, embrace ( ب a
teaching, a religion, etc.)
ذھب dahab (m. and f.) gold; gold piece,
gold coin │O ذھب ابيض (abyaḍ) platinum
ذھبي dahabī golden, of gold; precious,
excellent, apposite (e.g., advice, saying,
etc.) │ آية ذھبية golden word, maxim,
epigram
ذھبية dahabīya pl. -āt dahabeah, a long
light-draft houseboat, used on the Nile
ذھاب dahāb going; passing, passage,
falling away, decrease, dwindling, loss,
disappearance; leave, departure; trip,
journey; outward-bound trip or journey
(as opposed to اياب iyāb return trip;
railroad); opinion, view ( الى ان that) │ ذھابا
وايابا (iyāban) there and back; back and
forth, up and down; تذكرة ذھاب واياب
tadkarat d. wa-iyāb round-trip ticket
ذھوب duhūb going │ ذھوب ومآب coming
and going; في جيئة وذھوب coming and
going, in a state of fluctuation, having its
ups and downs
مذھب madhab pl. مذاھب madāhib2 going,
leave, departure; way out, escape ( عن
from); manner followed, adopted
procedure or policy, road entered upon;
opinion, view, belief; ideology; teaching,
doctrine; movement, orientation, trend
(also pol.); school; mazhab, orthodox rite
of fiqh (Isl. Law); religious creed, faith,
denomination │O مذھبه في الحياة (ḥayāh) his
philosophy of life, his weltanschauung;
المذھب المادي (māddī) the materialistic
ideology, the materialistic approach to
life; ذھب مذھبا بعيدا to go very far, be very
extensive
مذھبي madhabī denominational,
confessional; sectarian
مذھبية madhabīya sectarianism 313
ذاھب dāhib: ذاھب اللون d. al-laun faded,
colorless, discolored
مذھوب به madhūb bihī and مذھوب العقل m.
al-‘aql out of one’s mind, demented
مذھب mudahhab gilded
ذھل dahala a (dahl, ذھول duhūl) to forget,
overlook, omit, neglect, fail to heed ( عن
s.th.); -- dahlia a ( ذھول duhūl) to be
perplexed, alarmed, dismayed, startled,
surprised, baffled; to be astonished, be
amazed; to frighten, scare, take alarm,
flinch; to be absent-minded, be distracted;
to be or become distracted ( عن from),
forget, overlook, fail to heed, neglect ( عن
s.th.) IV to baffle, startle, nonplus ( ه s.o.);
to distract ( عن ه s.o. from), make ( ه s.o.)
forget ( عن s.th.) VII = dahila
ذھول duhūl perplexity, consternation,
bafflement, daze, stupor; confusion,
bewilderment, dismay, alarm, fright;
surprise; amazement, astonishment;
absentmindedness, distraction,
distractedness ( عن from)
ذاھل diJAil negligent, forgetful,
oblivious, distracted, absent-minded;
dazed, in a stupor
مذھول madhūl perplexed, startled,
alarmed, dismayed, dazed, confused,
baffled, bewildered; distracted,
absentminded
ذھل mudhil startling, baffling, amazing
منذھل mundahil alarmed, dismayed,
perplexed, startled, baffled; distracted,
absent-minded
ذھن dihn pl. اذھان adhān mind; intellect
ذھني dihnī mental, intellectual
ذھنية dihnīya mentality
ذو dū, genit. ذي dī, acc. ذا dā, f. ذات dāt, pl. m.
ذوو dawū, اولو ulū, pl. f. ذوات dawāt (with
foll. genit.) possessor, owner, holder or
muter of, endowed or provided with,
embodying or comprising s.th. │ ذو عقل dū
‘aql endowed with brains, bright,
intelligent; ذو مال rich, wealthy; ذو صحة dū
ṣiḥḥa healthy; ذو شأن dū ša’n important,
significant; ذو القربى dū l-qurbā relative,
kin(sman); غير ذي زرع (zar‘) uncultivated
(land); من ذي قبل min dī qablu than before;
من ذي نفسه of one’s own accord,
spontaneously; ذووه dawūhu his relatives,
his kin, his folk; ذوو المعرفة dawū lmawadda
wa-l-ma‘rifa friends end
acquaintances; ذوو الشبھات dawū š-šubuhāt
dubious persons, people of ill repute; ذوو
الشأن dawū š-ša’n important, influential
people; the competent people (or
authorities), those concerned with the
matter; اولوا الامر ulū l-amr rulers, leaders;
اولو الحل والعقد ulū l-hall wa-l-‘aqd
influential people, those in power
ذات dāt pl. ذوات dawāt being, essence, nature;
self; person, personality; the same, the
selfsame; -self; الذوات people of rank,
people of distinction, notables; ذاتا dātan
personally │ ذات البين d. al-bain
disagreement, dissension, disunion,
discord, enmity; friendship; ذات الجنب d.
al-janb pleurisy (med.); ذات الرئة d. ar-ri’a
pneumonia; ذات الصدر d. aṣ-ṣadr disease of
the chest, pectoral ailment; ذات اليد d. alyad
wealth, affluence; ذات ايدينا d. aidīnā
our possessions; ذات اليمين dāta l-yamīn to
the right, ذات الشمال dāta š-šimāli to the
left, ذات اليسار dāta l-yasāri do.; ذات مرة
dāta marratin once, one time, في ذات مرة fī
dāti marratin do.; ذات يوم dāta yaumin one
day, في ذات يوم fī dāti yaumin do.; في ذات غد
fī dāti gadin sometime in the future,
before long; في ذات ... fī dāti ... (with foll.
genit.) as to …, concerning ..., with
reference to …, re; بالذات bi-d-dāt none
other than ..., ... of all things, ... of all 314
people; personally, in person; انا بالذات I, of
all people, ..., none other than I ...; في لندن
بالذات in London, of all places; السعادة بالذات
(sa‘āda) essential happiness, happiness
proper; ذات نفسه dāt nafsihī, ذات انفسھم d.
anfusihim his sejf, their selves, his (their)
very nature; ھو ذاته، ھو بذاته (he) himself;
ذات الشيء the same thing; ذات الأشياء the
same things; السنة ذاتھا (sana) the same
year; لذاته by himself (itself); in itself; as
such; for his (its) own sake; في ذاته in
itself; في حد ذاته fī ḥaddi d. do.; قائم بذاته selfexistent,
independent, self-contained,
isolated; الثقة بالذات (tiqa) self-confidence;
حب الذات ḥubb ad-d. and محبة الذات
maḥabbat ad-d. self-love, selfishness,
egoism; الاعتماد على الذات self-confidence,
self-reliance; صريح بذاته self-evident, selfexplanatory;
مناقض ذاته munāqiḍ dātahū
self-contradictory; ابن ذوات ibn dawāt
descended from a good family, highborn
ذاتي dātī own, proper; self-produced,
self-created, spontaneous; personal; selfacting,
automatic; subjective (philos.); (pl.
-ūn) subjectivist (philos.); ذاتيا dātīyan of
o.s., by o.s.; personally, in person │ الحكم
الذاتي (ḥukm) autonomy
ذاتية dātīya personality; subjectivism
(philos.); identity (of a person) │ تحقيق
الذاتية identification (of a person)
لا ذاتية lā-dātīya impersonality
ذواتي dawātī high-class, exclusive, luxurious
ذوابة 1 see ذأب
ذاب (ذوب 1 )) dāba u (daub), (daub, ذوبان ) to
dissolve; to melt; to melt away; to liquefy,
deliquesce; to dwindle away, vanish; to
pine away, waste away ( حسرة واسى
ḥasratan wa-asan with grief and sorrow)
│ ذاب حياء (hayā’an) to die of shame; ذابت
اظفاره في (aẓfāruhū) to strive in vain for,
make futile efforts in order to II to
dissolve, melt, liquefy ( ھ s.th.) IV to
dissolve (also, e.g., tablets in water),
liquefy ( ھ s.th.); to melt ( ھ s.th.); to smelt
ھ) metal); to consume, spend, exhaust,
use up, sap ( ھ s.th.) │ اذاب جھده (juhdahū)
to exhaust s.o.’s energy; اذاب عصارة مخه في
(‘uṣārata mukkihī) to rack one’s brain
with
ذوب daub dissolution; solution (also, as
a liquid)
ذوبان dawabān dissolution, melting,
deliquescence, liquefaction │ ذوبان الثلج
الثلوج )) d. at-talj (at-tulūj) snowbreak,
thaw; قابل للذوبان qābil li-d-d. meltable,
soluble, dissoluble
تذويب tadwīb dissolution, solution,
melting, liquefaction
اذابة idāba dissolution, solution,
melting, liquefaction
ذائب dā’ib dissolved; melted, molten;
salable, dissoluble
ذات and ذوات see ذو
ذاد (ذود ) dāda u (daud, ذياد diyād) to scatter,
drive away, chase away; to remove ( ، عن ھ
ه s.o., s.th. from); to defend, protect ( عن
s.o., s.th.) │ ذاد النوم عن عينه (an-nauma ‘an
‘ainihī) to drive or keep the sleep from his
eyes
ذود daud defense, protection ( عن of
s.th.)
ذياد diyād defense, protection ( عن of
s.th.)
مذود midwād pl. مذاود madāwid manger,
crib, feeding trough
ذائد dā’id pl. ذادة dāda defender,
protector
ذاق (ذوق ) dāqa u (dauq, ذواق dawāq, مذاق
madāq) to taste, sample ( ھ food, etc.); to
try, try out, teat ( ھ s.th.); to get a taste 315
ھ) of s.th.), experience, undergo, suffer ( ھ
s.th.), go through s.th. ( ھ ) IV to have ( ه
s.o.) taste or sample ( ھ s.th.), give ( ھ ه s.o.
s.th.) to taste V to taste ( ھ s.th.) slowly,
repeatedly, thoroughly; to get a taste ( ھ of
s.th.); to sense, perceive ( ھ s.th.); to enjoy
thoroughly, savor, relish ( ھ s.th.); to
derive pleasure ( من from)
ذوق dauq pl. اذواق adwāq gustatory
sense; taste ( ل for; also, e.g., literary
taste); perceptivity, responsiveness ( في
for); sensitivity, sensitiveness; savoirvivre,
suavity, urbanity, tact; liking,
inclination; taste, flavor (of food, etc.) │
الذوق السليم good taste
ذوقي dauqī of taste, gustative, gustatory
ذواق dawāq taste
ذواق dawwāq epicure, connoisseur,
gourmet, bon vivant
مذاق madāq taste
ذائقة dā’iqa sense of taste
ذوى dawā i and dawiya a to wither, wilt, fad.;
to be withered, be dry IV to cause to wilt,
to dry
ذاو dāwin withered, faded, drooping
ذي see ذو
ذاع ( ذيع ) dā’a i ( ذيوع duyū‘) to spread, get
about, circulate, be spread, be
disseminated, be or become widespread;
to leak out, become public, become
generally known IV to spread. spread out,
disseminate, propagate ( ھ or ب s.th.); to
make known, announce, make public,
publicize, publish ( ھ or ب s.th.); to
promulgate ( ھ or ب s.th.); to show,
manifest, display ( ھ or ب s.th.), give
evidence ( ھ or ب of); to reveal, disclose,
divulge ( ھ or ب s.th.); to emit ( ھ electric
waves); to broadcast, transmit ( ھ s.th., على
to the public; radio) │ اذاع بالتلفزة (talfaza)
to telecast ( ھ s.th.)
ذيوع duyū‘ widespreadness,
commonness; spreading, spread,
dispersion, diffusion; circulation (of news)
مذياع midyā‘ pl. مذاييع madāyī‘2 telltale,
talebearer, tattler, blabber,: indiscret
person; radio station, broadcasting station;
broadcasting; microphone; O radio set
اذاعة idā‘a spreading, dissemination,
propagation; announcement,
proclamation; publication; revelation,
disclosure; playback (of a tape; as
opposed to recording); broadcasting,
radio; (pl. -āt) (radio) broadcast,
transmission │ اذاعة الأخبار i. al-akbāir
newscast, news (radio); اذاعة تلفزية
(talfazīya) television broadcast, telecast;
اذاعة لاسلكية (lā-silkīya) and اذاعة راديوفونية
radio broadcast; broadcasting, radio; اذاعة
البوليس police radio; مجلة الإذاعة majallat ali.
radio magazine
ذائع dā’i‘ widespread, common,
general; circulating, in circulation; widely
known │ ذائع الصيت d. aṣ-ṣīt famous, noted,
renowned, widely known
مذيع mudī‘ spreader, disseminator,
propagator, proclaimer; broadcasting,
transmitting (used attributively); (radio)
transmitter; radio announcer
مذيعة mudī‘a pl. -āt woman announcer
(radio)
ذيل II to furnish ( ھ s.th., esp. a book) with an
appendix, add a supplement ( ھ to); to
provide ( ھ s.th.) at the end ( ب with) IV to
trample underfoot, degrade, debase ( ھ
s.th.)
ذيل dail pl. ذيول duyūl, اذيال adyāl the
lowest or rearmost part of s.th., lower end;
tail; hem, border (of a garment); train (of a
skirt); lappet, coat tail; bottom, foot, end
(of a page); appendage, appendicle;
add.nda, supplement, appendix (of a
book); retinue, 316 attendants, suite;
dependent; result, consequence │ في ذيله
immediately thereafter: طاھر الذيل innocent,
blameless, upright, honest; طھارة الذيل
ṭahārat ad-d. innocence, moral integrity,
probity, uprightness, honesty; طويل الذيل
long, lengthy, extensive: تمسك باذياله
tamassaka bi-adyālihī to cling to s.o.’s
coat tails, hold on to s.o.; جر عليه ذيل العفاء
(jarra, ‘alaihi) to wipe out s.th., bring
about the doom of s.th., let s.th. sink into
oblivion: لاذ بأذيال الشيء to resort to s.th.
ر
راء rā’ name of the letter ر
رئة ri’a pl. رئون ri’ūn, رئات ri’āt lung
رئوي ri’awī pulmonary, pulmonic,
pneumonic, of or pertaining to the lung,
lung (used attributively)
رأب ra’aba a (ra’b) to mend, repair, patch up (
ھ a rent, and the like); to rectify, put in
order, set right ( ھ s.th.)
رؤبة ru’ba patch (for mending a rent)
مرأب mir’ab pl. مرائب marā’ib2 repair shop,
garage
رابور (Fr. rapport) report
راتينج ratinaj resin
راتينة = رتينة (look up alphabetically)
رؤد ru’d soft, tender; ru’d and فتاة رؤد (fatāh)
delicate young girl
رئد ri’d pl. ارآد ar’ād person of
approximately the same age,
contemporary
رادار rādār radar
راديكال radikālī radical
راديو rādiyō radio
راديولوجي radiyōlōjī radiology
راديوم radiyūm radium │ ذو راديوم فاعل
radioactive
رأرأ ra’ra’a: رأرأ بعينه (bi-‘ainaihī) to roll one’s
eyes
رأس ra’asa a ( رئاسة ri’āsa) to be at the head,
be the chairman, be in charge ( ھ of s.th.);
to preside ( ھ over s.th.); to had, lead,
direct, manage, run ( ھ s.th.); -- رؤس
ra’usa u to be the chief, the leader II to
appoint as chief or head, make the director
or leader, entrust with the direction,
management or chairmanship ( ه s.o.) V =
ra’asa VIII to become or be the chief,
head, leader, or director
رأس ra’s m. and f., pl. رؤوس ru’ūs,
ارؤس ar’us head (also as a enumerative of
cattle); chief, chieftain, head, leader;
upper part, upper end; tip; top, summit,
peak; vertex, apex; extremity, end;
promontory, headland, cape (geogr.);
main part; beginning: رأسا ra’san directly,
straightway; immediately │ برأسه sui
generis, in a class by itself, independent,
self-contained, e.g., علم برأسه (‘ilm) a
science in itself; رأس برأس (both) alike, one
like the other, equally, without distinction:
على رأس (with foll. genit.) at the head of; at
the end of; at the beginning of, before,
prior to; على الرأس والعين (wa-l-‘ain) very
gladly; juts as you wish! at your service!
على رؤوس الأشھاد ‘alā r. il-ašhād in public,
for all the world to see; رأسا على عقب
ra’san ‘alā ‘aqbin upside down, topsyturvy,
e.g., قلبه رأسا على عقب ٣١٧
(qalabahū) to turn s.th. completely upside
down, upset s.th. from the bottom up;
الرأس الى القدم (qadam) or من الرأس الى أخمص
القدم (akmaṣi l-qadam) from head to toe;
رفع به رأسا to pay attention to s.th.; رأس
الآفات the principal evil, the root of all evil;
رأس تنورة Ras Tanura (cape. E Saudi
Arabia, oil center); رأس ثوم r. tūm clove of
garlic: رأس الجسر r. al-jisr bridgehead; رأس
حامية (ḥāmiya) hothead, hotspur, firebrand;
رأس السنة r. as-sana New Year; رأس العمود
r. al-‘amūd capital (of a column or
pilaster); رأس الكتاب letter-head; رأس المال
pl. رؤوس المال capital (fin.): مسقط الرأس
masqaṭ, masqiṭ ar-r. birthplace, home
town; سمط الرأس samṭ ar-r. zenith
(astron.); البلد الرأس (balad) the capital city;
رؤوس الأصابع tiptoes
رأسي ra’sī head (adj.), cephalic; main,
chief, principal; perpendicular, vertical
رأسمالي ra’s-mālī capitalistic; (pl. -ūn)
capitalist
رأسمالية ra’s-mālīya capitalism
رئيس ra’īs pl. رؤساء ru’asā’ one at the
head, or in charge, of; head; chieftain;
leader; chief, boss; rais; director; headmaster,
principal, chairman; governor;
president; manager, superintendent;
conductor (mus.); superior (as
distinguished from مرؤوس subordinate);
(mil.) captain (Ir. 1922. Leb.; formerly
also Syr. And Eg.); رئيس اول (awwal)
military rank between captain and major
(= Fr. capitaine 1ière classe; Ir. 1922, Syr.
1952) │ رئيس الأساقفة archbishop; رئيس البلدية
r. al-baladīya chief of a municipality,
mayor; رئيس التحرير editor-in-chief; رئيس
اركان الحرب r. arkān al-ḥarb chief of
general staff; رئيس التشريفات r. at-tašrīfāt
chief of protocol, master of ceremonies
(of the king; formerly Ir.); رأس الشماسمة
archdeacon; رئيس عرفاء r. ‘urafā’ (mil.)
master sergeant (Ir., Syr.); رئيس الأقسام r.
al-aqsām technical director general (of the
State Railways; Eg.); رئيس النواب r. annuwwāb
president of parliament, speaker
of the (lower) house; رئيس ھيئة اركان الحرب
r. hai’at arkān al-ḥarb chief of general
staff; رئيس الوزراء r. al-wuzarā’ and رئيس
الوزارة prime minister, premier
رئيسة ra’īsa manageress; directress;
mother superior
رئيسي ra’īsī main, chief, principal,
leading │ دور رئيسي (daur) leading role,
leading part; سبب رئيسي (sabab) principal
cause, main reason; شارع رئيسي main
street; الفضائل الرئيسية cardinal virtues
(Chr.); مقالة رئيسية (maqāla) editorial,
leading article, leader
□ ريس rayyis (= رئيس ) mate (naval rank;
Eg.) │ رئيس ممتاز (mumtāz) a naval rank
(approx. = petty officer 3rd class; Eg.
1939)
رئاسة ri’āsa, رياسة riyāsa (also (رآسة
leadership, leading position; management,
direction; chairmanship; presidency,
presidentship; supervision,
superintendency │ رئاسة الوزارة prime
ministry, premiership; دار الرياسة
presidential palace, seat of the chief
executive of a country
ترؤس tara‘‘us direction, management;
chairmanship
روائس rawā’is2 cliffs lining river bode
(wadis)
مرؤوس mar’ūs subordinate; (pl. -ūn) a
subordinate, a subaltern
رأف ra’afa a and رؤف ra’ufa u ( رأفة ra’fa, رآفة
ra’āfa) to show mercy ( ب on s.o.), have
pity ( ب with s.o.), be kind, gracious,
merciful ( ب to s.o.) V do.
رأفة ra’fa and رآفة ra’āfa morcy,
compassion, pity: kindliness graciousness
رؤوف ra’ūf merciful, compassionate;
kind, benevolent; gracious
ارأف ar’af kindlier, more gracious ( ب
toward) 318
رافيا rāfiyā raffia, raftia palm
رأم 1 ra’ama a (ra’m) to repair, mend ( ھ s.th.)
رئم 2 ra’ima a ( رئمان ri’mān) to love tenderly ( ھ
s.th.), be very fond ( ھ of); to treat
tenderly, fondle, cares ( ھ s.th.)
رئم ri’m pl. ارآم ar’ām white antelope,
addax
رءوم ra’ūm loving, tender (mother to
her children)
رام لله rāmallāh Ramallah (town in W Jordan,
N of Jerusalem)
رامية rāmiya ramie, a strong, lustrous bast
fiber; China jute (bot.)
راوند rāwand rhubarb
رأى 1 ra’ā يرى yarā (ra’y, رؤية ru’ya) to see; to
behold, descry, perceive, notice, observe,
discern ( ھ s.th.); to look ( ھ ھ at s.th. as),
regard ( ھ ھ s.th. as), consider, deem,
think ( ھ ھ s.th. to be ...); to judge; to be of
the opinion ( ان that), believe, think ( ان
that); to express one’s opinion; to feel ( ان
that); to deem appropriate, think proper ( ھ
s.th.), decide ( ھ on s.th., ان to do s.th.); to
consider, contemplate │ أرأيت a-ra’aita tell
me! what do you think? رأى رأي العين
(ra’ya l-ain) to see with one’s own eyes;
رأى رؤيا (ru’yā) to have a dream; رأى منه
العجب (‘ajaba) to be amazed at s.th.; رأى
للشيء فائدة expect some benefit from s.th.;
رأى من واجبه (min wājibihī) to regard as
one’s duty, deem incumbent upon o.s.; رأى
له ان to think that it would be in s.o.’s
interest to ...; رأى رأيه (ra’yahū) to share
s.o.’s. opinion; pass.: رؤي ان (ru’iya) it
was decided that ...; رؤي الشيء it was felt
proper to do III it was thought to be the
right thing to do ill to act ostentatiously,
make a show before people, attitudinize;
to do eyeservice; to behave hypocritically,
act the hypocrite, (dis)simulate, dissemble
ه) toward s.o.) IV ارى arā to show,
demonstrate ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.) يا ترى yā
turā (in interrogative sentences) what’s
your opinion? would you say ...? │I
wonder ..., متى يا ترى I wonder when ...,
ترى ھل wonder if ..., would you say
that ...? اتراھا جاءت (a-tarāhā) I wonder if
she has come, would you say she has
come? اتراني اعود would you say I should
go back? V to deem, think, believe VI to
present o.s. to or come into s.o.’s ( ل) view,
show o.s. ( ل to s.o.); to appear, seem ( ل to
s.o.); to appear right, seem appropriate ( ل
to s.o.), be thought proper ( ل by s.o.); to
see one another; to look at o.s. (in a
mirror); to act the hypocrite; to fake,
feign, simulate ( ب s.th.) VIII to consider,
contemplate ( ھ s.th.); to be of the opinion
ان) that), decide ( ان that) │ ارتأى رأيا
(ra’yan) to have an opinion; ارتأى رأيه
(ra’yahū) to share s.o.’s opinion
رأي ra’y pl. آراء ārā’ opinion, view;
idea, notion, concept, conception; advice,
suggestion, proposal; (Isl. Law) subjective
opinion, decision hued on one’s individual
judgment (not on Koran and Sunna) │ في
رأيي and عند رأيي in my opinion; انا من ھذا
الرأي I am of this opinion; من رأيه ان he is of
the opinion that ...; أخذ الرأي على (ukida) it
was put to the vote, (the matter) was voted
upon; لم يكن عند رأيھم he was not what they
had expected; لم يكن له فيه رأي he had no say
in the matter; الرأي العام (‘āmm) public
opinion; ذو الرأي pl. ذوو الآراء sensible,
judicious; man of good sense and
judgment; well-informed, knowledgeable
person, one in the know; تبادل الآراء
tabādul al-ārā’, exchange of views; صلب
الرأي ṣulba ar-r. obstinate, stubborn,
opinionated; قسم الرأي qism ar-r. committee
of experts, council on legal and economio
matters (attached to the ministries; Eg.)
راية rāya pl. -āt banner, flag 319
رؤية ru’ya seeing, looking, viewing;
inspection, examination
رؤيا ru’ya pl. رؤى ru’an vision; dream
│ سفر الرؤيا sifr ar-r. the ھ pocalypse (Chr.)
مرأى mar’an sight, view; vision;
apparition │ على مرأى من before s.o.’s
eyes; على مرأى ومسمع من (wa-masma‘in)
before the eyes and ears of; with full
knowledge of
مرآة mir’āh pl. مراء marā’in, مرايا
marāyā looking glass, mirror; reflection,
reflected image
□ مراية mirāya pl. -āt looking glass
mirror
رئاء ri’ā and رياء riyā’ eyeservice;
hypocrisy, dissimulation; dissemblance;
simulation ( ب of s.th.)
مراآة, مراءاة murā’āh eyeservice;
hypocrisy, dissimulation, dissemblance;
simulation ( ب of s.th.)
راء rā’in viewer, onlooker, spectator,
observer
O رائية rā’iya pl. -āt view finder (of a
camera)
مرئي mar’īy seen; visible; المرئيات the
visible things, the visible world
مراء murā’in pl. مراؤون murā’ūun
hypocrite
رئة 2 and رئوي see رء
راي 3 rāy an Egyptian variety of salmon
راية 4 see رأى 2
رب rabba u (rabb, ربابة ribāba) to be master,
be lord, have possession ( ھ، ه of), control
ھ، ھ) s.o., s.th.), have command or
authority ( ھ، ه over); -- u (rabb) and II to
raise, bring up ( ه a child) II to deify,
idolize ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
رب rabb pl. ارباب arbāb lord; master;
owner, proprietor (Isl. Law); (with foil.
genit.) one possessed of, endowed with,
having to do with, etc.; الرب the Lord (=
God) │ رب بحري (baḥrī) a naval rank
(approx. = seaman; Eg.); رب العائلة father
of the family, paterfamilias; ارباب السلطان
a. as-sulṭān the rulers; ارباب المال the
capitalists; صعود الرب the ھ scension
(Chr.); ارباب المعاشات a. al-ma’āšāt
pensioners; ارباب السوابق those previously
convicted; ارباب الفنون artists
ربة rabba pl. -āt mistress; lady │ ربة
المنزل r. al-manzil the lady of the house;
ربة البيت r. al-bait landlady; ربة شعره r.
ši‘rihī his muse; ربات الحجال r. al-ḥijāl the
ladies
رب rubb pl. رباب ribāb, ربوب rubūb rob,
thickened juice (of fruit): mash, pulp
رب rubba (with fol. indet. genit.) many
a, e.g., رب رجل (rajulin) many a man, رب
مرة (marratin) many a time
ربما rubbamā sometimes; perhaps,
maybe, possibly
ربة rabba, ribba a kind of skin eruption
affecting the head and face
رباب rabāib, ربابة rabāba rebab or
rebec, a stringed instrument of the ھ rabs
resembling the fiddle, with one to three
strings (in Eg. usually two-stringed)
ربيب rabīb pl. -āt ارباء aribbā’ foster
son, stepson; foster father; confederate,
ally
ربيبة rabība pl. ربائب rabā’ib2 foster
daughter, stepdaughter; foster mother;
(woman) ally
ربوبية rubūbīya divinity, deity, godship
ربان rubbān pl. -īya, ربابنة rabābina
captain, skipper; a naval rank, approx. =
captain, ربان ثان (tānin) approx. =
commander (Eg. 1939)
رباني rabbānī divine; pertaining to God
│ الربانيات divine things; الصلاة الربانية
(ṣalāh) the Lord’s Prayer (Chr.)
مربة (eg.) mirabba (= مربى murabban)
jam, preserved fruit 320
راب rābb stepfather
رابة rābba stepmother
ربأ raba’a a to hold in esteem, esteem highly (
ب s.o.); If '! 4J to consider s.o. above s.th.,
above doing s.th., have too high an
oplnion of s.o. as to suspect him of
(doing) s.th. or as to expect him to do
s.th.; ربأ بنفسه عن (bi.-nafsii) to deem o.s.
above s.th., be too proud for, stand aloof
from
ربيئة rabī’a pl. ربايا rabāya guard
ربت rabata i (rabt) to pat, caress, stroke ( ه s.o.)
II do. │ ربت على خده (kaddihi) to pat s.o.’s
cheek; ربت على كتفه (katifihi) to pat s.o. on
the shoulder; ربت نفسه to be self-satisfied,
self-complacent, smug
ربح rabiḥa a (ribḥ, rabaḥ) to gain ( ھ من from
s.th. s.th.), profit ( من from); to win (sports,
games) │ ما ربحت تجارتھم (tijāratuhum)
their business was unprofitable II and IV
to make ( ه s.o.) gain, allow s.o. ( ه) a profit
ربح ribḥ pl. ارباح arbāḥ gain, profit;
benefit; interest (on money); pl. proceeds,
returns, revenues; O dividends │ ربح بسيط
simple interest, ربح مركب (murakkab)
compound interest
رباح rabbāḥ pl. ربابيح rabābīḥ2 monkey
اربح arbaḥ2 more profitable, more
lucrative
مرابحة murābaḥ (Isl. Law) resale with
specification of gain, resale with an
advance
رابح rābiḥ profiteer, gainer, winner;
beneficiary; lucrative, gainful, profitable
(business)
مربح murbiḥ lucrative, gainful,
profitable
ربد V to become clouded, become overcast
(sky); to turn ashen, take on a glowering
expression (face, with anger) IX to
become ashen, assume a glowering
expression (face)
مربد murbadd clouded; gloomy, morose
(face)
ربص rabaṣa u (rabṣ) to wait, look, watch, be
on the lookout ( ب for) V to lurk, lie in
wait ( ل for s.o.), waylay, ambush ( ل s.o.);
to lay an ambush, move into an ambush;
to take up positions (mil.); to expect ( ھ، ب
s.th.), wait ( ھ، ب for s.th.) │ تربص الفرصة
(furṣata) to wait (or look) for an
opportunity; تربص الأمر (amra) to wait for
s.th. to befall s.o. or to happen to s.o., e.g.,
تربص به الدوائر ; to wait; for s.o. to meet
with disaster
تربص tarabbuṣ probationary term (adm.)
متربص mutarabbiṣ candidate, aspirant
ربض rabaḍa (rabḍ, rubūd) to lie down; to lie,
rest (animals; with the chest to the
ground); to lurk ( ل for s.o.)
ربض rabaḍ pl. ارباض arbāḍ outskirts,
suburb; place where animals lie down to
rest
مربض marbaḍ pl. مرابض marābiḍ2 place
where animals lie down to rest; sheep pen,
fold
ربط rabaṭa u i (rabṭ) to bind, tie up, make fast,
moor ( ھ s.th.); to tie, fasten, attach, hitch (
الى ھ s.th. to); to connect ( الى ھ s.th. with);
to fix, appoint, determine ( ھ s.th.); to
value, rate, assess ( ھ s.th.); to add,
append, affix ( الى ھ s.th. to); to insert ( الى
ھ s.th. in); to combine, unite ( ھ s.th., – بين
وبين s.th. with); to ligate ( ھ s.th.), apply a
tourniquet ( ھ to); to bandage, dress ( ھ a
wound); to bridle, check ( ھ، على s.th.); to
brake ( ھ a train); to suspend ( ه a cleric;
Chr.) │ ربط لسانه (lisānahū) to silence s.o.;
ربط على قلبه (qalbihī) to fortify s.o., give
s.o. patience (said of God); ربط جأشه
(ja’šahū) to keep one’s self-control,
remain calm, be undismayed; ربط 321
الطريقة to practice highway robbery III to
be lined up, posted, stationed (troops); to
line up, take up positions; to be moored
(ship); to move into fighting positions │
رابط في قضيته (qaḍīyatihī) to defend the
cause of, fight for VIII to bind o.s.,
commit o.s. engage o.s.; to be bound ( ب
by, also, e.g., by an obligation), be tied ( ب
to); to be linked, be connected ( ب with); to
depend ( ب on); to unite, join forces
ربط rabṯ binding, tying; fastening,
joining, attaching, connecting; fixation,
determination (of an amount, of a
number); valuation, assessment │ ربط مالي
financial allocation; اھل الحل والربط ahl al-
ḥall wa-r. infIuentiBJ people, those in
power; مكان الربط makān ar-r. (welded)
seam, weld (techn.)
ربط rabaṭ (tun.) section, quarter (of a
city), suburb
ربط rabṭa pl. -āt, رباط ribāṭ ribbon,
band, bandage; bundle; parcel, package │
ربطة الرقبة r. ar-raqaba necktie; ربط الساق r.
as-sāq garter; ربطة النقود money purse
رباط ribāṭ pl. -āt, ربط rubuṭ, اربطة arbiṭa
ribbon, band; ligature, ligament;
bandage; dressing (of a wound); bond,
fetter, shackle; -- suspension (of a cleric;
Chr.); (pl. -āt, ربط rubuṭ) inn for travelers,
caravansary; hospice (for Sufis or the
poor) │ رباط الاجربة r. al-ajriba garter; رباط
الجزمة r. al-jazma shoestring; رباط الرقبة r.
ar-raqaba necktie
رباط ribāṭ, رباط الفتح ribāṭ al-fatḥ Rabat
(capital of Morocco)
رباط الجأش ribāṭ al-ja’š composure, selfcontrol,
calmness, intrepidity
مربط marbiṭ, marbaṭ pl. مرابط marābiṭ2
place where aniimals are tied up
مربط mirbaṭ pl. مرابط marābiṭ2 hawser,
mooring cable; rope; O terminal (el.)
ارتباط irtibāṭ connectedness, connection,
link; contact, 1iaison; tie ( ب to);
obligation, engagement, commitment;
bearing ( ب on), connection (( ب with),
relation ( ب to); unity; league,
confederation │ بدون ارتباط bidūn irt, not
binding, without obligation (com.); ضابط
ارتباط liaison officer
رابط الجأش rābiṭ al-ja’š composed, calm,
unruffled, undismayed, fearless
رابطة rābiṭa pl. روابط rawābiṭ2 band;
bond, tie; connection, link; confederation,
union, league │ روابط الصداقة r. aṣ-ṣadāqa
bonds of friendship; الرابطة الاسلامية
(Islāmīya) the Moslem League
مربوط marbūṭ bound; connected;
fastened, tied, moored ( الى to); fixed,
appointed; fixed salary; estimate (of the
budget)
مرابط murābiṭ posted, stationed;
garrisoned (troops); Marabout │ الجيش
المربوط (jaiš) the Territorial Army (Eg.)
مرتبط murtabiṭ connected, linked ( ب
with); bound, committed ( ب by);
depending, conditional ( ب on)
ربع raba‘a a to gallop (horse); -- to sit; to
squat; to stay, live II to quadruple,
multiply by four, increase fourfold ( ھ
s.th.); to square ( ھ a number) V to sit or
sit down cross-legged; to sit │ تربع على
العرش (‘arš) to mount the throne, sit on the
throne
ربع rab‘ pl. ربوع rubū‘, رباع ribā‘, ارباع
arbā‘, اربع arba‘ home, residence,
quarters; pl. ربوع region, area territory,
lands; ربع (group of) people │ الربع
الخالي Rub‘ al Khali (desert region in S
Arabia)
ربع rib‘: حمى الربع ḥummā r-rib‘ quartan
(fever)
ربع rub‘ pl. ارباع arbā‘ quarter, fourth
part; roubouh, a dry measure 322 (Eg. =
قدح = ٨.٢٥ l); (syr.) 25-piaster piece │ ربع
سنوي r. sanawī quarterly, trimestral
ربعي rub‘ī quarterly, trimestral
ربعة rab‘a: ربعة القوام r. al-qiwām and
ربعة القامة r. al-qāma (m. and f.) or medium
height, medium sized
ربعة rub‘a robhah, a dry measure (Eg.;
= قدح = ٠.٥١٦ l)
رباع rabbā‘ athlete (boxer, wrestler,
weight lifter, etc.)
ربيع rabī‘ spring, springtime, vernal
season; name of the third and fourth
months of the Muslim year ( ربيع الأول r.
al-awwali Rabia I, and ربيع الثاني r. at-tānī
Rabia Il); quarter, fourth part
اربعة arba‘a (f. اربع arba‘) four │
ذوات الأربع dawāt al-arba‘ the
quadrupeds
اربعة عشر arba‘ata ‘ašara (f. اربع عشرة
arba‘a ‘ašarata) fourteen
اربعون arba‘ūn forty; الأربعون a
ceremony held on the 40th day after s.o.’s
death │ عيد الأربعين ‘īd al-a. Ascension Day
(Chr.)
رباعي rubā‘ī consisting or four,
quadripartite, fourfold, quadruple;
quadrangular; tetragonal; (gram.)
consisting of four radical letters,
quadriliteral; quartet; (pl. -āt) quatrain
(poet.) │ مؤتمر رباعي (mu’tamar) fourpower
conference; رباعي الأضلاع
quadrilateral; رباعي الأرجل r. l-arjul
quadruped(al), four-footed; محرك رباعي
المشوار muḥarrik r. l-mišwār four-cycle
engine
الأربعاء al-arba‘ā’, al-arbi‘ā’, يوم الأربعاء
yaum al-a. Wednesday
يربوع yarbū‘ pl. يرابيع yarābī‘ jerboa
(Jaculus jaculus; zool.)
مربع marba‘ pl. مرابع marābi‘ meadow
تربيع tarbī‘ lunar quarter; -- (pl. ترابيع
tarābī‘2) quadrangle; square, plaza
(surrounded by houses) │ تربيع الدائرة
quadrature or the circle
تربيعة tarbī‘a pl. ترابيع tarābī‘2 square,
quadrangle; square, plaza; square panel;
tile, floor tile
تربيعي tarbī‘ī quadratic, square
الرابع ar-rābi‘ the fourth; رابعا fourthly,
in the fourth place
رابع rābi‘ (due to erroneous pointing) =
رائع q.v.
مربوع marbū‘ of medium height,
medium-sized
مربع murabba‘ fourfold, quadruple;
quadragular; tetragonal; square, quadratic;
quadrangle; square; (pl. -āt) quadrangular
piece; quartet │ متر مربع (mitr) square
meter; مربع الأضلاع quadrilateral (math.)
مربعة murabba‘a pl. -āt section, district,
area
مرابع murābi‘ partner in an agricultural
enterprise (sharing one quarter of the
gains or losses)
جلس متربعا jalasa mutarabbi‘an to sit
crosslegs
رابغ rābig pleasant, comfortable
ربق ribq lasso, lariat
ربقة ribqa, rabqa pl. ربق ribaq, رباق
ribāq, ارباق arbāq noose
ربك rabaka u (rabk) to muddle, entangle,
complicate ( ھ s.th.); to confuse, throw
into confusion ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); -- rabika a
(rabak) to be in an involved, confused
situation VIII to be confused; to become
involved ( في in)
ربك rabak involved, confused situation
ربك rabik: confused; in trouble, beset
by difficulties
ارتباك irtibāk pl. -āt entanglement,
involvement; snarl, tangle, muddle, mess;
confusion; embarrassment; upset (of the
stomach) 323
مربك murabbik confusing, bewildering,
disconcerting
مرتبك murtabik; confused, complicated,
involved; bewildered, disconcerted,
embarrassed; involved ( في in)
ربل rabil plump, fleshy, fat (person)
ربلي rablī, rabalī fleshy
ربلة rabla pl. rabalāt (mass of) flesh (of
the body)
ربيل rabīl fleshy, corpulent, fat
ربالة rabāla corpulence
ربما see رب
ربا (ربو ) rabā u ( رباء rabā’, ربو rubūw) to
increase; to grow; to grow up; to exceed, (
على a number, also عن ), be more than (( على
ما يربو على المئة │ more than a hundred II to
make or let grow; to raise, rear, bring up ( ه
s.o.); to educate; to teach, instruct ( ه a
child); to breed, raise ( ھ e.g., poultry,
cattle); to develop ( ھ e.g., a method) III to
practice usury IV to make grow, augment,
increase ( ھ s.th.); to exceed ( على a
number, an age, a measure) V to be
brought up, be educated; to be bred, be
raised
ربو rabw dyspnea, asthma
ربوة rubwa (rabwa, ribwa) pl. ربى
ruban hill
ربوة ribwa pl. -āt ten thousand, myriad
ربا riban interest; usurious interest;
usury
ربوى ribawī usurious
رباء rabā’ surplus, excess; superiority (
على over s.o.); favor
تربية tarbiya education, upbringing;
teaching, instruction; pedagogy; breeding,
raising (of animals) │ سيئ التربية sayyi’ at-t.
ill-bred; قليل التربية ill-bred, uncivil, illmannered;
علم التربية ‘ilm at-t. pedagogy,
pedagogics; تربية الأطفال baby care; التربية
البدنية (badanīya) physical education,
physical training; تربية الحيوان t. al-
ḥayawān cattle farming, stockbreeding;
تربية الدجاج t. ad-dajāj chicken farming,
poultry husbandry; تربية السمك t. as-samak
pisciculture; تربية النباتات t. an-nabātāt plant
cultivation
تربوي tarbawī, تربيوي tarbiyawī
pedagogic, pedagogical
رابية rābiya pl. رواب rawābin hill
مرب murabbin pl. مربون murabbūn
educator; pedagogue; breeder (of
livestock)
مربية murabbiya pl. -āt tutoress,
governess; dry nurse, nursemaid
مربى murabban raised, brought up;
educated; well-bred, well-mannered; jam,
preserved fruit; pl. مربيات murabbayāt
preserves
مراب murābin usurer
مترب mutarabbin well-bred, wellmannered
ربورتاج (Fr. reportage) pl. -āt reportage, report
ارت aratt2, f. رتاء rattā’2, pl. رت rutt afflicted
with a speech defect
رتب II to array, arrange, dispose ( ھ s.th. in a
regular sequence or order); to decorate,
dress (iii a show window); to settle,
determine, regulate ( ھ s.th.); to put into
proper order, put together ( ھ words); to
prepare, set aside, earmark ( ھ s.th.); to fix,
appoint ( ل ھ a salary for s.o.); to make ( ھ
s.th.) result or accrue ( على from), derive (
على ھ s.th. from), make ( ھ s.th.) the result
or consequence of ( على ) V to fall in line;
to be arranged, organized or set up (along
the lines of); to be set aside, be assigned;
to be subordinate ( على to s.th.), be the
result or consequence ( على of), result,
follow, derive, spring ( على from), be
caused ( على by) │ ترتب بذمته (bi-dimmatihī)
to become the debtor of s.o. 324
رتبة rutba pl. رتب rutab degree, grade,
level; rank, standing, station; class,
quality; (mil.) rank; clerical rank, order (of
the Christian ministry); religious
ceremony (Chr.) │ كتاب الرتب ritual (of the
Roman Catholic Church)
رتابة ratāba monotony
رتيب ratīb monotonous
رتباء rutabā’2 noncommissioned
officers (Syr.; mil.)
مرتبة martaba pl. مراتب marātib2 step; a
steplike elevation serving as a seat;
mattress; grade, degree, rank, class │ في
المرتبة الأولى (ūlā) first (mortgage)
ترتيب tartīb pl. -āt order, arrangement,
array; sequence, succession; make-up,
setup; layout (of a complex, e.g., of
houses); organization; preparation,
arrangement, provision, measure, step; rite
of administering a sacrament (Chr.) │
بالرترتيب one by one, in proper succession;
  من غيرترت disorderly, in confusion
ترتيبي tartībī ordinal │ عدد ترتيبي (‘adad)
ordinal number .
راتب rātib monotonous; (pl. رواتب
rawātib2 salary, pay, emolument; pl. رواتب
certain supererogatory exercises of
devotion
مرتب murattab arranged; organized, set
up, regulated, etc.; (pl. -āt) salary, pay,
emolument
رتج rataja u (ratj) to look, bar, bolt ( ھ the
door); -- ratija a (rataj) to be tonguetied,
be speechless, falter IV pass. ارتج عليه
(urtija) words failed him, he was
speechless, he didn't know what to say, he
was at a loss
رتاج ritāj pl. رتج rutuj, رتائج ratā’ij2
gate, gateway I eli)1 p muḥkam ar-r.
firmly bolted (gate)
رتع rata‘a a (rat‘, رتوع rutū‘, رتاع ritā‘) to
pasture, graze; to gormandize, carouse,
feast; to revel, indulge freely ( في in) IV to
pasture, put out to graze ( ھ cattle)
مرتع marta‘ pl. مراتع marāti‘2 rich
grazing land, pasture; fertile ground ( ل
for; fig.); breeding ground, hotbed (of
vice, of evil, etc.)
رتق rataqa u i (ratq) to mend, repair, patch up,
sew up ( ھ s.th.)
رتق ratq pl. رتوق rutūq patching,
mending, repair; dam (of a stocking)
رتك rataka u i, (ratk, ratak, رتكان ratakān) to
run with abort steps, trot
مرتك martak litharge (chem.)
رتل ratila a (ratal) to be regular, well-ordered,
neat, tidy II to phrase elegantly ( الكلام alkalāma
one’s words); to psalmodize,
recite in a singsong; to sing, chant ( ھ
spiritual songs, hymns; Chr.)
رتل ratl pl. ارتال artāl railroad train │
رتل آلي (ālī) motorized convoy (mil.)
رتيلاء rutailā’2 harvestman
(Phalangium), daddy longlegs; tarantula
ترتيل tartīl slow recitation of the Koran
(a technical term of tajwīd); psalmodizing,
psalmody, singsong recitation; singing,
chanting (of hymns, etc.; Chr.); -- (pl.
تراتيل tarātīl2) hymn; religious song (Chr.)
ترتيلة tartīla pl. تراتيل tarātīl2 hymn
مرتل murattal church singer; choirboy,
chorister (Chr.); singer, chanter
رتم ratama i (ratm) to utter, say ( بكلمة bikalima
a word; only with neg.)
رتم ratam (coll.; n. un. ة) retem (Retama
raetam Webb., Genista raetam Forsk.;
bot.)
رتمة ratma and رتيمة ratīma pl. رتائم
ratā’im رتام , 2 ritām thread wound around
one’s finger as a reminder 325
رتا (رتو ) ratā u and II رتى rattā to mend, darn (
ھ e.g., stockings)
رتوش (Fr. retouche) ritūš retouch
رتينج ratīnaj (= راتينج ) resin
رتينة (It. retina) ratīna pl. رتائن ratā’in2
incandescent mantle
رث ratta i ( رثاثة ratāta, رثوثة rutūta) to
be ragged, tattered, shabby. worn
(garment)
رث ratt pl. رثاث ritāt old, shabby, worn,
threadbare │ رث الھيئة r. al-hai’a of shabby
appearance
رثة ritta old, outmoded things, worn
clothes
رثيث ratīt old, .habby, worn, threadbare
رثاثة ratāta shabbiness, raggedness
رثوثة rutūta shabbiness, raggedness
رثو ) and رثي) رثا ratā u (ratw) to bewail,
lament, celebrate in an elegy, in a funeral
oration ( ه a deceased person); -- رثى ratā i
(raty, رثاء ritā’, مرثية martiya, مرثاة martāh)
to bewail, lament, bemoan ( ه a deceased
person); to elegize, celebrate in an elegy,
in a funeral oration ( ه a deceased person);
to mourn ( ل for, over), deplore ( ل s.o. or
s.th.); to pity ( ل s.o.), feel sorry ( ل for) │
رثاه بمرثاة to elegize s.o. (a deceased
person), bewail and celebrate him in an
elegy; شيء يرثى له (yurtā) a deplorable,
regrettable thing
رثى raty bewailing, bemoaning,
lamentation
رثاء ritā’ bewailing, bemoaning,
lamentation; regret; elegiac poetry
رثية ratya pl. ratayāt arthritis, gout
مرثية martiya and مرثاء martā’ pl. مراث
marātin elegy, dirge, epicedium; pl. مراث
funeral orations
رج raja u (rajj) to convulse, shake, rock ( ھ
s.th.); pass. rujja to be shaken, tremble,
shake, quake VIII to be convulsed, shake,
tremble, quake
رج rajj shaking, rocking, convulsion
رجة rajja convulsion; shook,
concussion
رجاج rajjāj trembling, quaking,
shaking, rocking
ارتجاج irtijāj shock, concussion;
trembling, tremor │ O ارتجاج المخ irt. almukk
cerebral concussion (med.)
رجأ IV to postpone, adjourn, defer, put off ( ھ
s.th.)
ارجاء irjā’ postponement, deferment,
adjournment
رجب rajaba u and rajiba a (rajab) to be afraid
من) or عن of), be awed ( من or عن by)
رجب rajab Rajab, the seventh month of
the Muslim year
رجح rajaḥa a i u ( رجوح rujūḥ, رجحان rujḥān) to
incline (scale of a balance); to weigh
more, be of greater weight; to
preponderate, predominate; to surpass,
excel ( ه s.o.); to be very likely ( ان that),
رجح عنده ان it appeared to him most likely
that ...; -- to weigh ( ھ بيده s.th. in the hand)
II to make ( ھ s.th.) outweigh ( على s.th.
else), give preponderance ( ھ to s.th., على
over); to think ( ھ s.th.) weightier; to
prefer ( على ھ s.th. to), give ( ھ s.th.)
preference ( على to), favor ( على ھ s.th.
more than); to think likely or probable ( ھ
s.th., ان that) V to carry greater weight, be
weightier, preponderate; to swing back
and forth, pendulate; to rock; to seesaw,
tester VIII to swing back and forth,
pendulate; to rook; to seesaw, tester
رجاحة rajāḥa forbearance, indulgence,
leniency; composure, equanimity
رجحان rujḥān preponderance,
predominance ( على over), ascendancy,
superiority 326
ارجح arjaḥ2 superior in weight,
preponderant; having more in its favor,
more acceptable; preferable; more likely,
more probable │ الأرجح ان it is most likely
that ...; probably ...; على الأرجح probably, in
all probability
ارجحية arjaḥīya preponderance,
predominance, prevalence
ارجوحة urjūḥa pl. اراجيح arājīḥ2 seesaw;
swing; cradle
راجح rājiḥ) superior in weight,
preponderant; having more in its favor,
more acceptable; preferable; probable,
likely
مرجوحة marjūḥa pl. مراجيح marājīḥ2
seesaw; swing
مرجح murajjaḥ preponderant,
predominant; probable, likely
رجرج rajraja and II tarajraja to tremble,
quiver; to sway
رجراج rajrāj agitated; trembling,
tremulous; swaying; quivering; الرجراج the
sea
رجز 1 VIII to compose or declaim poems in the
meter rajaz; to thunder, roar, surge (sea)
رجز rujz, rijz punishment (inflicted by
God); dirt, filth
رجز rajaz name of a poetical meter
ارجاز arjāz verses in the meter rajaz;
little (work) song
ارجوزة urjūza pl. اراجيز arājīz2 poem in
the meter rajaz
ارجوز 2 look up alphabetically
رجس rajisa a (rajs) and rajusa u ( رجاسة rajāsa)
to be dirty, filthy; to commit a shameful
act, do s.th. disgraceful or dirty
رجس rijs pl. ارجاس arjās dirt, filth; dirty
thing or act, atrocity
رجس rajas pl. ارجاس arjās dirt, filth
رجس rajis dirty, filthy
رجاسة rajāsa dirt, squalor
رجاس rajjās roaring, surging (sea);
thundering
رجع raja‘a i ( رجوع rujū‘) to come back, come
again, return; to recur; to resort, turn ( الى
to); to recommence, begin again, resume (
الى s.th.); to fall back ( الى on), go back,
revert ( الى to); to look up ( الى s.th. in a
book), consult ( الى a book); to go back, be
traceable ( الى to), be attributable ( الى ان to
the fact that ...), derive, stem, spring ( الى
from); رجع به الى to reduce s.th. to (its
elements, or the like); to depend ( الى on);
to be due, belong by right ( الى to); to fall
under s.o.’s ( ل) jurisdiction, be s.o.’s ( (ل
bailiwick; to desist, refrain ( عن from); to
withdraw ( عن , also في e.g., what one has
said), revoke, countermand, repeal, cancel
عن) or على e.g., a decision); to turn against
s.o. ( على)؛ رجع به على فلان to claim
restitution of s.th. from s.o.; to demand,
claim ( ب s.th., على from s.o.); to entail,
involve ( ب s.th., a consequence); to have a
good effect ( في on), be successful ( في
with) │ رجع على عقبه (‘aqbihī) pl. رجعوا على
اعقابھم (a‘qābihim) to retrace one's steps,
go back the way one came; رجع الى الصحة
(ṣiḥḥa) to regain one’s health; رجع الى
صوابه (ṣawābihī) to come to one's senses;
رجع الى نفسه to watch o.s., examine o.s.;
يرجع ذلك الى ان this is due to the fact that ...;
يرجع السبب الى (sabab) the reason is to be
found in ...; رجعت به الذاكرة الى he recalled,
remembered ...; رجع في كلامه (kalāmihī) to
go back on one’s word II to cause to come
back or return; to return, give back; to
send back; to turn away ( عن ه s.o. from);
to sing or chant in a vibrant, quavering
tone; to echo, reverberate ( ھ s.th.) │ رجع
صداه (ṣadāhū) to return the echo of s.th.,
echo s.th. III to return, come back ( ھ، ه
to); to revert 327
رجعع rujū‘ return; reverting, coming
back ( الى to); recourse ( الى to); traceability
الى) to); revocation, withdrawal, retraction
عن) of s.th.); resignation, surrender ( عن of
s.th.); reclamation; recall; restitution,
return │ برجوع البريد by return mail
رجيع rajī‘ excrement
مرجع marji‘ pl. مراجع marāji‘ return;
authority to which one turns or appeals;
place of refuge, retreat; recourse resort;
authority, responsible agency; source (esp.
scientific), authoritative reference work;
resource; source to which s.th. goes back
or to which s.th. can be attributed; starting
point, origin; recourse (jur.) │ مرجع
النظر m. An-naẓar jurisdiction, competence;
المرجع اليه he is the one to turn to; المرجع في
ذلك الى I am thereby referring to …; كان
مرجع ھذا الشيء الى this was due to …, was
attributable to …; اليھم مرجع الفضل (m. ulfaḍl)
the merit is due to them
مرجعية marji‘īya authority
مراجعة murāja‘a reiteration, repetition;
inspection, study, examination;
consultation (of a reference work);
request; application, petition (esp. to an
authority); application for advice or
instruction, etc., consultation (of s.o.);
checking, verification, re-examination;
auditing, audit (also ;(مراجعة الحساب
revision, correction (of a manuscript)
ارجاع irjā‘ return, restitution;
refundment; attribution ( الى to); reduction
الى) to)
تراجع tarāju‘ withdrawal, retreat;
recession, retrogadation
ارتجاع irtijā‘ return to an older form or
order, reactionism, reaction
ارتجاعي irtijā‘ī reactionary 328
استرجاع istirjā‘ reclamation; recovery,
retrieval; retraction, withdrawal,
revocation
راجع rāji‘ returning, reverting, etc.; due,
attributable ( الى to); rightfully belonging (
الى to s.o.); subject ( ل to s.th.); depending (
ل on) │ الحمى الراجعة (ḥummā) relapsing
fever
مراجع murāji‘ checker, verifier,
examiner; reviser │ مراجع m. al-ḥisāb
auditor, comptroller
رجف rajafa a (rajf, رجفان rajfān) to be
convulsed, be shaken; to tremble, quake;
to shiver, shudder; -- to agitate, convulse,
shake ( ه s.o.) IV to make ( ه s.o.) tremble or
shudder; to convulse, shake, rock ( ھ s.th.);
to spread lies, false rumors; also with ,ب
e.g., ارجف بافتراءات (bi-ftirā’āt) to spread
calumnies VIII to tremble, quake; to
shudder
رجفة rajfa (n. vic.) trepidation, tremor;
shudder, shiver
رجاف rajjāf trembling, quaking; shaken,
convulsed
ارجاف irjāf pl. اراجيف arājīf untrue,
disquieting talk, false rumor
رجل rajila a to go on foot, walk II to comb ( ھ
the hair); to let down ( ھ the hair), let it
hang long V = I; to dismount ( من or if
from; rider); to assume masculine
manners, behave like a man │ ترجل في
طريقه to walk all the way VIII to
improvise, extemporize, deliver offhand (
ھ a speech) X to become a man, reach the
age of manhood, grow up; to act like a
man, display masculine manners or
qualities
رجل rijl f., pl. ارجل ari"l foot; leg
رجل rijl pl. ارجال arjāl swarm (esp. of
locusts); -- common purslane (Portulaca
oleracea L.; bot.)
رجل rajil going on foot, pedestrian,
walking
رجل rajul pl. رجال rijāl man; pl. رجالات
rijālāt great, important men, leading
personalities, men of distinction │ رجال
الدولة r. ad-daula statesmen; رجال السند r.
as-sanad informants, sources of
information
رجالي rijālī men’s, for men (e.g.,
apparel)
رجولة rajūla masculinity, virility,
manhood
رجولية rajūlīya masculinity, virility,
manhood
مرجل mirjal pl. مراجل marājil2 cooking
kettle, caldron; boiler
ارتجال irtijāl improvisation,
extemporization, extemporary speech
ارتجالي irtijālī extemporary, improvised,
impromptu, offhand, unprepared
راجل rājil pl. رجل rajl, رجالة rajjāla,
رجال rujjāl, رجلان rujlān going on foot,
walking; pedestrian
مرتجل murtajal improvised,
extemporaneous, extemporary,
impromptu, offhand
رجم 1 raiama u (raim) to stone ( ه a.o.); to curse,
damn, abuse, revile ( ه s.o.) │ رجم بالغيب
(gaib) to talk about s.th. of which one
knows nothing; to guess, surmise, make
conjectures; to predict the future II رجم
بالغيب do.
رجم rajm stoning; (pl. رجم rujam)
missile │ رجم بالغيب (gaib) conjecture,
guesswork; prophecy
رجم rujum shooting stars, meteorites
رجمة rajma pl. رجم rujam, رجام rijām
tombstone
رجيم rajīm stoned; cursed, damned; see
also alphabetically
ترجم، ترجمة 2 look up alphabetically
مرجونة marjūna basket 329
رجا (رجو ) rajā u ( رجاء rajā’, رجاة rajāh, مرجاة
marjāh) to hope; to hope for s.th. ( ;(ھ
to .xpeat, anticipate ( ھ s.th.), look forward
ھ) to); to wish ( ھ for s.th., ھ ل s.o. s.th.,
e.g., success); to ask ( ھ for s.th., من or
s.o., ان to do s.th.), request ( ھ s.th., من
from s.o., ان that he ...) │ رجاه في
الحاح (ilḥāḥ) to plead with s.o., implore s.o.;
اجو عدم المؤاخذة (‘adama l-mu’ākadata) │ I
must ask your indulgence V to hope ( ه، ھ
for); to expect, anticipate ( ه، ھ s.th., s.o.),
look forward ( ھ to); to request ( ه s.o.); to
ask ( ه s.o.) VIII to hope ( ه، ھ for); to
expect, anticipate ( ه، ھ s.th., s.o.), look
forward ( ھ to); to dread ( ه s.o.)
رجا rajan and رجاء rajā’ pl. ارجاء arjā’
side, direction; region; -- pl. ارجاء arjā’
vastness (of a land), expanses; whole
vicinity or area │ في ارجائه about its
interior, e.g., في ارجاء الغرفة (gurfa) all
about the room, في ارجاء البلاد all over the
country, throughout the country; تجاوبت
ارجاء الردھة باتصفيق (a. ur-radha) the entire
auditorium resounded with applause; شاسع
الأرجاء and واسع الأرجاء vast in extent, vastdimensioned
رجاء rajā’ hope ( ب، في and genit.; of);
expectation, anticipation; urgent request │
على رجاء in the hope of, hoping for; رجاء
العلم rajā’ al-‘ilm for your information (on
memos, records, etc.); رأس الرجاء الصالح
Cape of Good Hope
رجاة rajāh hope, expectation,
anticipation
رجية rajīya s.th. hoped for; hope
مرجاة marjāh hope
راج rājin hoping, full of hope
مرجو marjūw hoped for, expected;
requested │ المرجو من فضلك ان (min faḍlika)
approx.; I hope you will be kind enough to
المرجو مراعاة ان ;... (murā‘ātu) please notice
that …, attention is called to the fact that
…
رجي rajiya a to become silent; to remain
silent; pass. رجي عليه (rujiya) to be tonguetied,
be unable to utter a sound
رجيم (Fr. régime) rijīm diet
رحب raḥiba a (raḥab) and raḥuba u (ruḥb,
رحابة raḥāba) to be wide, spacious, roomy
II to welcome ( ب s.o., also ب s.th., e.g.,
news), bid welcome ( ب to s.o.); to receive
graciously, make welcome ( ب s.o.) V to
welcome ( ب s.o.), bid welcome ( ب to)
رحب raḥb wide, spacious, roomy;
unconfined │ رحب الصدر r. aṣ-ṣadr
generous, magnanimous; broad-minded,
open-minded, liberal; frank, candid, openhearted;
carefree; صدر رحب (raḥb)
generosity, magnanimity; openmindedness,
broad-mindedness, liberality;
frankness, candor; رحب الباع generous,
openhanded, liberal; رحب الذراع do.
رحب ruḥb vastness, wideness,
spaciousness unconfinedness │ اتى على
الرحب والسعة (atā, ṣa‘a) to be welcome; وجد
رحبا وسعة (sa‘atan) to met with a friendly
reception
رحب raḥab vastness, wideness,
spaciousness, unconfinedness │ رحب الصدر
r. aṣ-ṣadr magnanimity, generosity;
lightheartedness
رحبة raḥba, raḥaba pl. -āt public square
(surrounded by buildings); (pl. raḥabāt
and رحاب riḥāb) vastness, expanse │ رحاب
الكون and رحاب الفضاء r. al-faḍā’ vastness of
outer space
رحيب raḥīb = رحب raḥb
رحابة raḥāba wideness, vastness,
spaciousness, unconfinedness │ رحابة الصدر
r. aṣ-ṣadr magnanimity, generosity
مرحبا بك marḥaban bika welcome!
ترحاب tarḥāb welcome, greeting │ قابله
بترحيب (qābalahū) to receive s.o. with
open arms
ترحيب tarḥīb welcoming, welcome,
greeting 330
رحرح raḥraḥa: رحرح بالكلام (kalām) to
equivocate, speak ambiguously, beat
around the bush
رحرح raḥraḥ and رحراح raḥrāḥ wide,
broad, flat; carefree, pleasant (life)
رحض raḥaḍa a (raḥḍ) to rinse, wash
مرحاض mirḥāḍ pl. مراحض marāḥīḍ2
lavatory, toilet
رحيق raḥīq exquisite wine; nectar
رحل 1 raḥala a ( رحيل raḥīl) to set out; to depart,
leave; to move away, emigrate; to start (
عن from a place) │ رجل يرحل ويقيم (yuqīm)
a man constantly on the go, a dynamic
man II to make ( ه s.o.) leave, induce or
urge ( ه s.o.) to depart; to evacuate ( الى ه
s.o. to), resettle, relocate ( الى ه s.o. in); to
deport ( الى ه s.o. to); to allow ( ه s.o.) to
emigrate; to give ( ه s.o.) travel clearance;
to carry (passengers e. g., a ship); to
transfer ( ھ s.th.); to transport, convey,
forward ( ھ s.th.); to dispatch, send out ( ھ
s.th.); to carry over, post ( ھ an item;
bookkeeping); to carry forward ( ھ the
balance; bank) V to wander, roam,
migrate, lead a nomadic life; to be
evacuated VIII to set out, leave, depart; to
move away, emigrate │ ارتحل الى رحمة ربه
(ilā raḥmati rabbihī) to pass away, die
رحل raḥl pl. رحال riḥāl camel saddle;
saddlebags; baggage, luggage; pl.
stopping place, stop, stopover │ شد الرحال
(šadda) to set out, break camp; القى رحاله
alqā riḥālahū to stop ( في in, at)
رحلة riḥla travel, journey; trip, tour;
travelogue
رحلة ruḥla destination, place for which
one is bound
رحيل raḥīl departure, setting out;
emigration; exodus; demise
رحال raḥḥāl pl. رحل riḥal roving,
roaming, peregrinating, wandering,
migratory nomadic; -- (pl. رحالة raḥḥāla)
great traveler, explorer; nomad │ الطيور
الرحالة migratory birds; ( الأعراب (العربان
الرحل (‘urbān) the nomadic Bedouins
رحالة raḥḥāla great traveler, explorer;
globetrotter
مرحلة marḥala pl. مراحل marāḥil2 a
day’s journey; leg of a journey; way
station; stage, phase │ يزيد عليه بمراحل
(yazīdu) it exceeds it by far; في مراحل حياتھا
(ḥayātihā) throughout her life, in every
stage of her life
ترحال tarḥāl departure, setting out │ حياة
الترحال ḥayāt at-t. nomadic life
ترحيل tarḥīl emigration, exodus;
effectuation of (s.o.’s) departure;
deportation; evacuation; resettlement;
transfer; moving; transport, transportation;
posting (of accounts); carrying forward
(fin.); dispatch │ ترحيل عمال t. ‘ummāl
assignment (or detailing) of workmen
ارتحال irtiḥāl departure, setting out;
emigration, exodus; demise
راحل rāḥil pl. رحل ruḥḥal departing
leaving, parting; traveling; (pl. -ūn)
deceased, late, الفقيد الراحل the deceased
راحلة raḥila pl. رواحل rawāḥil2 female
riding camel│ شد راحلته (šadda) to saddle
one’s camel, start out on a journey
مرحل muraḥḥal pl. -āt carry-over │
مجموع مرحل balance carried forward (fin.)
راحيل 2 rāḥīl Rachel
رحم raḥima a ( رحمة raḥma, مرحمة marḥama) to
have mercy ( ه upon s.o.), have compassion
ه) for s.o.) ; to spare, let off ( ه s.o.); to be
merciful II رحم عليه to say to s.o.: رحمك لله
raḥimaka llāh may God have mercy upon
you; to ask God to have mercy ( على upon
s.o.), plead for God’s mercy ( على for what
has happened) V = II; VI to show human
understanding for one another, love and
respect one another X to ask ( ه s.o.) to
have mercy 331
رحم raḥim, riḥm f., pl. ارحام arḥām
uterus; womb; relationship, kinship │ ذوو
الارحام dawū l-a. relatives on the maternal
side
رحمة raḥma pity, compassion; human
understanding, sympathy, kindness; mercy
│ كان تحت رحمته to be at s.o.’s mercy; جعله
تحت رحمته to leave s.th. or s.o. to s.o.’s
mercy; بساط الرحمة pall
رحيم raḥīm pl. رحماء ruḥamā’ and رحوم
ruḥūm merciful, compassionate
الرحمن ar-raḥmān the Merciful (i.e.,
God)
مرحمة marḥama pl. مراحم marāḥim2 pity,
compassion, sympathy; mercy
ترحيم tarḥīm: ترحيم الموتى (mautā) pl.
تراحيم tarāḥīm2 intercessory prayer for the
dead (Chr.)
استرحام istirḥām plea for mercy
مرحوم marḥūm deceased, late, e.g.,
المرحوم السيد the late M. …
رحى raḥan f., pl. ارحاء arḥā’, رحى ruḥīy, ارحية
arḥīya quern, hand mill │ حجر الرحى ḥajar
ar-r. millotone; (دارت رحى الحرب (القتال
dārat r. l-ḥarb the war (fighting) broke
out; the war (fighting) was going on
رحوى raḥawī rotating, rotatory
رحاوى raḥḥāy pl. -ūn grinder
رخ raḳḳa u to mix with water, dilute ( ھ wine)
رخ raḳḳ (n. un. ة) light shower
رخ rukk roc, name of a fabulous giant
bird; (pl. رخخة rikaka) rook, castle (chess)
رخاخ rakāk soft (ground); comfortable,
pleasant, easy (life)
رخص rakuṣa (rukṣ) to be cheap, inexpensive; (
رخاصة rakāṣa) to be supple, tender, soft II
to permit, allow ( ل s.o. ب or في s.th.); to
authorize, license ( ل s.o., ب or في to do
s.th.); to empower ( ل s.o.); to reduce the
price ( ھ of s.th.) IV to reduce the price ( ھ
of s.th.) V to be willing to please, meet on
fair term. ( مع في s.o. in), show o.s. ready to
compromise ( مع with s.o. في in s.th.); to
make concessions ( في or ب in s.th.); to
permit o.s. liberties, take liberties ( في in)
X to find cheap, regard as inexpensive ( ھ
s.th.); to request s.o.’s ( ه) permission
رخص rakṣ supple, tender, soft
رخص rukṣ cheapness, inexpensiveness
رخصة rukṣa pl. رخص rukaṣ permission;
concession, license, franchise; admission;
authorization; leave; permit │ رخصة قيادة
السيارات r. qiyādat as-sayyārāt driving
permit, operator’s license
رخيص rakīṣ supple, tender, soft, cheap,
inexpensive, low-priced; base, mean, low;
trash, trumpery
ترخيص tarkīṣ pl. -āt, تراخيص tarākīṣ2
granting of permission; permission;
authorization; mandate; concession;
license; price reduction, price cut
مرتخص murtakiṣ low-priced,
inexpensive, cheap │ كل مرتخص وغال kullu
murtakaṣin wa-gālin every conceivable
effort, everything (in one’s power)
رخم rakuma u ( رخامة rakāma) and rakama u to
be soft, mellow, gentle, pleasant (voice);
رخمت بيضھا (على بيضھا ) rakamat baiḍahā
(‘alā baiḍihā) to sit on the eggs (hen) II to
soften, mellow ( ھ the voice); to apocopate
ھ) a word); to tile with marble ( ھ the
floor)
رخم rakam (coll.; n. un. ة) Egyptian
vulture (Neophron percnopterus; zool.)
رخام rukām marble
رخام rukāma pl. -āt marble slab
رخيم rakīm soft, mellow, pleasant,
melodious (voice); O note lowered by a
semitone, flat (mus.) 332
ترخيم tarkīm shortening, apocopation, esp. of a
name in the vocative by elision of the final
consonant (gram.)
رخو) and رخي) رخو rakuwa u and رخي rakiya a
رخاوة) rakāwa, رخاء rakā’) to be or become
loose, slack, relaxed; to slacken, slump,
sag, relax; -- رخاء rakā’ u ( رخاء rakā’): رخا
عيشه (‘aišuhū) to live in easy
circumstances, live in opulence IV to
loosen, slacken ( ھ s.th.); to relax ( ھ s.th.);
to let go ( ھ s.th.); to lower, drop, let down
ھ) s.th.) VI to slacken, sag, droop, become
limp; to show little energy or zeal, let up,
become lax, be remiss ( عن in s.th.); to go
down, slump (prices); to lag, become dull
or listless (stock market); to diminish,
flag, wane, ebb, decrease; to desist ( عن
from); to be lowered, drop, fall (curtain);
to be delayed, be retarded VIII to slacken,
slump, sag, droop, become limp, flaccid,
flabby; to become loose, work loose; to
soften, become soft; to relax, become
relaxed, unbend; to abate, let up; to
languish, nag, lose force or vigor X = VIII
رخو rakw, rikw loose, slack; limp,
flabby, flaccid; indolent, languid; soft;
supple
رخاء rakā’ ease, comfort, happiness;
prosperity; abundance, opulence (of
living); welfare; fairness, lowness (of
prices)
رخاء rukā’ gentle breeze
رخاوة rakāwa softness; flaccidity,
limpness; laxity │ رخاوة العود r. al-‘ūd
weakness of character
رخي rakīy feeble, weakened, languid;
relaxed, at ease; cozy, comfortable
تراخ tarākin, limpness; slackness;
languor, lassitude; abatement, mitigation,
letup; relaxation; loosening, looseness
ارتخاء irtikā’ loosening, slackening;
looseness, slackness; laxity; abatement
mitigation, letup; ease, relaxedness;
relaxation; limpness; languor, lassitude
استرخاء istirkā’ = ارتخاء irtikā’
راخ rākin sagging, drooping
متراخ mutarākin limp, flaccid, flabby;
drooping; languid; negligent, indolent,
slack
رد radda u (radd) to send back; to bring back,
take back ( الى ھ، ه s.o., s.th. to); to return (
الى ھ s.th. to its place). put back, lay back (
الى ھ s.th. in its place); to throw back,
repel, drive back, drive away ( ه s.o.); to
resist, oppose ( ه s.o.); to turn down, refuse,
decline ( ھ s.th., e.g., the fulfillment of a
wish); to ward off, parry, repel ( ھجوما
hujūman an attack); to reject ( تھمة
tuhmatan a suspicion); to hand back, give
back, return, restore ( ھ s.th., الى to s.o.); to
return ( السلام as-salāma the greeting); to
reply ( على to s.o.), answer ( على s.o.); to
reflect ( ھ light); to throw back, echo ( ھ
the voice); to refute, disprove ( على s.th.);
to hold back, keep, restrain ( عن ه s.o. from
s.th.); to dissuade ( عن ه s.o. from), prevail
upon s.o. ( ه) not to do s.th. ( عن ); to trace
back, attribute ( الى ھ s.th. to an origin); to
bring, yield ( ھ على s.th. to s.o.); to
reappoint, reinstate ( ه ه s.o. as, e.g., حاكما
ḥākiman as governor) │ رد الباب to close
the door; رد جوابا (jawāban) to answer; ما
يرد ھذا عليك شيئا this won’t help you at all; لا
يرد (yuraddu) irrefutable; رده على عقبيه
(‘aqibaih) pl. ردھم على اعقابھم (a‘qābihim)
to drive s.o. back to where he came from;
رد عينه عنه (‘ainahū) he averted his eyes
from it II to keep away, avert, prevent,
stave off ( ھ s.th.); to repel, throw back (، ھ
ه s.o., s.th.); to repeat (constantly,
frequently); to break forth, burst ( ھ into,
e.g., into singing), strike up, intone, let
ring out ( ھ a tune, or the like) │ ردد الصدى
(ṣadā) to return the echo; ردد النظر في
(naẓara) to look at s.th. again and again;
ردد طرفه بين 333 (ṭarafahū) to let one’s
eyes wander between, look first at one,
then at the other V to be thrown back, be
reflected (voice, echo); to ring out
(shouts); to shift repeatedly (wind); to
come and go ( على at s.o.’s house; rarely
الى ), frequent, visit frequently ( على s.o.’s
house, a place; rarely الى ); to return, recur;
to hesitate, be reluctant ( في in s.th., to do
s.th.); to waver, become uncertain,
become doubtful في in s.th. or as to s.th.)
│ تردد على الألسنة (alsina) to be frequently
diocussed (question) VIII to withdraw,
retreat, fall back; to move backward,
retrogress; to go back, return, revert ( الى
to); to fall back ( الى on); to go away,
absent o.s.; to desist, refrain ( عن from),
renounce, give up, abandon, quit, leave (or
s.th.); to forsake, desert (or one’s faith,
one’s principles, etc.), apostatize, fall off (
عن from) │ ارتد على عقبيه (‘aqbaihi), pl.
ارتدوا على اعقابھم (a’qābihim) to withdraw,
turn back X to reclaim, demand back, call
in ( ھ s.th.), demand the return ( ھ of s.th.);
to bring back, lead back ( ه الى s.o. to); to
get back ( ھ s.th.); to retrieve, recover,
regain ( ھ s.th.); to withdraw (e.g., يده
yadahū one’s hand; also fig., e.g., استقالته
istiqālatahū one’s resignation); to
withdraw, take out ( ھ money, from an
account, from a bank) │ استرد انفاسه
(anfāsahu) to catch one’s breath
رد radd pl. ردود rudūd return;
restoration, restitution; refund,
reimbursement; repayment, requital;
repulsion; warding off, parrying; denial,
refusal; rejection; reply, answer; reflection
(e.g., of light); refutation; attribution ( الى
to) │ رد الفعل al-fi‘l reaction; رد الاعتبار
rehabilitation; ردا على (raddan) in reply
to ...; اخذ ورد see أخذ akada
ردة radda ugliness; reverberation, echo;
bran
ردة ridda apostasy ( عن الاسلام or from
Islam)
ارد aradd2 more useful, more profitable
على) to s.o.)
مرد maradd fact to which s.th. is
attributable, underlying factor or reason;
averting, rejection, repulsion; responsory
(Chr.) │ لا مرد له (maradda) irresistible;
مرده الى (maradduhū) it is attributable to ...,
one must ascribe it to لا مرد له الا براعته
(maradda, barā‘atuhū) it can only be
attributed to his efficiency; كان على مرد لسانه
(maraddi lisānihi) to be constantly on
s.o.’s lips, be a standing phrase with s.o.
ترداد tardād frequent repetition;
frequentation
ترديد tardīd repetition, reiteration
تردد taraddud frequent coming and
going, frequentation; frequency (el.);
hesitation, irresolution, indecision,
wavering; reluctance
ارتداد irtidād retreat, withdrawal;
retrogression; renunciation, desertion;
apostasy ( عن الاسلام from Islam) │ كارتداد
الطرف ka-rtidādi ṭ-ṭarf in the twinkling of
an eye, in a jiffy
استرداد istirdād reclamation, claim of
restitution, vindication (Isl. Law);
recovery, retrieval; retraction, withdrawal;
refundment, reimbursement; withdrawal,
taking out (of money, from an account)
مردود mardūd yield, return(s)
مرتد murtadd turncoat, renegade,
apostate
ردأ 1 rada’a a (rad’) to support, prop, shore up
ھ) a wall)
ردء rid’ pl. ارداء ardā’ support; help,
helper
ردؤ 2 radu’a u ( رداءة radā’a) to be bad V to
become bad, be spoiled
رديء radī’ pl. اردياء ardiyā’2 bad; mean,
base, vile; evil, wicked; vicious, 334
malicious │ رديء السمعة r. as-sum‘a of ill
repute
اردأ arda’2 worse; more wicked
رداءة radā’a badness; wickedness;
viciousness, maliciousness
اردب irdabb (now commonly pronounced
ardabb) pl. ارادب arādib2 ardeb, a dry
measure (Eg.; = 1981)
اردب irdabba cesspool
ردح radaḥ long period of time │ ردحا من الھر
radaḥan min ad-dahr for a long time
ردس radasa i u (rads) to crush ( ھ . s.th.); to
roll smooth, level by rolling ( ھ ground)
ردع rada‘a a (rad‘) to keep, prevent ( ه عن s.o.
from) VIII to be kept, be prevented ( عن
from)
رادع rādi‘ deterring; (pl. روادع rawādi‘)
deterrent; impediment, obstacle, handicap;
restriction, limitation, curb, check;
inhibition (psych.)
ردغة radga, radaga mud, mire, slush
ردف radafa u (radf) and radifa a to come next,
come immediately after s.o. or s.th. ( ,(ھ، ه
follow, succeed ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.) III to ride
behind s.o. ( ه on the same animal); to be
the substitute ( ه of s.o.), replace ( ه s.o., ھ
s.th.); to be synonymous ( ھ with) IV to
seat ( ه s.o.) behind one (on an animal); to
make ( ه s.th.) be followed ( ب by s.th.
else); to complement, complete ( ب ھ s.th.
with or by) VI to follow one another,
come in succession; to pile up in layers,
become stratified; to form a single line; to
flock, throng ( على to); to be synonymous
ردف ridf pl. ارداف ardāf rear man
(riding on the same animal); one who or
that which is subsequent, follows, comes
next; posteriors, backside, rump;
haunches, croup (of an animal); dual:
الردفان ar-ridfān day and night
رداف ridāf croup, rump (of an animal)
رديف radīf rear man, one following next
in line; redif, reserve (in the army of the
former Turkish Empire)
رديفة radīfa fem. of رديف
ترادف tarāduf succession; synonymity
مرادف murādif synonym (of a word);
synonymous, consignificant ( ل with);
corresponding in meaning, analogous
مترادف mutarādif synonymous; مترادفات
synonyms
ردم radama i u (radm) to fill up with earth ( ھ
pit, pond) II to repair, fix, mend IV not to
leave ( على s.o.), cling ( على to s.o.; said of
disease) V to be mended, be repaired; to
repair, mend ( ھ s.th.); to be worn, show
signs of wear
ردم radm filling up (of swamps, ponds,
etc.); rubble, debris; dam
رديم radīm worn, shabby, threadbare
(garment)
ردن radana i (radn) to spin; to purr (cat); to
grumble ( على at)
ردن rudn pl. اردان ardān sleeve
ردينى rudainī spear (originally epithet
for one of superior quality)
مردن mirdan pl. مرادن marādin2 spindle
ردنجوت (Fr. redingote) redengōt frock coat,
Prince Albert
ردھة radha hall; large room, sitting room,
parlor; lobby; entrance hall, vestibule │
ردھة الاستقبال reception hall, drawing room,
parlor ردھة المحاضرة r. al-muḥāḍarāt
lecture room
ردي radiya a ( ردى radan) to perish, be
destroyed II to bring to the ground ( ه s.o.),
bring about the fan of ( ه) IV to bring to the
ground ( ه s.o.), bring about the fall of ( ;(ه
to destroy, ruin ( ه s.o.); to fell ه) 335 s.o.);
to kill ( ه s.o.) │ اراده قتيلا (qatīlan) to fell
s.o. with a deadly blow V to fall, tumble;
to decline, fall off, come down, go from
bad to worse; to deteriorate, become
worse; to clothe o.s. ( ب with), put on ( ب a
garment) VIII to put on ( ھ a garment or
headgear); to wear ( ھ a garment, a
headgear), be clothed, be clad ( ھ in) │
ارتدى ملابسه (malābisahū) to put on one’s
clothes, dress, get dressed
ردى radan ruin, destruction
رداء ridā’ pl. اردية ardiya loose outer
garment, cloak, robe; (lady’s) dress,
gown; attire, costume │ رداء المساء almasā’
evening gown
مترد mutaraddin dressed
رذ radda u: رذت السماء (samā’) and IV there
was a drizzle, it drizzled
رذاذ radād drizzle
رذل radila a and radula u ( رذالة radāla) to be
low, base. vile. despicable. Contemptible;
-- radala u (radl) to reject, cast off,
discard, repudiate, disown ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.);
to despise, disdain, scorn ( ھ، ه s.o. s.th.);
to disapprove ( ھ، ه of) IV to reject, cast
off, discard, repudiate, disown ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.) X to regard as low or despicable (, ھ
ه s.o., s.th.)
رذل radl rejection; repudiation; (pl.
رذول rudūl, ارذال ardāl) low, base, mean,
vile, despicable, contemptible
رذيل radīl pl. رذلاء rudalā’ low, base,
mean, vile, despicable, contemptible,
depraved
رذالة radāla lowness, baseness,
meanness, vileness, depravity
رذالة radīla pl. رذائل radā’il vice;
depravity
مرذول mardūl depraved, despicable,
mean, base, vile, evil, wicked
رز 1 ruzz (= ارز ) aruzz) rice
رز 2 razza u (razz) to insert, drive in ( ھ s.th.) II
to burnish, polish ( ھ s.th.) IV to telephone
رزة razza pl. -āt staple, U bolt; ring
screw; joint pin
O ارزيز irzīz telephone
رزأ raza’a a ( رزء raz’) to deprive ( في or ه ھ
s.o. of s.th.); pass. رزئ ruzi’a to incur or
suffer loss; to lose ( ب s.th.); to be afflicted
ب) by)
رزء ruz’ pl. ارزاء arzā’ heavy loss,
serious damage; disaster, calamity
رزيئة razī’a and رزية razīya pl. رزايا
razāyā heavy loss, serious damage;
disaster, calamity
رزب razaba u (razb) to keep, stick, cling ( ھ
to)
مرزبة mirzabba pl. مرازب marāzib2 iron rod
مرزاب mirzāb pl. مرازيب marāzīb2
waterspout, gargoyle; (roof) gutter
رزح razaḥa a ( رزوح ruzūḥ, رزاح ruzāḥ, razāḥ)
to succumb, collapse, sink to the ground
(under a burden); to descend, hover (e.g.,
silence) III to suffer
مرزغ marzig muddy, boggy, miry
رزق razaqa u to provide with the means of
subsistence ( ه s.o.; said of God); to bestow
ه ھ) upon s.o. s.th., material or spiritual
possessions; said of God), endow ( ه ھ s.o.
with); to bless ( ه ھ s.o. with, esp. مولودا
with a child); -- pass. ruziqa to be
endowed ( ھ with); to live VIII to make a
living, gain one’s livelihood; to live ( من on
or by s.th.) X to seek one’s livelihood; to
ask for the means of subsistence
رزق rizq pl. ارزاق arzāq livelihood,
means of living, subsistence; daily bread,
nourishment, sustenance; boon, blessing
336 (of God); property, possessions,
wealth, fortune; income; pay, wages │
ارزاق ناشفة dry rations, emergency rations
(mil.)
الرازق ar-rāziq the Maintainer, the
Provider (one of the 99 attributes of God)
ارترزاق istirzāq independent livelihood, selfsupport
مرزوق marzūq blessed (by God), fortunate,
prosperous, successful
مرتزق murtaziq hired, hireling, mercenary,
kept
مرتزقة murtaziqa kept persons, hangers-on;
mercenaries
مرتزق murtazaq means of subsistence,
livelihood, living
رزم razama i u (razm) to bundle, bale, pack,
wrap up ( ھ s.th.)
رزمة rizma pl. رزم rizam bundle; bale, pack;
parcel, package; ream (of paper)
رزن razuna u ( رزانة razāna) to be grave,
serious, sedate, staid, calm, composed,
self-possessed V to display grave or
sedate manners, show o.s. calm,
composed, self-possessed
رزين razīn grave, serious, sedate, staid;
composed, calm, self-possessed
رزانة razana gravity, sedateness,
staidness; composure, self-possession,
poise
رزنامة ruznāma see روزنامة
رزية pl. رزايا see رزيئة
رسيس rasīs covered with verdigris
رسب rasaba u ( رسوب rusūb) to sink to the
bottom, settle, subside (esp., in water); to
fail, dunk (in an examination) II to cause
to settle ( ھ s.th., in a liquid), deposit ( ھ a
sediment); to precipitate ( ھ s.th.; chem.) V
to settle, subside, be deposited; to
precipitate (chem.)
رسوب rusūb sediment, deposit; lees,
dregs, settlings; precipitate (chem.);
failure (in an examination)
ترسيب tarsīb sedimentation;
precipitation (chem.)
راسب rāsib pl. رواسب rawāsib2
sediment, deposit; dregs, lees, settlings;
precipitate (chem.); residue
رستامية rustāmīya to tidy, arrange well, put in
order ( ھ s.th.)
رستق rastaqa to tidy, arrange well, put in order
ھ) s.th.)
رستو، روستو (It. arrosto) rostō roast meat
رستوران (Fr. restaurant) restorān restaurant
مرسح marsaḥ (= مسرح ) pl. مراسح marāsiḥ2
theater, playhouse; stage; party, social
gathering
مرسحي marsaḥī social, party (used
attributively); formal (dress)
رسخ rasaka u ( رسوخ rusūk) to be firmly
established, be deeply rooted ( في in s.th.);
to be firm, solid, stable; to be conversant,
be thoroughly familiar ( في with s.th.), be
well versed, be at home ( في in s.th., in a
field); to seep in; to permeate ( في a fabric);
to become fast (color or dyes in a fabric)
II and IV to make ( ھ s.th.) take root(s),
establish ( ھ s.th.); to implant ( ھ s.th.); to
secure, make fast, fix firmly, ground ( ھ
s.th.) │ ارسخ الشيء في ذھنه (dihnihī) to
impress or inculcate s.th. upon s.o.
ارسخ arsaka more firmly established,
more deeply rooted │ ارسخ قدما (qadaman)
do.
راسخ rāsiq, firmly established, deeprooted;
grounded, firmly fixed, stable;
conversant ( في with s.th.), thoroughly
versed, completely at home ( في in a field)
رسراس risrās (eg.) glue, adhesive, specif., one
for pasting leather, made of a yellow
powder 337
رسغ rusg pl. ارساغ arsāg, ارسغ arsug wrist
رسف rasafa u i to go in shackles; to be bound;
to be moored (ship)
رسل rasila a (rasal) to be long and flowing
(hair) III to correspond, carry on a
correspondence, exchange letters ( ه with
s.o.); to contact ( ه s.o.), get in touch ( ه with
s.o.) IV to send out, dispatch ( ب or ھ، ه
s.o., s.th. الى , also ل, to); to send off, send
away ( ب or ھ , .s.o., s.th. الى , also ل, to); to
send, forward, ship ( ب or ھ s.th. الى , also
ل, to); to send, transmit (radio); to release,
let go ( ھ s.th.); to set free ( ھ s.th.); to
discharge ( ھ s.th.); to pour forth, vent ( ھ
s.th.), give vent ( ھ to); to utter ( ھ words);
to shed ( ھ tears); to let ( ھ the hair) hang
down, let it fall ( على on) │ ارسل في طلبه
(ṭalabihī) to send for s.o.; ارسل الكلام ارسالا
(al-kalāma irsālan) to speak without
restraint, talk freely; ارسل نفسه مع طبيعتھا
(nafsahū) to yield to one’s natural
impulse, do the natural thing; ارسل على
سجيته (sajīyatihī) to make s.o. feel at home;
ارسل نفسه على سجيتھا (nafsahū) to feel at
home, let o.s. go V to proceed leisurely,
take one’s time ( في in s.th.); to hang down,
be long and flowing (hair) VI to keep up a
correspondence, exchange letters; to send
to one another, exchange ( ب s.th.) X to ask
من) s.o.) to send ( ھ s.th.), have s.o. ( (من
send ( ھ s.th.); to be relaxed, at ease, free
from restraint; to be long and flowing
(hair); to be friendly, affable, intimate,
chummy ( الى with s.o.); to act naturally,
without affectation; to let o.s. go; to
enlarge ( في الكلام fī l-kalām in discourse,
i.e., to talk at length); to abandon o.s., give
o.s. up ( في to s.th., also مع or الى ); to persist
في) in s.th.), keep up ( في s.th.)
رسل rasl easy, gentle, leisurely (pace,
gait); loose, slack, relaxed; long and
flowing (hair)
رسل risl moderation │ على رسلك ! slowly!
gently! take it easy!
رسيل rasīl pl. رسلاء rusalā’2 messenger;
runner (mil.)
رسول rasūl pl. رسل rusul messenger;
emissary; envoy, delegate; apostle (Chr.);
الرسول or رسول لله the Messenger of God
(i.e., Mohammed)
رسولي rasūlī apostolic, papal (Chr.) │
البركة الرسولية (baraka) apostolic
benediction; السدة الرسولية (sudda) the Holy
See; قاصد رسولي apostolic delegate
رسالة risāla pl. -āt, رسائل rasā’l2
consignment, shipment; mail item;
(written) communication, (written) report;
missive; letter, note; epistle; dispatch;
message; treatise; radio message; (pl. -āt)
mission, calling, vocation │ رسالة برقية
(barqīya) telegram; رسالة غرامية (garāmīya)
love letter; رسالة مسجلة (musajjala)
registered letter
رسيلات rusailāt: القى الخبر على رسيلاته
(kabara) he didn’t take the matter
seriously
O مرسال mirsāl: مرسال نور m. nūr, pl. -āt
searchlight
مراسلة murāsala exchange of letters,
correspondence; note, message, letter,
communication; orderly (mil.)
ارسال irsāl sending, forwarding,
shipping, dispatch
ارسالية irsālīya pl. -āt consignment; mail
item; shipment; transport; (mil.)
expedition; mission
ترسل tarassul art of letter writing
استرسال istirsāl ease, naturalness,
relaxedness; abandon; elaboration,
expatiation
مراسل murāsil pl. -ūn correspondent,
reporter (of a newspaper) │ مراسل حربي
(ḥarbī) war correspondent; مراسل خاص
(kāṣṣ) 338 special correspondent; مراسل
رياضي (riyāḍī) sports reporter
مرسل mursil sender (of a letter); consignor;
O transmitter (radio)
O مرسلة mursala pl. -āt transmitter (radio)
مرسل mursal sent, forwarded; dispatched;
delegated; transmitted (radio); long and
flowing (hair); (pl. -ūn) millionary
(Chr.); incompletely transmitted (of a
Prophetic tradition resting on a chain of
authorities that goes no further back
than the 2nd generation after the
Prophet) │ المرسل اليه recipient,
addressee (of a letter); consignee; كلام
مرسل (kalām) prose
مرسلية mursalīya mission
مسترسل mustarsil loose, flowing (hair);
friendly, affable; intimate, chummy;
devoted, given up ( في or مع to s.th.)
رسم rasama u (rasm) to draw, trace ( ھ s.th.);
to sketch ( ھ s.th.); to describe ( ھ e.g., a
circle); to paint ( ھ s.th.); to record, put
down in writing ( ھ s.th.); to enter, mark,
indicate ( ھ s.th.); to sketch, outline ( ھ
s.th.; fig.); to describe, depict, portray,
picture ( ھ s.th.); to make, work out,
conceive ( خطة kiṭṭatan a plan); to
prescribe ( ب or ل ھ to s.o. s.th.), lay down
as a rule ( ب or ل ھ for s.o. s.th.); to ordain
ه) a priest; Chr.) │ رسم شارة الصليب to make
the sign of the cross, cross o.s. (Chr.) II to
enter, mark, indicate ( ھ s.th., في in); to
appoint to a public office ( ھ s.o.; tun.) V
to follow ( ھ s.th., esp. s.o.’s footsteps, an
example, etc.); to be appointed to a public
office (tun.) VIII to come out, find visible
expression; to be traced, engraved,
inscribed, written; to impress itself, leave
an impression ( على on); to be ordained, be
introduced into the office of the ministry
(priest; Chr.); to make the sign of the
cross (Chr.)
رسم rasm drawing (e.g., as a subject in
school); -- (pl. رسوم rusūm, رسومات
rusūmāt) a drawing; sketch; graph;
picture; photograph; illustration; pattern
(e.g., on a fabric); -- (pl. رسوم ) trace,
impression) designation, mark;
inscription, legend; record, notes;
(official) document, (legal) instrument;
writing; design; prescription, regulation;
ceremony, form, formality; rate, fee, tax,
due │ برسم bi-rasmi intended for, care of
(c/o), for; اخذ الرسم akd ar-r. taking of a
picture; رسم بياني (bayānī) illustrative
figure, diagram (in a book); رسم الدخول
admission fee; رسم دخولي (dukūlī) import
duty, tariff; رسم شمسي (šamsī) photograph;
رسم عمومي layout, ground plan (arch.); رسم
تفصيلي detail drawing; رسم قلبي (qalbī)
cardiogram; رسوم قيدية (qaidīya)
registration fees; رسم الإنتاج r. al-intāj
excise tax; رسم قيمي (qaimī) ad valorem
duty; رسم ھزلي (hazalī) caricature, cartoon
رسمي official, formal, conventional;
ceremonial; official, officeholder, public
servant; رسميا ramīyan officially; رسميات
rasmīyāt formalities; ceremonies,
ceremonial, ritual; rules, regulations │
رجال رسمية officials; ملابس رسمية official
dress; court dress; ثياب رسمية uniforms; شبه
رسمية šibh r. and شبيه بالرسمي semi-official;
نصف رسمي niṣfu r. do.; غير رسمي gairu r.
unofficial
رسام rassām pl. -āt draftsman; painter,
artist
رسامة risāma, rasāma ordination,
consecration (of a priest; Chr.)
روسم rausam pl. رواسم rawāsim2 O
cliché (Syr.)
مرسم marsam studio (of an artist)
مراسم marāsim2 ceremonies,
ceremonial, ritual; etiquette, protocol
(dipl.); customs; principles; regulations │
مدير ادارة المراسم mudīr idārat al-m. and
رئيس المراسم ٣٣٩ chief of protocol (dipl.);
مراسم التتويج coronation ceremonies; مراسم
التشريفات court etiquette
ترسم tarassum design, planning
ارتسام irtisām pl. -āt (visible)
expression, manifestation (e.g., of a
feeling, of an emotion on s.o.’s face)
مرسوم marsūm drawn, traced, sketched;
painted; recorded in writing, written;
designed, planned; decreed, ordered; --
(pl. مراسيم marāsīm2) decree; act, edict;
regulation, ordinance ( ب regarding); مراسيم
ceremonies, ceremonial, ritual; etiquette;
regulations │ مرسوم بقانون (bi-qānūn)
enactment, statute, ordinance (Eg.); مرسوم
تشريعي (tašrī‘ī) and مرسوم اشتراعي (ištirā‘ī;
Pal., Syr.) do.; مدير المراسيم mudīr al-m.
chief of protocol (dipl.)
□ رسمال rasmāl pl. رساميل rasāmīl رأس مال = 2
capital (fin.)
رسن rasana pl. ارسن arson, ارسان arsān, ارسنة
arnsina halter
رسا (رسو ) rasā u (rasw) to be firm, stable,
steady; to anchor ( على off a coast), cast
anchor, land, dock; to ride at anchor ( على
off a coast, في in a harbor); to disembark,
land ( ب s.o.; ship); to come or go
eventually ( على to), land ( على with) │ رسا
عليه المزاد (mazād) it was knocked down to
him (at an auction); رست عليه المناقصة
(munāqaṣa) the commission or contract
went to him (after an invitation to submit
tenders) IV to make fast, fix firmly ( ھ
s.th.); to anchor, place at anchor ( ھ a ship)
مرسى marsan pl. مراس marāsin
anchorage │ مرسى مطروح Mersa Matrûh
(village in NW Egypt, on Mediterranean
coast)
مرساة mirsāh pl. مراس marāsin anchor
راس rāsin pl. رواس rawāsin fixed,
stationary, immovable, firm, steady,
stable, firmly established; anchored, at
anchor; pl. راسيات rāsiyāt, رواس rawāsin
towering, unshakable mountains
رسى (= رسا see above) to anchor
رش rašša u (rašš) to spatter, splash, spurt ( ھ a
liquid); to spray ( ھ a liquid); to sprinkle (
ھ s.th., ب with, على on); to splatter,
spatter, bespatter ( ھ s.th., ب with water,
etc.); to water ( ھ s.th.)
رش rašš sprinkling; watering;
splattering, spattering; spraying; buckshot
│ مصلحة الرش والكنس maṣlaḥat ar-r. wa-lkans
street-cleaning department; عربة الرش
‘arabat ar-r. watering cart, sprinkler; رمى
رشا to fire in bursts (mil.)
رشة rašša light drizzle
رشاش raššāš spattered liquid; drizzle,
dribble (esp. fig.)
رشاش raššāš pl. -āt water hose;
machine gun │ مدفع رشاش (midfa‘) machine
gun; مسدس رشاش (musaddas) pl. مسدسات
رشاشة submachine gun, Tommy gun
رشاشة raššāša pl. -āt perfume spray,
atomizer; O watering can; shower, douche
(Mor.)
O مرشة mirašša watering can
رشح rašaḥa a (rašḥ) to sweat, perspire; to leak,
be leaky (vessel); to filter, strain, percolate
ھ) a liquid) II to raise, rear, bring up ( ه a
child); to train, prepare ( ه s.o.); to
nominate, put up as a candidate (. s.o., ل
for, e.g., for an office), (with نفسه nafsahū)
to be a candidate, apply ( ل for an offioe.
etc.); to filter ( ھ s.th.) V to be reared, be
brought up; to be suited, qualified, trained
ل) for s.th.); to be nominated as a
candidate, be a nominee ( ل for s.th.); to
catch a cold
رشح rašḥ secretion (of a fluid);
perspiration, sweating; leaking, leakiness;
filtering, filtration, percolation; oozing,
trickling; cold, catarrh 340
رشاحة rušāḥa transudate, transudation
(med.)
ترشيح taršīḥ training, preparation;
nomination (as a candidate, for election);
ترشيح نفسه =) ) candidacy, candidature;
election; concession
ترشح taraššuḥ infiltration (med.)
ارتشاح irtišāḥ infiltration (med.)
مرشح muraššiḥ pl. -āt filter; percolator;
filtering installation; purification plant
مرشح muraššaḥ pl. -ūn candidate,
nominee; having a cold
مترشح mutaraššiḥ pl. -ūn candidate,
nominee
رشد rašada u (rušd) to be on the right way,
follow the right course, be well guided,
not go astray (esp., in religious matters);
to have the true faith, be a true believer; to
become sensible, become mature, grow
up; to come of age II to lead the right way,
guide well ( ه s.o.) IV to lead the right
way, guide well ( ه s.o.); to load, guide,
direct ( الى • s.o. to s.th.), show ( ه s.o.) the
way ( الى to; fig.); to lead s.o. ( ه) to the
discovery that ( الى ان ), suggest to s.o. the
idea of, make s.o. realize that; to calls.o.’s
ه) ) attention ( الى to s.th.), point out ( الى ه to
s.o. s.th.); to teach ( الى ه s.o. to do s.th.),
instruct, (direct, guide ( الى ه s.o. in); to
inform ( الى ه s.o. about), acquaint s.o. ( (ه
with the facts of ( الى ); to advise, counsel (
الى ه s.o. to do s.th.); to inform ( الى against
s.o.); to come of age X to ask ( ه or ب s.o.)
to show the right way, ask s.o. for
guidance or directions; to ask ( ه s.o.) for
instructions or information; to consult ( ه
s.o.), ask s.o.’s ( ه) advice, seek guidance ( ه
from s.o.); to be guided ( ب by)
رشد rušd integrity of (one’s) actions,
proper, sensible conduct; reason, good
sense, senses; consciousness; maturity (of
the mind) │ سن الرشد sinn ar-r. majority,
full legal age; بلغ رشده (rušdahū) to come
of age; ثاب الى رشده to come to one’s
senses, calm, down, sober up; ضاع رشده to
go out of one’s mind; ذھب برشده to drive
s.o. mad (pain)
رشد rašad integrity of conduct,
straightforwardness, forthrightness
رشاد rašād integrity of conduct; reason,
good sense, senses; maturity; garden
peppergrass (Lepidium sativum L.; bot.)
رشيد rašīd rightly guided, following the
right way; having the true faith;
reasonable, rational, intelligent,
discriminating, discerning; mature; (pl.
رشداء rušadā’) of full legal age, major;
Rosetta (city in N Egypt)
مراشيد marāšid2 where the right way
leads to; salvation
ترشيد taršīd a declaring (s.o.) of age
(jur.)
ارشاد iršād guidance; a conducting,
showing the way ( الى to); guiding hand;
care; spiritual guidance; instruction;
direction; directive; information; advising,
advice; pl. ارشادات ) directives, directions,
instructions, advice │ بإرشاده on his
instructions, following his direction; وزارة
الإرشاد القومي wizārat al-i. al-qaumī
Ministry of National Guidance (Eg.)
شعر ارشادي ši‘r iršādī didactic poetry
راشد rāšid following the right way,
rightly guided, having the true faith;
sensible, reasonable; of full legal age,
major │ الخلفاء الراشدون (kulafā’) the
orthodox caliphs (i.e., Abū Bakr, ‘Umar,
‘Utmān, ‘Alī)
مرشد muršid pl. -ūn leader; guide to the
right way; adviser; spiritual guide;
informer; instructor; (ship) pilot; tourist
guide; Grand Master, Master (e.g., of the
Moslem Brotherhood)
مرشدة muršida woman guide 341
رشرش rušruš pl. رشرش rašārīš2 belt
رشراش rašrāš tender (e.g., meat)
رشف rašafa i u (rašf) and rašifa a (raša), V
and VIII to suck, sip ( ھ s.th.); to drink ( ھ
s.th.); to drink up, drain ( ھ a vessel)
رشفة rašfa (n. un.) pl. -āt gulp, sip (of a drink)
رشق rašaqa u (rašq) to throw ( ه ب at s.o.
s.th.), pelt, strike, hurt ( ه ب s.o. with s.th.); to
insert, fasten. fix ( في ھ s.th. in); -- rašuqa
u ( رشاقة rašāqa) to he shapely, of graceful
stature; to he elegant, graceful, lissome VI
to pelt one another, hurt one another
رشيق rašīq elegant, graceful (exterior,
style); svelte, slender, slim; lissome
رشاقة rašāqa elegance, grace,
gracefulness; shapeliness graceful, slender
build; nimbleness, agility
رشم rašama u (rašm) to mark, designate
ھ) s.th.); to make the sign of the cross; to
seal ( ھ s.th.) │ رشم بصليب على to make the
sign of the cross over; رشم الصليب to make
the sign of the cross (Chr.)
رشمة rašm pl. رشوم rušūm, رشومات
rušūmāt sign of the cross (Chr.);
anointment (Copt.-Chr.)
رشمة rašma ornamental halter
decorated with silver pendants, or the like;
camel halter
راشن rāšin tip, baksheesh
رشا (رشو ) rašā u (rašw) to bribe ( ه s.o.) VIII to
accept as bribe, he corrupt, he venal
رشو rašw bribery, corruption
رشوة rišwa, rušwa, rašwa pl. رشا، رشى rišan,
rušan, (eg.) رشاوى rašāwā bribe; bribery,
corruption, dishonesty
رشاء rišā’ rope, well rope
ارتشاء irtišā’ venality, corruptibility;
bribery, corruption
رص raṣṣa u (raš􀀀ṣ) to fit tightly together,
press together, compress ( ھ s.th.); to ram,
force ( ھ s.th. into the ground); to pile up,
stack up ( ھ s.th.); to join together, line up,
align, arrange .ide by side ( ھ s.th.) II to fit
tightly together, press together, compress (
ھ s.th.); to ram home ( ھ s.th.); to coat or
cover with lead ( ھ s.th.) VI to be pressed
together, be packed together; to press
together, crowd together; to be or become
compact
رصاص raṣāṣ lead; bullets │ قلم رصاص qalam r.
pencil
رصاصة raṣāṣa (n. un.) pellet; bullet
رصاصي raṣāṣī lead, (made) of lead;
leady; leaden, lead-colored, dull gray
رصيص raṣīṣ compressed, closely
packed, jammed together; compact
O تراص tarāṣṣ agglutination
رصد raṣada u (raṣd) to keep one’s eyes ( ھ، ه
on); to lie in wait ( ه for); to observe ( ھ
s.th.). watch ( ھ s.th. or over s.th.), control
ھ) s.th.); to conjure ( ه demon) │ رصد
الأفلاك to observe the stars, practice
astronomy II to provide, set aside,
earmark ( ھ funds); to prepare, keep ready
ھ) s.th.); to balance ( الحساب the account;
com.) IV to keep ready ( ھ s.th.); to
provide, set aside, earmark ( ھ ل s.th., esp.
funds, for); to procure, get ( ھ s.th.) V
ترصد الأفلاك to observe the stars, practice
astronomy
رصد raṣd, raṣad pl. ارصاد arṣād
observation │ رصد الأفلاك r. al-aflāk
stargazing, astronomy; ارصاد جوية
(jawwīya) meteorological observation;
تقرير الأرصاد weather report
رصدخانة raṣdakāna observatory
رصد raṣad pl. ارصاد arṣād spy, watcher,
watchdog; lookout, observation post;
ambush; talisman 342
رصاد raṣṣād: رصاد الجو r. al-jaww
meteorologist
رصيد raṣīd pl. ارصدة arṣida stock on
hand (of merchandise, of supplies);
avaible funds; balance (com.; also =
remainder of a sum to be paid later);
capital (fin.) │ شيك يدون رصيد uncovered
check, check without sufficient covering
funds
مرصد marṣad pl. مراصد marāṣid 2
observatory │ مرصد جوي (jawwī)
meteorological station, weather station
O مرصد marṣad telescope
مرصاد mirṣād observation post, lookout;
ambush │ وقف المرصاد to lie in wait;
كان منه بالمرصاد and وقف له بالمرصاد to lie in
ambush for s.o., waylay s.o.
راصد rāṣid registering; (pl. رصاد
ruṣṣād) watcher, watchdog, spy │O خزينة
راصدة cash register; O ميزان راصد (mīzān)
self-registering balance
راصدة rāṣida: راصدة فلكية (falakīya)
telescope
مبلغ مرصود mablag marṣūd security,
cover (fin.)
رصع II to inlay, set, stud ( ھ s.th., ب with gems
or gold); to adorn, decorate, ornament ( ھ
ب s.th. with)
رصف raṣafa u (raṣf) to pave, lay with stone ( ھ
s.th.); -- raṣufa u ( رصافة raṣāfa) to be
firmly joined II to lay with flagstones,
pave ( ھ s.th.)
رصف raṣf paving (of roads)
رصيف raṣīf firmly joined, firm, solid,
compact; -- (pl. ارصفة arṣifa) pavement;
sidewalk; quay; wharf, pier; mole, jetty;
platform; (pl. رصفاء ruṣafā’) colleague │
رصيف المحطة r. al-maḥaṭṭa (railway)
platform; رصيف لأعمال الحفر في البحر (lia‘
māli l-ḥafr fī l-baḥr) offshore drilling
platform (for oil drilling); عوائد الرصيف
‘awā’id ar-r. quayage, pierage, wharfage
رصيفة raṣīfa pl. -āt woman colleague │
رصيفتنا الغراء (garrā’) a phrase of courtesy
used by one newspaper when referring to
another; approx.: our honorable friends
رصافة raṣāfa firmness compactness
مرصوف marṣūf paved ( ب with)
رصن raṣuna u ( رصانة raṣāna) to be firm,
strong; to be sedate, calm, composed
رصين raṣīn firm, unshakable; sedate,
calm, composed
رصانة raṣāna sedateness, composure,
calmness, equanimity
رض raḍḍa u (raḍḍ) to crush ( ھ s.th.); to bruise
ھ) a part of the body)
رض raḍḍ pl. رضوض ruḍūḍ bruise,
contusion
رضيض raḍīḍ crushed; bruised
رضاب ruḍāb spittle, saliva
رضخ raḍaka a i (raḍk) to break, smash, shatter
ھ) s.th.); to crack ( ھ a kernel); -- raḍaka a
(raḍk) to give ( ھ s.o.) a small, paltry
present; -- (ruḍūk) to yield, bow, give in,
subordinate o.s., submit ( ل to s.o., to s.th.)
VIII ارتضخ لكنة (luknatan) to speak Arabic
with a foreign accent
رضخ raḍk, رضخة raḍka a small, paltry
gift
رضيحة raḍīka a small, paltry gift; tip,
baksheesh
رضوخ ruḍūk submission, surrender;
yielding, compliance; sympathetic
understanding ( ل of)
مرضاح mirḍāk nutcracker
رضرض raḍraḍa to break into coarse pieces,
pound, crush ( ھ s.th.)
رضراض raḍrāḍ pebbles, gravel 343
رضع raḍi‘a a and raḍa‘a i a (raḍ‘, رضاع
raḍā‘) to suck ( ثدي أمه tadya ummihī at its
mother’s breast) II and IV to nurse at the
breast, suckle, breast-feed ( ه a baby)
رضيع raḍī‘ pl: رضعاء ruḍa‘ā‘ رضائع , 2
raḍā’i‘2 suckling, infant, baby; foster
brother
O رضاعة raḍā‘a pl. -āt nursing bottle
رضاع riḍā‘ foster relationship
راضع rāḍi‘ pl. رضع ruḍḍa‘ sucking;
suckling, infant, baby; infant (adj.)
مرضع murḍi‘ and مرضعة murḍi‘a pl.
مراضع marāḍi‘2 wet nurse; foster mother
رضه abbreviation of رضي لله عنه see رضى
رضا see رضى riḍan
رضي raḍiya a ( رضى riḍan, رضوان riḍwān,
مرضاة marḍāh) to be satisfied, be content (
ھ، ب or في with); to consent, agree ( ھ، ب
or في to); to approve ( ھ، ب or في of),
accept, sanction ( ھ، ب or في s.th.); to
accept the fact, resign o.s. to the fact ( ان
that); to be pleased ( ھ، على or عن with); to
wish, desire ( ھ s.th., ل for s.o.) │ رضي لنفسه
ب (li-nafsihī) to permit o.s. s.th.; ما رضي لھا
المذلة (madalla) he had no desire to
humiliate her; رضي او ابى (au abā) whether
he likes it or not; رضي لله عته (Isl. eulogy)
may God be pleased with him; رضي من
الغنيمة بالإياب (iyāb) to be content to return
without booty, be happy to have saved
one’s skin n to satisfy, gratify, please ( ه
s.o.); to compensate ( ه s.o.) III to seek to
satisfy, try to please ( ه s.o.); to propitiate,
conciliate, win ( ه s.o.), gain the good will
of ( ه) IV to satisfy, gratify, please ( ه s.o.)
V to seek to satisfy, try to please ( ه s.o.);
to seek to propitiate ( ه s.o.); to conciliate.
appease ( ه s.o.) VI to come to terms VIII
to be satisfied, content, pleased ( ھ with);
to consent, agree ( ھ to s.th.); to approve (
ھ of s.th.), sanction ( ھ s.th.) X to seek to
satisfy, try to conciliate, treat in a
conciliatory manner ( ه s.o.); to conciliate,
appease ( ه s.o.); to show o.s. obliging,
make o.s. popular, ingratiate o.s., try to
gain good will or favor
رضى، رضا riḍan contentment,
contentedness, satisfaction; agreement,
consent, assent, acceptance, approval;
pleasure, delight; good will, favor │ عن
رضى readily, gladly; سريع الرضى easy to
please, easily reconciled
رضي raḍīy pl. ارضياء arḍiyā’2 satisfied,
content; pleasant, agreeable │ بنفس راضية
(bi-nafs) gladly
رضوان riḍwān consent, assent,
agreement, acceptance, approval,
sanction; good will, favor; pleasure,
delight
مرضاة marḍāh a means affording
satisfaction or gratification; satisfaction,
pleasure
ترضية tarḍiya satisfaction, gratification;
compensation
رضاء riḍā’ contentment, contentedness,
satisfaction; agreement, consent, assent,
acceptance, approval, sanction;
propitiation, conciliation
بالمراضاة bi-l-murāḍāh by fair means,
amicably
إرضاء irḍā’ satisfaction, gratification;
fulfillment (of a claim, of a desire) │ صعب
الارضاء ṣa‘b al-i. hard to please, fastidious
تراض tarāḍin mutual consent
استرضاء istirḍā’ conciliatory attitude,
conciliatoriness; propitiation, conciliation
استرضائي istirḍā’ī conciliatory
راض rāḍin pl. رضاة ruḍāh satisfied,
content; agreeing, consenting; willing,
ready; pleasant, agreeable (life)
مرض murḍin satisfactory; satisfying;
pleasant, pleasing, gratifying, sufficient
344
رطب raṭiba a and raṭuba u ( رطوبة ruṭūba, رطابة
raṭāba) to be moist, damp, humid; to be
wet II to moisten ( ھ s.th.); to cool,
refresh; to soothe, soften, calm ( القلب alqalba
the heart); to become succulent,
mellow, ripen (dates) IV to moisten ( ھ
s.th.); to become succulent, mellow, ripen
(dates) V to be moistened; to be cooled,
be refreshed; to be soothed, be softened,
be calmed
رطب raṭb moist, damp, humid; wet;
fresh, cool; juicy, succulent, tender (plant)
رطب ruṭab (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. ارطاب
arṭāb, رطاب riṭāb fresh, ripe dates
رطيب raṭīb pl. رطاب riṭāb moist, damp,
humid; fresh, cool; juicy, succulent, tender
(plant)
رطوبة rṭūba moisture, dampness,
humidity; wetness
راطب rāṭib moist, damp, humid; wet
مرطبات muraṭṭibat refreshments, soft
drinks
رطل raṭl pl. ارطال arṭāl rotl, a weight (in Eg. =
449.28 g; in Syr. = 3.202 kg, in Beirut and
Aleppo = 2.566 kg)
رطم raṭama u (raṭm) to involve, implicate,
drag ( ه في s.o. into s.th. unpleasant) VIII to
tumble, fall, plunge ( في into); to stick fast,
be stuck; to be involved, be entangled ( في
in s.th.); to run aground, strand (ship); to
bump, hit, crash ( ب against)
O مرطم marṭam breakwater, mole, jetty
رطن raṭana u ( رطانة raṭāna, riṭāna) to speak
unintelligible language, talk gibberish,
jabber
رطانة raṭāna, riṭāna lingo, gibberish
رطينى rujainā lingo, gibberish
رعاع ra‘ā‘ rabble, mob, riffraff, scum, ragtag;
rowdies, hooligans
رعب ra‘aba a (ru‘b) to be alarmed, terrified;
to be afraid, be scared II and IV to
frighten, scare, terrify ( ه s.o.) VIII to
become frightened, become alarmed, be
afraid
رعب ru‘b fright, alarm, dismay
ارعاب ir‘āb frightening, intimidation
راعب rā‘ib dreadful, horrifying, terrible
مرعوب mar‘ūb frightened, terrified,
appalled, afraid
مرعب mur‘ib frightening, terrifying,
terrible, horrible, dreadful
رعد ra‘ada a u (ra‘d) to thunder; to appall ( ل
ب s.o. with) IV to make ( ه s.o.) tremble;
pass. ur‘ida to shudder, shiver, tremble (
من with, e.g., with fear) VIII to tremble
رعد ra‘d pl. رعود ru‘ūd thunder
رعدة ra‘da, ri‘da tremor; shudder;
shiver
رعاد ra‘‘ād (coll.; n. un. ة) electric ray
(zool.)
رعديد ri‘dīd pl. رعاديد ra‘ādīd2
cowardly; coward
رعرع ra‘ra‘a to come into the prime of life
(youth) II tara‘ra‘a to grow, develop,
flourish, thrive
رعرع ra‘ra‘, ru‘rū‘ pl. رعارع ra‘āri‘2 in
full bloom
رعراع ايوب ra‘rā‘ ayyūb (eg.) a variety
of fleabane (Pulicaria arabica Coss.,
Pulicarla inuloides D.C.; bot.)
رعش ra‘aša a (ra‘š) and ra’iša a (ra’aš) to
tremble, shake IV to make ( ه s.o.) tremble;
to make ( ه s.o.) shiver VIII = ra’aša
رعشة ri‘ša tremor │ رعشة الحمى r. al-
ḥummā feverish shiver
ارتعاش irti‘āš tremor, trembling
رعص V and VIII to writhe, wind, coil 345
رعف ra‘afa u a and ra‘ifa a: رعف انفه (anfahū)
to have a nosebleed
رعاف ru‘āf and رعيف ra‘īf nosebleed
راعف rā‘if tip of the nose
رعلة ru‘la wreath
رعيل ra‘īl pl. رعال ri‘āl squadron of
armored, motorized, or cavalry troops
(Syr., Ir.; mil.)
رعام ru‘ām gladers
رعمسيس ra‘amsīs Ramses (name of Eg. kings)
رعن ra‘ana u ( رعونة ru‘ūna) to be lightheaded,
frivolous; -- ra‘ana u (ra‘n): رعنته الشمس
ra‘anathu š-šamsu to have a sunstroke
رعن ra‘n sunstroke; -- (pl. رعان ri‘ān)
mountain peak
ارعن ar‘an2 lightheaded, frivolous,
flippant, rash, heedless, careless; stupid,
silly; thoughtless; unsteady, fickle,
volatile
رعونة ru‘ūna pl. -āt levity, frivolity,
flippancy; thoughtlessness
رعا (رعو ) ra‘ā u (ra‘w, رعوة ra‘wa, ru‘wa,
رعوى ra‘wā, ru‘wā) and IX ارعوى ir‘awā
to desist ( من or عن from sin, from error),
repent, see the light │ ارعوى عن غيه
(gayyihī) to repent, turn over a new leaf
رعوى ra‘wā, ru‘wā repentance,
amendment, conversion
رعوى ra‘awī and رعوية see رعى
رعى ra‘ā a (ra‘y, رعاية ri‘āya, مرعى
mar‘an) to graze; to tend ( ھ a flock of
animals); -- (ra‘y, رعاية ri‘āya) to guard,
protect, take under one’s wing ( ه s.o.); to
care ( ھ، ه for), take care ( ھ، ه of); to watch
ھ) over); to male a point ( ھ of s.th.), make
it one’s business; to observe, bear in mind,
heed, respect ( ھ s.th.); to adhere ( ھ to),
comply ( ھ with), abide (e.g., عھدا ‘ahdan
or معاھدة mu‘āhadatan by a treaty or an
agreement, etc.); to take into consideration
ھ) s.th.), allow ( ھ for s.th.) in to
supervise, watch, control ( ھ s.th.), keep an
eye ( ھ on); to maintain, keep up, preserve
ھ) s.th.); to observe, bear in mind, heed,
respect ( ھ s.th.), comply ( ھ with, e.g.,
with regulations); to take into
consideration, take into account ( ھ s.th.),
allow, make allowance ( ھ for s.th.); to
show deference, regard or respect ( ه for
s.o.); to make provision, see to it ( ان that)
│ راعى خاطره (kāṭirahū) to defer to s.o.,
respect s.o.’s feelings or wishes IV ارعيته
سمعى ar‘aituhū sam‘ī I listened to him;
ارعنى سمعك ar‘inī sam‘aka listen to me!
ارعى ھ نظره (naẓarahū) to follow s.th.
attentively with one’s eyes VIII to graze,
pasture (cattle) X to attract ( نظره naẓarahū
s.o.’s eyes, انتباھه intibāhahū s.o.’s
attention); to observe ( ھ s.th.)
رعى ra‘y care, keeping, custody,
guardianship; protection; observance ( ل
of), adherence ( ل to, e.g., to agreements)
│ رعيا لك God be with you!
رعية ra‘īya pl. رعايا ra‘āyā herd, flock;
parish (Chr.); subjects, citizens; a subject,
a citizen
رعوي ra‘awī, رعاوى ra‘āwī and رعائى
ra‘ā’ī pastoral, bucolic │ كنيسة رعائية
parish church (Chr.); رسالة رعائية pastoral
letter (Chr.)
مرعى mar‘ā pl. مراع marā‘in grassland,
grazing land; pasture
رعاية ri‘āya keeping, custody, charge,
care; attention, consideration, regard;
patronage, auspices, sponsorship,
protectorate │ تحت رعاية under the auspices
of, sponsored by; مركز رعاية الطفل markaz
r. al-ṭifl health center for children (Eg.);
شرط معاملة الدول الأكثر رعاية šarṭ mu‘āmalat
ad-duwal al-aktar ri‘āyatan most-favored
nation clause 346
مراعاة murā‘āh consideration, regard,
deference, respect; compliance (with),
observance (e.g., of regulations, of duties,
etc.) │ مراعاة ل (murā‘atan) in deference
to, out of regard for, for the lab of; in
observance of; مراعاة لخواطرھم out of
deference to them, out of regard for their
feelings, wishes, etc.; مع مراعاة ھذا taking
this into account, bearing this in mind
راع rā‘in pl. رعاة ru‘āh, رعيان ru‘yān,
رعاء ru‘ā’, ri‘ā’ shepherd, herdsman;
guardian, keeper, protector; patron,
sponsor; pastor (Chr.)
مرعى mar‘ā observed, complied with
رغب ragiba a ( رغبة ragba, رغب ragab) to
desire, wish, want, crave, covet ( في s.th.);
to ask ( من or الى s.o., في for s.th., ان to do
s.th.), request ( في s.th.; من or الى s.o., ان to
do s.th.); to prefer ( في على s.th. to, also ب
عن s.th. to), like s.th. ( في , also ب) better
than ( على , also عن ); to dislike, detest,
loathe ( عن s.th.), have a distaste ( عن for);
to wish ( ل ب s.o. s.th.) │ لا يرغب فيه
(yurgabu) undesirable II to make ( ه s.o.)
desirous ( في of), awaken a desire, a wish ( ه
في in s.o. for); to interest ( ه في s.o. in s.th.),
excite s.o.’s ( ه) interest in ( في ); to awaken
an aversion ( ه عن in s.o. to s.th.) IV = II
رغب ragab: رغبا ورھبا ragaban warahaban
torn between greed and fear
رغبة ragba pl. ragabāt wish, desire,
longing, appetite ( في for)
رغيبة ragība pl. رغائب ragā’ib2 object of
desire, desideratum; wish, desire
ترغيب targīb awakening of a desire or
longing ( في for); incitement to
covetousness; invitation, attraction
راغب rāgib pl. رغبة desiring, desirous │
لآخر راغب li-ākiri rāgibin (sale) to the
highest bidder
مرغوب margūb: مرغوب فيه coveted,
sought after, in demand; desired,
desirable; غير مرغوب فيه undesirable; شخص
مرغوب فيه (šakṣ) persona grata, شخص غير
مرغوب فيه persona non grate (dipl.); مرغوب
عنه undesirable, unwanted, objectionable,
loathsome
مرغبات muraggibāt attractions, lures,
advantages
رغث ragaṭa a (rugt) to suck ( ھا at the mother’s
teats; said of animals)
رغوث ragūt unweaned young female
animal
رغد raguda u ( رغادة ragāda) and ragida (rugd)
to be pleasant, comfortable, carefree (life)
رغد ragd easy, carefree, pleasant,
agreeable (life) │ عيش رغد (‘aiš) a life of
plenty and opulence
رغيد ragīd easy, carefree, pleasant,
agreeable (life) │ عيش رغيد (‘aiš) a life of
plenty and opulence
رغد ragad comfort, opulenoe, affluence
(of living)
رغادة ragāda comfort, opulence,
affluence (of living)
رغرغ 1 ragraga to live in opulence and luxury
2□ رغرغ ragraga (= غرغر gargara) to gargle
ارغاطة urgāṭa pl. –āt, اراغيط arāgīṭ (eg.)
windlass, winch; capstan
رغيف ragīf pl. ارغفة argifa, رغفان rugfān, رغف
ruguf loaf of bread; roll, bun (syr.)
رغم IV to foroe, compel, coerce ( ه على s.o. to
do s.th.)
رغم ragma (prep.) despite, in spite of │ رغم ان
although, though; رغما عن ragman ‘an in
spite of, despite; رغما عن انفه (anfihī) and
على الرغم من انفه just to spite him, in
defiance of him, against, his will; بالرغم من
bi-r-rami min and بالرغم عن and على الرغم
من despite, in spite of; بالرغم من كل ھذا in
347 spite of all this; بالرغم منه and على الرغم
منه against s.o.’s will; against one’s own
will, reluctantly, without wanting it; على
رغم مني ‘alā ragmin minnī without my
wanting it; بالرغم من in spite of the fact
that, although; لا ... الا رغما lā … illā
ragman only reluctantly, only with great
effort
رغام ragām dust and sand
رغام rugām mucus
رغامى rugāmā windpipe, trachea (anat.)
مرغمة margama pl. مراغم marāgim2
compulsion, coercion, force; aversion,
unwillingness, reluctance, dislike, distaste
ارغام irgām compulsion ( على to)
راغم rāgim reluctant, unwilling │ وانفه
راغم (anfuhū) (as a ḥāl clause) reluctantly,
grudgingly
ارغن look up alphabetically
رغا (رغو ) ragā u (ragw) to foam, froth II and
IV do. │ ارغى وازبد (azbada) to fume with
rage
رغو ragwa, rugwa pl. رغاو ragāwin
foam, froth, spume; lather; dross, slag
رغوي ragwī foamy, frothy
رغاء raggā’ windbag (fig., of a person);
garrulous; chatterbox, prattler
رغاوة rugāwā foam, froth, spume
راغ: ما له ثاغية ولا راغية (tāgiya) he has
absolutely nothing, he is devoid of all
resources, prop.: he has neither a bleating
(sheep) nor a braying (camel)
رف raffa i (raff, رفيف rafīf) to gleam, shimmer,
glisten, glitter; -- u i (raff) to quiver,
twitch; to flicker; to flap the wings (bird);
to flutter; to wave, stream; to flash, flare
for a moment; to appear suddenly; -- u I to
be anxious to please ( ل s.o.). serve ( ل s.o.)
diligently │ رف على ذاكرته it flashed
through his mind, it occurred to him all of
a sudden
رف raff flight, covey (of birds)
رف raff pl. رفوف rufūf, رفاف rifāf shelf;
rack; ledge │ وضعه على الرف to shelve
s.th., put s.th. aside
رفاف raffāf radiant, flashing, sparkling,
glistening
رفأ rafa’a a (raf’) to mend, repair, patch ( ھ
clothing), sew up, fine-draw ( ھ a rent),
darn ( ھ socks); to drag ( ھ a boat) on shore
رفاء raffā’ darner, fine-drawer
رفاء rifā’ (marital) harmony, love │
بالرفاء والبنين (banīn) live in harmony and
beget sons! (felicitation to newlyweds)
مرفأ marfa’ pl. مرافئ marāfi’2 landing
place wharf, quay; port, harbor
رفت 1 rafata i u (raft) to break, smash, crush ( ھ
s.th.); to reject, turn down, decline ( ھ
s.th.); to dismiss, discharge ( ھ s.o. from
service)
رفت raft dismissal, discharge (from
service)
رفت rufāt mortal remains, body (of a
person)
رفتية 2 raftīya transit duty; clearance certificate,
clearance papers (com.)
رفث rafata i u to behave in an obscene manner
رفث rafat obscenity
رفح rafaḥ Rafah (town in S Gaza sector)
رفد rafada i (rafd) to support, aid, help ( ه s.o.);
to support, uphold, carry ( ه s.th.) IV to
support, aid, help ( ه s.o.) X to ask ( ه s.o.)
for support, appeal ( ه to s.o.) for help
رفد rifd pl. رفود rufūd, ارفاد arfād
present, gift; support
رفادة rifāda dressing, bandage (over a
wound); saddlecloth, pad 348
رافد rāfid pl. روافد rawāfid2 tributary
stream; الرافدان ar-rāfidān (Euphrates and
Tigris = ) Mesopotamia, Iraq
رافدة rāfida pl. روافد rawāfid2 support,
prop; rafter
رفرف rafrafa to flap the wings (bird); to flutter
(flag, wings, or the like); to blow (wind);
to blindfold ( ھ the eyes)
رفرف rafrāf pl. رفارف rafārif 2 cushion,
pad; eyeshade, visor (of a cap); fender (of
an automobile)
رفروف rafrūf pl. رفاريف rafārīf2 eye
bandage
رفس rafasa i u (rafs) to kick ( ه s.o.)
رفس rafsa (n. vic.) kick
رفاس raffās steam launch, steamboat;
motor tug; O propeller
رفش rafš shovel, spade
رفاص raffāṣ (= رفاس raffās) steam launch,
steamboat
رفض rafaḍa i u (rafḍ) to leave, abandon ( ھ
s.th.); to discard, dismiss ( ھ s.th.); to
reject, turn down, decline, refuse to accept
ھ) s.th.) IV to finish, conclude, terminate
V to he bigoted, fanatic IX to scatter,
disperse, break up; to disappear, cease
(e.g., pain); to drip (sweat)
رفض rafḍ dismissal; rejection, refusal,
nonacceptance
رفيض rafīḍ abandoned; rejected,
dismissed
ترفض taraffuḍ bigotry, fanaticism
رافضة rāfiḍa pl. روافض rawāfiḍ2
turncoats, renegades, dissenters, defectors;
troops having deserted their leader;
Rafidites, a Shiitio sect
رافضي rāfiḍī pl. ارفاض arfāḍ apostate,
renegade, turncoat; Rafidite; disloyal,
rebellious; bigoted, fanatical
رفع rafa‘a a (raf‘) to lift, lift up, raise aloft,
heave up, hoist up ( ھ s.th.); to raise ( ھ
s.th., e.g., one’s head, also fig.: e.g., the
intellectual level, a price); to raise in
esteem ( ھ s.th.); to make high or higher (
ھ s.th.); to elevate ( ھ s.th.); to heighten,
exalt, enhance ( ھ s.th.); to raise, promote (
ه الى s.o. to the rank of); to fly, let up ( ,ھ
e.g., a kite); to hoist, run up ( علما ‘alaman
or راية rāyatan a flag); to take off, doff, tip
قبعته) qubba‘atahū one’s hat); to place,
fasten or attach ( ھ s.th.) high above; to
erect, set up ( ھ s.th.); to raise ( صوته
ṣautahū one’s voice); to remove, take
away ( عن or ھ من s.th. from); to abolish,
eliminate ( ھ s.th.); to lift ( ھ s.th., e.g., a
ban), put an end ( ھ to s.th.); to remedy ( ھ
a mistake); to free, relieve ( عن ھ s.o. of
s.th.); to put s.th. ( ھ ) before s.o. ( ,(الى
submit ( ه الى s.th., e.g., a petition, to), file (
ھ الى a report, and the like, with a proper
authority); to present, dedicate ( ھ الى s.th.
to s.o.); to offer up ( ھ sacrifices; Chr.); to
make, deliver ( تقريرا a report); to start,
initiate ( قضية qaḍīyata legal action); to
ascribe ( ھ الى a Prophetic tradition to an
authority or source); (gram.) to pronounce
the final consonant with u; to put ( ھ a
word) in the nominative or indicative,
respectively; pass. rufi‘a it appeared,
came in sight, became visible ( ل before
s.o.); رفع عنه rufi‘a ‘anhu he regained
consciousness │ رفع شيئا فوق شيء to put s.th.
before or above s.th. else; رفع به رأسا
(rafa‘a) to pay attention to s.th.; رفع من شأنه
(min ša’nihī) to enhance the importance of
s.th.; to speak of s.th. in glowing terms;
رفع من مكانته (makānatihī) to upgrade s.th.;
رفع يديه عنه (yadaihī) to desist, refrain from
s.th.; رفع الدعوى عليه (da‘wā) to sue s.o.,
lodge a complaint against s.o. ( امام in a
court); رفع قضية عليه (qaḍīyatan) or رفع به
قضية to bring legal action against s.o., go
with s.o. to court; رفع الاستئناف to appeal,
349 make an appeal ( امام to a court) II to
raise, lift;, elevate; to celebrate carnival III
to act as defence counsel ( عن of s.o.),
defend ( عن s.o., in court), plead s.o.’s ( (عن
cause; to summon, hale ( ه الى s.o. to court)
V to be or deem o.s. above s.th. ( عن ), be
too proud ( عن for s.th.), look down ( عن
upon) │ ترفع برأسه to raise or bear one’s
heed high VI to hale one another before
the judge ( الى الحاكم ); to take one’s case
before the judge ( الى الحاكم ); to plead (in
court) VIII to rise, lift; to go up, ascend; to
become higher; to grow, increase, rise; to
ring out (tone, voice, tune); to go away,
pass away, be eliminated, disappear ( عن
from) │ ارتفع صوته (ṣautuhū) to gain
prestige
رفع raf‘ lifting, hoisting (also, of a
flag); elevation; raise, raising, stepping up
(of prices, of temperatures, etc.); setting
up; erection; abolition; lift, (e.g., of a
ban); remedy, elimination, removal;
remission (of a tax); submission, filing
(e.g., of a report); pronunciation of the
final consonant with u (gram.) │ رفع الأثقال
weight lifting (athlet.)
رفعة rif‘a height, elevation (e.g., of a
structure); high rank or standing │ صاحب
الرفعة (formerly:) title of the Egyptian
Prime Minister, رفعة رئيس الوزراء rif‘at raīs
al-wuzarā’ His Excellency the Prime
Minister
رفاع rifā‘ Shrovetide (Chr.)
رفيع rafī‘ high, high-ranking; lofty,
exalted, sublime; loud (voice, sound);
thin, fine, delicate; exquisite, refined,
subtle; artistic │ رفيع الشأن r. aš-ša’n
approx.: exalted; formerly, in Tunisia, title
of the members of the Bey’s family; صاحب
المقام الرفيع (maqām) title conferred upon
bearers of the order القلادة al-qilāda,
established by Fu’ād I in الفنون الرفيعة ; 1936
الفنون الجميلة =)) the fine arts; الرفيع والوضيع
high end low (= all)
ارفع arfa‘ higher; loftier, more exalted;
liner; more relined, subtler
رفيعة rafī‘a pl. رفائع rafā’i‘2 legal case
brought before the competent authorities;
a document submitted to a proper
authority
مرفع marfa‘ Shrovetide (Chr.); carnival,
pl. مرافع marāfi‘2 do.
مرفعة mirfa‘a pl. مرافع marāfi‘2 hoisting
gear, crane
ترفيع tarfī‘ pl. -āt promotion (of an
official); salary raise ( الى to the amount of)
مرافعة murāfa‘a pl. -āt speech for the
defense (in court); proceedings at law │ يوم
المرافعة yaum al-m. date fixed for the trial
(of a case in court); قانون المرافعة (Eg.) and
مجلة المرافعة majallat al-m. (Tun.) code of
procedure
ترفع taraffu‘ arrogance, haughtiness,
snobbery ( عن toward s.th.), disdain,
contempt ( عن of s.th.)
ارتفاع irtifā‘ rise (e.g., of prices);
elevation; increase; height, altitude (e.g.,
of a mountain, عن سطح البحر ‘an saṭḥI lbaḥr
above sea level, etc.) │ ... على ارتفاع
at an altitude of ...
رافع rāfi‘ bearer │ آلة رافعة hoisting gear,
lifting apparatus, hoist; windlass, winch;
crane; pump; مضخة رافعة (miḍakka) suction
pump
رافعة rāfi‘a pl. روافع rawāfi‘ hoisting
gear, lifting apparatus, hoist; crane;
hoisting installation (mining) │O رافعة
ھوائية (hawā’īya) ejector; O رافعة الغام r.
algām mine sweeper
مرفوع marfū‘ traceable in ascending
order of traditionaries to Mohammed
(Prophetic tradition); (gram.) in the
nominative or indicative, respectively
مرفع muraffa‘: المرفع شأنه (ša’nuhū) =
الرفيع الشأن (see رفيع rafī‘) 350
مرافع murāfi‘ plaintiff
مترفع mutaraffi‘ haughty, arrogant,
snobbish
مرتفع murtafi‘ rising, ascending; high,
elevated; resounding, ringing │ سكة الحديد
المرتفعة (sikkat al-ḥadīd) elevated railway
مرتفع murtafa‘ height, altitude; elevated
place; O terrace; pl. -āt heights,
elevations, hills
رفق rafaqa u (rifq) and rafiqa a (rafaq) to be
kind, friendly, nice ( ب to s.o., also على and
ل), treat gently ( ب s.o.,), be courteous ( ب
with s.o.) III to be a companion, a
comrade ( ه of s.o.); to keep ( ه s.o.)
company; to be on intimate terms, be hand
in glove, be friends, associate closely ( ه
with s.o.); to accompany ( ه s.o.; also
mus.); to escort ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) IV to be of
use, be useful ( ه to s.o.), avail, serve, help
ه) s.o.); to accompany ( ھ ب s.th. with);: to
attach, enclose, add, append ( ھ ب to s.th.
s.th.) V to show o.s. kind, display a gentle,
friendly attitude ( ب toward s.o., also ,(مع
be nice ( ب to s.o., also مع ); to do gently ( في
s.th.), proceed gently ( في in) │ ترفق في سيره
(sairihī) to walk slowly, stroll, saunter VI
to travel together VIII to profit, benefit,
gain ( ب from or by), make use, avail o.s.,
take advantage ( ب of), utilize ( ب s .h.); to
lean one’s elbows, rest one’s arms ( ھ on
s.th.)
رفق rifq friendliness, kindness,
gentleness │ جمعية الرفق بالحيوان jam‘īyat
ar-r. bi-l-ḥayawān Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
رفقة rifqa, rufqa pl. رفاق rifāq, رفق rifaq,
rufaq, ارفاق arfāq group, troop, body (of
people); company │ برفقة accompanied by,
in the company of
رفيق rafīq pl. رفقاء rufaqā’ رفاق , 2 rifāq
companion, attendant; escort; buddy,
friend; comrade (in Marxist terminology);
associate, partner; accomplice; kind ( ب
to), mild, gentle, tender │ رفيق المدرسة r. almadrasa
classmate, schoolmate
رفيقة rafīqa pl. -āt woman companion;
girl friend; sweetheart; mistress, par
amour
مرفق mirfaq, marfiq elbow; -- mirfaq
pl. مرافق marāfiq2 anything conducive to
personal ease and comfort, convenience;
appurtenance (of an apartment, of a house;
such as kitchen, bathroom, stable, etc.);
attainment of civilization, civilizational
institution; pl. مرافق attainments of
civilization; conveniences; public utilities;
installations; facilities │ القيام على مرافقھم
(qiyām) concern for their welfare; مرافق
الحياة m. al-ḥayāh conveniences, anything
conducive to personal ease and comfort;
المرافق العامة (‘āmma) the public utilities;
مرافق التكرار refining facilities (oil industry)
مرافقة murāfaqa accompaniment; escort;
company, association
ارتفاق irtifāq utilization, use; usefulness,
serviceableness; easement (jur.)
مرافق murāfiq pl. -ūn companion,
attendant; escort; accompanist; adjutant,
aide (Ir.)
مرفق به murfaq bihi attached, enclosed;
pl. مرفقات enclosures (in a letter, or the
like)
مرتفق murtafaq that on which one leans
or rests; support; toilet, latrine
رفل rafala u (rafl) to trail a garment; to strut,
swagger
رفل rifl train (of a garment)
رفه rafuha u ( رفاه rafāh, رفاھة rafāha, رفاھية
rafāhīya) to be comfortable, pleasant,
luxurious (life) II to make ( ھ life) pleasant
and comfortable; to afford ( ه s.o.) a
pleasant, luxurious life; to be a source 351
of ease and comfort, make things easy (
على، عن for s.o.), let ( على , s.o.) live in
comfort; to relax ( على، عن s.o.), provide
recreation ( على، عن for); to ease soften,
mitigate ( عن ھ for s.o. s.th.); to cheer up (
عن s.o.), raise the spirits of ( عن ); to soothe
عن) the soul) │ رفه عن نفسه to relax, find
recreation ( ھ from work); رفع على نفسه to
find recreation
رفه rifh and رفاه rafāh well-being,
welfare; personal ease and comfort; good
living, luxury, comforts of life
رفاھة rafāha, رفاھية rafāhīya
comfortable, luxurious life; luxury;
comfort, comfortableness, coziness;
complete relaxation and ease
ترفيه tarfīh creation of ease and luxury;
habituation to luxury; providing of
comfort and relaxation; recreation;
(mental) relaxation │ ترفيه العيش t. al-‘aiš
good living, comfortable life; قسم الترفيه
qism at-t. recreation department
رفا (رفو ) rafā u (rafw) to darn, mend ( ھ s.th.)
رق raqqa i ( رقة riqqa) to be or become thin,
delicate, fine; to be tender, soft; to be
pure, clear, limpid (water); to soften,
relent ( ل toward s.o.), have pity, feel
compassion, have sympathy ( ل for) │ رق له
قلبه (qalbuhū) he took pity on him II to
make thin. thin out ( ھ s.th.); to refine,
make fine, soft or tender, render delicate (
ھ s.th.); to polish, smooth, make elegant (
ھ one’s speech); to flatten, roll out ( ھ esp.
metal) IV to make thin, line or tender,
render delicate, refine ( ھ s.th.); to soften (
ھ the heart) V to soften, relent ( ل toward
s.o.). have pity, have sympathy ( ل for),
sympathize ( ل with) X to be thin, fine,
delicate; to soften ( ھ s.th.); to enslave,
make a slave ( ھ s.o.)
رق raqq pl. رقوق ruqūq turtle
رق riqq quality or condition of being a
slave, slavery, bondage
رق raqq, riqq parchment; riqq (eg.)
tambourine
رق riqqa thinness; slenderness,
slimness; fineness, delicateness, delicacy;
gentleness, mildness; amiability,
graciousness, friendliness │ رقة الحاشية r.
al-ḥāšiya friendliness, courteousness,
amiability; رقة الشعور sensitivity, delicacy
of feeling, tact; رقة الطبع r. aṭ-ṭab‘
kindness, gentleness, mild temper,
friendliness; رقة المزاج gentleness, mild
temper
رقاق ruqāq flat loaf of bread; O waffles
رقيق raqīq pl. ارقاء ariqqā’ رقاق , 2 riqāq
slave, slaves (sing. and coll.); flat loaf of
bread (mid); thin; slender, slim; line,
delicate; soft. tender, gentle; sensitive,
tactful, discreet, prudent │ تجارة الرقيق slave
trade; رقيق الحال poor, needy; رقيق الحاشية
الحواشي ) ) r. al-ḥāšiya (al-ḥawāšī) friendly,
courteous, civil, amiable; رقيق الشعور
sensitive; رقيق الطبع r. aṭ-ṭab‘ kind, gentle,
mild-tempered, friendly; رقيق المزاج
gentlehearted
رقيقة raqīqa lamina, flake
ارق araqq2 thinner; slimmer; more
delicate
مرقاق mirqāq rolling pin
مرقوق marqūq thin, flaky pastry
رقأ raqa’a a to cease to flow (tears)
رقب raqaba u ( رقوب ruqūb, رقابة raqāba) to
observe, watch, regard attentively ( ھ
s.th.); to supervise, control ( ھ s.th.); to
wait ( ھ for), await ( ھ s.th.); -- ( رقوب
ruqūb) to watch ( ھ over s.th.), guard ( ھ
s.th.); to take into consideration, heed,
observe, respect ( ھ s.th.); to fear ( ه God);
to be on one’s guard, watch out, be careful
│ لا يرقب فيه إلا ولا ذمة (illan wa-lā
dimmatan) to treat s.o. ruthlessly ill to
watch, observe, regard attentively ( ه s.o.,
ھ s.th.), keep an eye ( ھ، ه on); to make
out, detect ( ھ s.th.); to control ھ) 352
s.th., e.g., the traffic, the press, s.o.’s
doings, etc.), supervise ( ھ some work),
have an eye ( ھ on, e.g., on s.o.’s
dealings); to fear ( ه God) │ راقب لله فيه (lit.:
to fear God with regard to s.o.) to treat s.o.
well for fear of God V to expect,
anticipate, await ( ھ s.th.), look forward to
ھ) ), wait, look, look out ( ھ، ه for); to
regard ( ھ s.th.), look ( ھ at s.th.); to lie in
wait ( ه for) VIII to expect, anticipate ( ھ
s.th.)
رقبة riqba observation; control;
attention; caution, wariness; vigilance,
watchfulness
رقبة raqaba pl. -āt, رقاب riqāb neck; --
(pl. رقاب ) slave; (īsl. Law) person │O رقبة
جسر r. jisr bridgehead; صلب الرقبة ṣulb ar-r.
stubborn, obstinate, obstreperous; غليظ
الرقبة do.; ھذا في رقابھم responsibility for it
rests on their shoulders; أخذ بعضھم برقاب
بعض akada ba‘ḍuhum bi-r. ba‘ḍin to
follow in close succession
رقوب ruqūb anticipation, expectation
رقيب raqīb pl. رقباء ruqabā’2 vigilant,
watchful; guardian, keeper, warden;
watcher, observer, lookout; spy; overseer,
supervisor, inspector; controller, control
officer; postal censor; sergeant (Syr., mil.)
│ رقيب اول (awwal) approx.: staff sergeant
(Syr., mil.)
رقبى ruqbā donation with the proviso
that it shall either revert to the donor after
the donee’s death or become the property
of the donee upon death of the donor (Isl.
Law)
رقابة raqāba supervision, control;
censorship (of the press)
رقوبة raqūba and راقوبة rāqūba (eg.) nest
egg
مرقب marqab and مرقبة marqaba lofty
observation post, lookout; watchtower; O
observatory
مرقب mirqab telescope
مراقبة murāqaba observation;
supervision; surveillance; inspection;
control; censorship (of the Press); mail
censorship; superintendency,
controllership; zone of inspection
ترقب taraqqub expectation, anticipation
ارتقاب irtiqāb expectation, anticipation
مراقب murāqib pl. -ūn observer;
overseer, supervisor, inspector; controller,
control officer; censor; sergeant major,
quartermaster sergeant (Eg. 1939) │ مراقب
تعليم m. ta‘līm a military rank (approx.:
master sergeant; Eg. مراقب تعيين ;( 1939 m.
ta‘yīn a military rank (approx.:
quartermaster sergeant; Eg. مراقب ;( 1939
مدني (madanī) title of a high local official
(Mor., Tun.); مراقب الخطوط linesman
(soccer)
رقد raqada u (raqd, رقود ruqūd, رقاد ruqād) to
sleep, be asleep; to go to bed; to lie down
to rest; to lie; to rest; to abate, subside, let
up, calm down (e.g., a storm); to be down,
be flagging; to be dull, listless (market) │
رقد على البيض (baiḍ) to sit on the eggs (hen)
II to put ( ه s.o.) to sleep; to make ( ه s.o.)
lie down; to put ( ه s.o.) to bed; to lay
down, stretch out ( ه s.o.) IV to put to sleep
ه) s.o.); to put to bed ( ه a child)
رقدة raqda sleep; manner of lying, lying
position
رقاد ruqād sleep; recumbency,
recumbent position
رقود ruqūd sleep; recumbency,
recumbent position; sleeping, sleep (pl. of
the active participle)
راقود rāqūd pl. رواقيد rawāqīd2 large jug
مرقد marqad pl. مراقد marāqid2 bed;
couch; resting place; mausoleum
ترقيد tarqīd (eg.) layerage (hort.) │ ترقيد
البيض t. al-baiḍ hatching of the eggs 353
ترقيد tarqīd (tarqīd) layer (hort.)
راقد rāqid pl. رقد ruqqad, رقود ruqūd
sleeping, asleep; lying, reclining,
recumbent; resting; quiet, dull, listless
(market)
مرقد muraqqid somniferous, lulling; pl.
مرقدات soporifics
رقرق raqraqa to mix. dilute ( ھ wine with
water) II taraqraqa to overflow ( بالدموع
with tears; eyes), be bathed ( بالدموع in
tears); to glitter, glisten, sparkle: to stir
gently, breathe (wind)
رقراق raqrāq bathed (in tears), moist,
misty (eyes); glittering, glistening; radiant,
brilliant, resplendent
رقارق raqāriq not deep, shallow (water)
رقش raqaša u to variegate, make multicolored
ھ) s.th.) II do.; to adorn, embellish,
decorate ( ھ s.th.)
ارقش arqaš2 variegated, multicolored,
colorful
O مرقاش mirqāš pl. مراقيش marāqīš2
brush (of the painter)
رقص raqaṣ u (raqṣ) to dance; to prance (horse;
على to a tune) │ رقص فرحا (faraḥan) to
dance with joy II to make ( ھ s.o.) dance;
to set ( ھ s.th.) in a swinging motion; to
make ( ھ the heart) tremble │ رقص الحناجر
(prop.: to make the throats tremble) to
provoke loud laughter III to dance ( ھا with
a girl) IV = II; VI to move; to dance; to
prance; to tremble (heart)
رقص raqṣ dancing, dance │ معلم الرقص
mu‘allim ar-r. dancing instructor
رقصة raqṣa (n. vic.) pl. raqaṣāt dance
رقاص raqqāṣ (professional) dancer;
pendulum (phys.; also of a timepiece)
رقاصة female dancer; dancing girl,
danseuse; ballerina
مرقص marqaṣ, pl. مراقص marāqiṣ2
dance hall, ballroom; dance, ball
راقص rāqiṣ dancer; dance, dancing
(used attributively) │ حفلة راقصة (ḥafla)
dance, ball; موسيقى راقصة dance music; ليلة
راقصة (laila) dancing party
راقصة rāqiṣa pl. -āt female dancer; O
kneecap, patella
مراقصة murāqiṣa (female) dancing
partner
رقط II to speckle, spot ( ھ s.th.)
ارقط arqaṭ2 speckled, spotted; leopard
رقع raqa‘a a (raq‘) to patch ( ھ a garment); --
raqu‘a u ( رقاعة raqā‘a) to be stupid II =
raqa‘a
رقعة ruq‘a pl. رقع ruqa‘, رقاع riqā‘
patch; piece of cloth; piece of land, terrain
or ground; area; lot, plot of land; ground
(of a flag); chessboard; slip of paper, piece
of paper; note, brief message; ticket;
coupon; bond, security; a cursive style of
calligraphy
رقيع raqī‘ stupid, silly, foolish;
impudent, impartment, shameless; (pl.
ارقعة arqi‘a) firmament
رقاعة raqā‘a stupidity, foolishness folly
مرقعة marqa‘a and مرقعية marqa‘īya
tatters, rags
ترقيع tarqī‘ patching │ ترقيع القرنية t. alqarnīya
transplantation of the cornea
(mid.)
مرقعات muraqqa‘āt fragments
رقم raqama u (raqm) to write ( ھ s.th.);
to point, provide with points ( ھ a text); to
brand ( ھ a hone); to imprint ( ھ a trace, a
mark); to mark ( ھ s.th.); to stripe ( ھ a
fabric); to number ( ھ s.th.) II to point,
provide with points ( ھ a text); to stripe,
streak ( ھ s.th.); to rule ( ھ s.th.); to number
ھ) s.th.) 354
رقم raqm pl. ارقام arqām numeral;
number, No. │ الأرقام الھندية (hindīya) the
numerals of the Arabs; رقم القياس r. alqiyās
or رقم قياسي (qiyāsī) record (athlet.),
سجل رقما قياسيا (sajjala) to set a record
(athlet.)
رقيم raqīm inscription tablet; letter,
message
مرقم mirqam pl. مراقم marāqim2 drawing
pencil, crayon; (painter’s) brush
ترقم tarqīm pointing; numbering,
numeration
مرقم marqūm pl. مراقم marāqīm2 striped
blanket
رقوص II taraqwaṣa (syr.) to toss, fling o.s.
about
رقى raqiya a (raqy, ruqīy) to ascend ( الى or في
s.th. or to s.th.); to climb, mount, scale ( ھ
s.th.); to rise (in rank), advance, he
promoted; to date back, go hack ( الى to a
bygone era); رقي به to lead s.o. up; to
further, promote, encourage s.th.; - raqa i
رقية) ruqya) to use magic or incantations ( ه
on s.o., من against s.th.) II to cause to
ascend; to promote ( ه s.o.); to raise,
further, promote, advance ( ھ s.th.) V to
ascend, rise, advance, progress VIII to
ascend, rise; to ascend ( ھ s.th.; also. e.g.,
العرش al-‘arša the throne), climb ( ھ s.th.,
on s.th., also العربة al-‘araba into the
carriage); to advance, he promoted ( الى
منصب ilā manṣib to an office); to rise,
increase ( الى to the number of); to
advance, rise, show an upward trend,
develop upward; to date hack. go hack ( الى
to a given time)
رقي ruqīy rise, progress, upward
development; الرقي به promotion,
encouragement, furtherance of s.th.
رقية ruqya pl. رقى ruqan spell, charm,
magic; incantation
رقاء raqqā’ magician, sorcerer
ارقى arqā higher, superior; more
advanced, more progressed
مرقاة marqāh pl. مراق marāqin stairs,
staircase; O elevator, lift
ترقية tarqiya raising; -- (pl. -āt)
promotion (in rank); elevation; promotion,
furtherance, encouragement,
advancement; extension, development,
improvement
ترق taraqqin pl. taraqqiyāt ascension;
ascent; advance, advancement; progress,
rise, progressive development
ارتقاء irtiqā‘ climbing, mounting;
ascension; ascent; progress, rise,
progressive development │ ارتقاء العرش irt.
al-‘arš accession to the throne
راق rāqin ascending, rising; high, highranking;
superior, high-grade, high-class,
of high standard; educated. refined;
advanced │ الطبقة الراقية (ṭabaqa) the upper
class
راق rāqin pl. رقاة ruqāh magician,
sorcerer
مرتق murtaqin high, superior, advanced
(esp. intellectually)
مرتقى murtaqan ascent, rise
رك 1 rakka i (rakk, ركة rikka, ركاكة rakāka) to
be weak, feeble; to be poor, meager,
scanty; -- u (rakk): رك الشيء في عنقه (fī
‘unuqihī) to saddle s.o. with the
responsibility for s.th., thrust s.th. upon
s.o.
ركة rikka weakness feebleness
ركيك rakīk pl. ركاك rikāk, رككة rakaka
weak, feeble; thin; colorless, pallid (e.g.,
style); scanty, meager, poor, pitiful
ركاك rukāk weak, feeble
ركاكة rakāka weakness, feebleness;
lowliness; inadequacy, poorness;
colorlessness, pallor (e.g., of style) 355
ركة 2 rukka distaff │ طب الركة ṭibb ar-r. (eg.)
popular treatment of illnesses by means of
charms and incantations, practiced by
women
ركب rakiba a ( ركوب rukūb) to ride ( ھ an
animal); to mount ( ھ an animal); to go,
travel ( ھ in a carriage, in an automobile,
on a train, on board a ship, etc.), ride ( ھ in
a vehicle, on a bicycle); to get, climb ( ھ
into a carriage, on a bicycle, etc.), board (
ھ a train, an airplane, a ship, etc.); to
pursue ( ه s.o.), be after s.o. ( ب with s.th.);
to engage ( ھ in), embark ( ھ on); to
commit, perpetrate ( ھ a sin, a crime); to
master ( ھ s.th.) │ ركب البحر (baḥr) to
travel by sea; ركبا الحياة (ḥayāh) to master
life; ركب الخطر (kaṭar) to embark on a
risky undertaking; ركب خيوله الحربية
(kuyūlahū l-ḥarbīya) to get on one’s high
horse; ركب ذنب الريح (danaba r-rīḥ) to
speed along like the wind; ركب رأسه
(ra’sahū) to act at one’s disoretion; to act
rashly, follow a whim; ركب السيارة
(sayyāra) to go by car, travel in an
automobile; ركب الشطط (šaṭaṭ) to commit
excesses, go too far; ركب الطيارة (ṭayyāra)
to fly, go by plane; ركب متن العنف (matna
l-‘unf) to commit acts of violence; ركب
مركب الخطل (markaba l-kaṭal) to make a
foolish mistake, commit a folly; to embark
on a reckless course, do irresponsible
things; ركب مطية الإخفاق (maṭīyata l-ikfāq)
to back the wrong horse, be on the losing
side, fail; ركب الأھوال (ahwāl) to defy the
horrors; ركب الھواء (hawā’) to fly, travel by
air; ركب ھواه (hawāhu) to follow one’s
whim II to make ( ه s.o.) ride; to put, place,
fasten, mount ( ھ على s.th. on); to fit,
mount, insert, set ( ھ في s.th. in. e.g., a
precious stone in a ring); to build in ( ھ a
machine part); to assemble ( ھ e.g., the
parts of an apparatus); to set up ( ھ a
machine); to install ( ھ s.th.; techn.), lay ( ھ
an electric line, and the like); to assemble,
put together, fit together ( ھ s.th.); to
make, prepare ( ھ s.th. out of several
components or ingredients); to construct,
build ( ھ e.g., a technical apparatus) IV to
make ( ه s.o.) ride or mount │ اركبه رأسه
وھواه (ra’sahū wa-hawāhu) to let s.o. have
his head, let s.o. do as he pleases V to be
composed, be made up, consist ( من of) VI
to be superimposed one upon another VIII
to commit, perpetrate ( ھ a sin, a crime); to
pursue, practice ( ھ s.th. │ ارتكب شططا
(šaṭaṭan) to overdo s.th., go too far
ركب rakb riders, horsemen, cavalcade;
caravan; traveling party; retinue, escort;
procession, troop (of people)
ركبة rukba pl. ركب rukab, -āt knee │ ابو
الركب abū r-rukab dengue, breakbone
fever (med.)
ركاب rikāb pl. ركب rukub stirrup; (pl.
-āt, ركب rukub, ركائب rakā’ib2) riding
Camel, riding animal, mount │ حل ركابه
بأرضنا ḥalla rikābuhū bi-arḍinā he has
arrived on our soil; ھو في ركابه he is his
loyal follower, he doge his footsteps; سار
في ركابه do.; to cling to s.o.’s heels, be
blindly subservient to s.o.
ركوب rakūb mount, riding animal
ركوبة rakūba pl. ركائب rakā’ib2 mount,
female riding camel
ركوب rukūb (horseback, camelback,
etc.) riding; traveling (in a vehicle, by sea,
by air, etc.); mounting (of a bicycle, of a
horse, etc.), boarding (of a train, of a ship,
etc.) │ ركوب البحر r. al-baḥr navigation;
ركوب الھواء r. al-hawā’ flying, aviation
ركاب rakkāb one who rides frequently,
(professional) horseman or rider, jockey
ركبان rukbān retinue, escort │ ذكره سار به
الركبان (dikruhū) approx.: his fame has
spread far and wide 356
مركب markab pl. مراكب marāk2 ship,
boat, vessel │ مركب بخاري (bukārī)
steamship, steamer; مرك ī حربي (ḥarbī)
warship, man-of-war; مركب دوري (daurī)
patrol boat; مركب شراعي (širā‘ī) sailing
vessel, sailboat; مركب لصيد m. aṣ-ṣaid
fishing smack, trawler; مركب النقل m. annaql
freighter, transport
مركبة markaba pl. -āt vehicle; carriage,
cab
مراكبى marākibī pl. marākibīya
boatman; ferryman
تركيب tarkīb pl. -āt, تراكيب tarākīb2
fitting in, insertion, setting; building in;
fastening, mounting; assembling,
assembly; final assembly; installation
(e.g., of a telephone extension);
composition; making, preparation (out of
several components or ingredients);
construction, building (techn.); structure;
constitution, build, physique; -- (pl. تراكيب
tarākīb2) phrase, idiom; construction
(gram.)
تركيبي tarkībī constructive,
constructional
ارتكاب irtikāb perpetration (of a sin or
crime)
راكب rākib riding, on horseback,
mounted; riding, traveling (in a vehicle);
(pl. ركاب rukkāb, ركبان rukbān) rider,
horseman; (pl. ركاب rukkāb) passenger,
occupant (of a conveyance) │ راكب دراجة r.
darrāja cyclist
مركوب markūb pl. مراكيب marākīb2
riding animal, mount; (eg., syr.) redleather
shoes │ ابو مركوب abū m. (eg.)
shoebill (Balaeniceps rex; zool.)
مركبات murakkabāt components,
constituents, elements, ingredients (esp.
chem.)
مركب murakkab mounted, fastened,
fixed ( على on); fitted, inserted, set ( في in);
built-in; assembled; made up, composed,
consisting ( من of); compound. composite;
complex; bound, not free; -- (pl. -āt)
composition; a compound (chem.); a
composite; a complex (psychol.);
medication, medicament │ ربح مركب (ribḥ)
compound interest; مركب كيميائي (kīmiyā’ī)
chemical compound; مركب نقص m. naqṣ
inferiority complex
مرتكب murtakib perpetrator (of a crime)
ركد rakada u ( ركود rukūd) to be motionless,
still, stagnant
ركود rukūd suspension, standstill,
stagnation; sluggishness; stillness,
tranquility
راكد rākid stagnant; sluggish
ركز rakaza u i (rakz) to plant or ram in the
ground, set up ( ھ s.th., e.g., a pole); to fix,
embed firmly ( ھ s.th.) II to plant or ram in
the ground, set up, ( ھ s.th., e.g., a pole); to
position, emplace ( ھ s.th.); to fix, embed
firmly ( ھ s.th.); to cause to take root,
naturalize ( ھ s.th.); to concentrate ( ھ s.th.,
also one’s thoughts, في on) V to
concentrate; تركز tarakkaz ready! (starter’s
command; athlet.) VIII to be implanted; to
settle permanently, stay ( في at a place); to
lean, support one’s weight ( على or الى on);
to he fastened, be mounted ( على on); to be
based, rest ( على on); to concentrate ( في
on); to gravitate ( في to)
ركز rikz sound, tone
ركزة rakza pause, rest, break
ركاز rikāz pl. اركزة arkiza, ركزان rikzān
precious minerals, buried treasures of the
earth
ركيزة rakīza pl. ركائز rakā’iz2 treasure;
support, brace, shore, stanchion; pillar,
pier; post, pile; shoring
مركز markaz pl. مراكز marākiz2
foothold; stand, station; place where s.o. is
posted or stationed; post; (police, etc.) 357
station; office, branch office (com.);
locality where s.th. takes place, scene,
site, seat; position (mil.); headquarters;
main office, central office; central
exchange (telephone); center (of a circle
and fig.); focus; markaz, an administrative
district (subdivision of a mudīrīya, Eg.);
position, situation, office, post; (social,
financial, official, etc.) status, standing;
power, position (of a country); situation │
مركز اساسي (asāsī) starting point, basis;
مركز البوليس police station; مراكز حيوية
(ḥayawīya) vital centers; مركز الإدارة m. alidāra
main office, central office,
headquarters; مركز الداء m. ad-dā’ the seat
of the disease O مركز الإذاعة m. al-idā‘a
broadcasting station; مركز رئيسي main
office, headquarters; مركز الرياسة m. arriyāsa
central command post; مركز رياسة
الجيش m. riyāsat al-jaiš Supreme
Command of the Army (Eg.); مركز رعاية
الطفل m. ri‘āyat aṭ-ṭifl health center for
children (Eg.); مركز السكة الحديدية m. assikka
al-ḥadīdīya railroad junction; مركز
الشرطة m. aš-šurṭa police station; مركز نيابي
(niyābī) parliamentary seat, mandate; O
مركز التوليد power station
مركزي markazī central; district (used
attributively); لامركزي O centrifugal;
decentralized (administration)
مركزية markazīya centralism; centrality,
central position or situation; لامركزية
decentralization
تركيز tarkīz setting up; installation;
implantation, establishment,
naturalization; concentration │ جھاز
التركيز jahāz at-t. stabilizer (tech.)
تراكز tarākuz concentricity
ارتكاز irtikāz support
مركز murakkaz concentrated,
centralized; O condensed
متراكز mutarākiz concentric
ركس VIII to suffer a setback, be thrown back;
to decline, degenerate, be degenerate; to
become stunted, atrophy
ركض rakaḍa u (rakḍ) to race, rush, run; to run
away; to gallop (intrans., said of a horse,
and trans. ھ a horse) III to race ( ه s.o.), run
a race ( ه with) VI to compete in a race; to
run fast
ركاض rakkāḍ runner, racer
ركوض rakūḍ fast-running, swift
ركع raka‘a a ( ركوع rukū‘) to bend the body,
bow (esp. in prayer); to kneel down, drop
to one’s knees II and IV to make ( ه s.o.)
kneel down
ركعة rak‘a pl. raka’āt a bending of the
torso from an upright position, followed
by two prostrations (in Muslim prayer
ritual)
راكع rāki‘ pl. ركع rukka‘ bowing to the
ground
ركل rakala u (rakl) to kick ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.)
ركلة rakla (n. vic.) kick
ركم fJ rakama u (rakm) to pile up, heap up,
accumulate, amass ( ھ s.th.) VI to
accumulate, be heaped up; to pile up,
gather (clouds) VIII = VI
ركم rakam pile, heap
ركام rukām pile, heap; lump; cumulus
clouds
O مركم markam pl. مراكم marākim2
storage battery
تراكم tarākum accumulation
ركن rakana u ( ركون rukūn) and rakina a to
lean, support one’s weight ( الى on); to
quiet down, become or be calm, to trust (
الى in), rely ( الى on); to be dependent, have
to rely ( الى on) │ ركن الى الھدوء to remain
calm IV to trust ( الى s.o.), rely ( الى on),
place one’s confidence ( الى in); to resort (
الى to) │ يركن اليه (yurkanu) 358 reliable,
dependable. trustworthy VIII to lean,
recline, support one's weight ( الى or على
on)
ركن rukn pl. اركان arkān support, prop;
corner; nook; basis, basic element, first
principle; pl. اركان staff (mil.); basic
elements, chief elements │ اركان الحرب a.
al-ḥarb general staff (mil.); اركان الجيش a.
al-jaiš do.; رئيس اركان الجيش chief of
general staff; وثيق الأركان of strong build,
sturdy
ركنى ruknī: ضربة ركنية (ḍarba) corner
kick (soccer)
ركين rakīn firm, steady, confident,
imperturbable; grave, calm, sedate
ركون rukūn reliance, confidence, trust
مركن mirkan pl. مراكن marākin2 washtub
مراكنة murākana (tun.) betrothal,
engagement
اركان arkān reliance, confidence, trust
ركوة rakwa pl. rakawāt (syr.) small coffee pot
of copper. having a long handle
رم ramma u i (ramm, مرمة maramma) to repair,
overhaul ( ھ s.th.); -- i (ramm, رمة rimma)
to decay; to rot II to decay; to rot V to be
repaired, undergo repair
رم ramm repair
رم ramm: رم الأسنان r. al-asnān caries
(med.)
رمة rimma cadaver
برمته bi-rummatihī whole, complete,
entire │ سورية برمتھا all Syria
رميم ramīm decayed, rotten; رمائم
ramā’im2 decaying bones
رمام rumām decayed, rotten
مرمة maramma pl. -āt repair; shipyard
(Tun.)
ترميم tarmīm pl. -āt repair, overhauling,
restoration
رمث ramal pl. ارماث armā~ log raft
رمح ramaḥa a (ramḥ) to pierce, transfix (with
a lance; ه s.o.); to gallop (horse)
رمح rumḥ pl. رماح rimāḥ, ارماح armāḥ
lance, pike; spear, javelin; pole │ رمي الرمح
ramy ar-r. javelin throwing (athlet.)
رماح rammāḥ pl. ة lancer; uhlan
السماك الرامح as-simāk ar-rāmiḥ Arcturus
(astron.)
رمد ramida a (ramad) to have sore eyes; to be
inflamed (eye) II to burn to ashes,
incinerate ( ھ s.th.) V to burn to ashes,
become ashes
رمد ramad ophthalmia, inflammation of
the eyes; eye disease │ رمد حبيبي (ḥubaibī)
trachoma, granular conjunctivitis; مستشفى
الرمد muštašfā r-r. eye clinic
رمدي ramadī and طبيب رمدي
ophthalmologist, oculist
رمد ramid sore-eyed
ارمد armad2 sore-eyed
رماد ramād pl. ارمدة armida ashes │
اربعاء الرماد arbi‘ā’ ar-r. or يوم الرماد yaum
ar-r. or عيد الرماد ‘īd ar-r. Ash Wednesday
(Chr.); نفخ في الرماد (lit.: to blow into cold
ashes, i.e.) to engage in futile
undertakings, set out on a wild-goose
chase
رمادي ramādī ashen, ash-colored, ashgray
ترميد tarmīd cremation, incineration
رمز ramaza u i (ramz) to make a sign, to wink,
nod, motion; to point ( الى to), indicate ( الى
s.th.); to symbolize, represent or express
symbolically ( الى s.th.); to designate ( ل ب
or الى s.th. with a distinguishing mark)
رمز ramz pl. رموز rūmūz sign, nod, wink,
motion; hint; allusion, intimation;
allegory; riddle; symbol. symbolic figure,
emblem, character; secret sign, code sign
359
رمزي ramzī symbolic(al}; in code, in
cipher
رمزيات ramzīyāt cipher, code
راموز rāmūz pl. روامز rawāmīz2
specimen, sample; O facsimile
رمس ramasa i u (rams) to bury ( ه s.o.); to
cover, efface, wipe out ( ھ tracks) VIII
ارتمس في الماء to be immersed in water
رمس rams pl. رموس rumūs, ارماس armās
grave, tomb
راموس rāmūs grave, tomb
رمش ramaša i u to take with the fingertips ( ھ
s.th.); to wink, blink
رمش ramaš inflammation of the
eyelids, conjunctivitis
رمشة ramša blink, wink
رمش rimš pl. رموش rumūš eyelashes
رمص ramaṣ white secretion (of the eye)
رمض VIII to be consumed by grief and sorrow
رمض ramaḍ parchedness, scorchedness
(esp. of the ground due to excessive heat)
رمضاء ramḍā’2 sun-baked ground │
استجار من الرمضاء بالنار approx.: to jump out
of the frying pan into the fire
رمضان ramaḍān2 Ramadan, the ninth
month of the Muslim calendar
رمق ramaqa u (ramq) to regard ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), glance, look ( ھ، ه at) II to stare,
gaze ( ھ، ه at); to perform ( ھ work)
perfunctorily and negligently, botch ( ھ a
job); to keep ( ه s.o.) barely alive V to wait
ھ) for an opportunity, and the like)
رمق ramaq pl. ارماق armāq (last) spark
of life, breath of life │ سد رمقه sadda
ramaqahū to keep s.o. or o.s. barely alive,
eke out a living, manage to keep body and
soul together; to provide s.o. with a bare
existence; to allay s.o.’s hunger; على آخر
رمق ‘alā ākiri ramaqin at the point of
death; on the verge of exhaustion, on
one’s last legs
مرموق marmūq regarded, looked at;
noted, of note; remarkable, notable,
significant, important; lofty, proud
رمك armak2, f. رمكاء ramkā’ 2 ashen, ash-gray
رمكة ramak pl. -āt, رماك rimāk, ارماك
armāk mare
رمل II to sprinkle with sand ( ھ s.th., so as to
blot it) IV to become a widower or a
widow V = IV
رمل raml pl. رمال rimāl sand │ علم الرمل
‘ilm ar-r. or ضرب الرمل ḍarb ar-r.
geomancy (divination by means of figures
or lines in the sand)
رملي ramlī sandy, sabulous; sand- (in
compounds) │ ساعة رملية sandglass,
hourglass
رمل ramal name of a poetical meter
رمال rammāl geomancer
ارمل armal2 pl. ارامل arāmil2 widower
ارملة armala pl. ارامل arāmil اراملة , 2
arāmila widow
مرملة marmala sandbox
ترمل tarammul widow(er)hood
رمان 1 rummān (coll.; n. un. ة) pomegranate;
رمانة knob, pommel; (pl. -āt), رمانة يدوية
(yadawīya) hand grenade
ارمن 2 and ارمنى look up alphabetically
رمى 1 ramā i (ramy, رماية rimāya) to throw, cast
ھ، ب) s.th.); to fling, hurl ( ھ، ب s.th.); to
toss away, throw down ( ھ، ب s.th.); to
throw aside, toss aside, discard, lay aside (
ھ، ب s.th.); to shoot, fire; to pelt, hit,
bombard ( ھ ه s.o. with) shoot, fire ( ه ب at
s.o. with); to charge ( ب ه s.o. with), accuse
ه ب) s.o. of), blame) 360 reproach ( ب ه s.o.
for); to aim, drive, be aimed ( الى at), have
in view, purpose, intend ( الى s.th.), be out
for ( الى ); with بين to sow dissension among
or between │ رماه بطلق نارى (ṭalaq) he fired
a shot at him; رمى بالغيب (gaib) to practice
divination VI to pelt one another; to throw
o.s. to the ground, prostrate o.s., fall to the
ground; to throw o.s., fling o.s. ( على on);
to plunge, rush, throw o.s. ( في into s.th.);
to be vast, extend far into the distance; to
come, get (information, report, news; الى
to s.o.) │ ترامى على قدميه (qadamaihi) to
throw o.s. at s.o.’s foot; ترامى بين ذراعيه
(dirā‘aihī) to throw o.s. into s.o.’s arms;
عاطفة ترامى به عھدھا (‘ahduhā) a fooling that
he had known long, long ago, a fooling
which lay far behind him; ترامى الينا ان we
have received word that ... VIII to throw
o.s. ( على on, e.g., on the bed, on or to the
ground); to fling o.s., fall ( على upon s.o.),
throw o.s., plunge ( في into s.th.); to have
fallen down and lie prostrate; to lie,
sprawl ( على on) │ ارتمى الى الأرض to fall to
the ground, tumble
رمي ramy (act or process of) throwing,
flinging, shooting, etc. │ رمي الحربة r. al-
ḥarba javelin throwing, رمي القرص r. alqurṣ
discus throwing (athlet.); اعدام رميا
بالرصاص i‘dām ramyan bi-r-raṣāṣ
execution before a firing squad
رمية ramya (n. vic.) throw, toss, fling;
shot │ رب رمية من غير رام rubba ramyatin
min gairi rāmin many a shot is without a
(skilled) marksman (proverbially, of
unexpected or undeserved success)
رمية ramīya pl. رمايا ramāyā game
animal (being shot at or already killed)
مرمى marman pl. مرام marāmin aim,
end, purpose; goal (athlet.); range (of a
gun); reach, extent │ حارس المرمى goalkeeper;
مرمى النظر m. an-naẓar range of
vision, field of vision
ترام tarāmin vastness, expanse │ ترامى
الأطراف vast expanse, vastness
رام rāmin pl. رماة rumāh throwing;
thrower, hurler; marksman; rifleman (Syr.,
mil.) │ الرامي Sagittarius (astron.); سھم
الرامي sahm ar-r. Sagitta (astron.); رامي
اللھيب flame thrower
مترام mutarāmin wide, extensive │
مترامي الأطراف vast, huge
رامية 2 look up alphabetically
رن ranna i ( رنين ranīn) to cry, wail, lament; to
resound; to echo; to ring
رنة ranna pl. -āt scream; sound;
reverberation, echo
رنين ranīn lament, wailing; sound;
reverberation, echo; resonance; ring
رنان rannān and مرنان mirnān ringing,
resounding; resonant; reverberating,
echoing
O رنانة rannāna tuning fork (mus.)
ارنب and ارنبة look up alphabetically
رنح II to make dizzy, make stagger, send
reeling ( ه s.o.); to sway ( ھ s.th.) │ رنح
اعطافه (a‘ṭāfahū) to work up s.o.’s feelings,
send s.o. into a frenzy V to stagger, reel,
totter, sway; to shake, rock │ ترنحت اعطافه
(a‘tāfuhū) to get into one’s stride, become
ecstatic, be carried away; to be beside o.s.
مرنحة marnaḥa prow (of a ship)
رندح randaḥa to scan (verse)
رنق II to cloud, muddy ( ھ water); to blur, dim
ھ) the eyes; said of sleep); to halt, stop,
stop over, stay; to look, glance ( نحو toward
or at s.th.) │ رنق النظر الى (naẓara) to keep
looking at, stare at
رنق ranq turbid, clouded (water)
رونق raunaq glamor, splendor, beauty
361
رنم II and V to sing ( ب a song); to intone ( ب a
song); to recite in a singsong voice, chant
ب) s.th.)
ترنيمة tarnīma pl. ترانم tarānim2 hymn,
anthem; song; a kind of chanting
recitation; little story recited in a singsong
voice; little song
رنا (رنو ) ranā u to gaze, look ( الى at s.th.)
رنى II and IV to please delight ( ه s.o.)
رھب rahaba a (rahab, ruhb, رھبة rahba) to he
frightened, be afraid; to fear, dread ( ه s.o.)
│ رھب جانبه see جانب II to frighten, scare,
alarm, intimidate ( ه s.o.) IV = II; to
terrorize ( ه s.o.) V to threaten ( ه s.o.); to
become a monk, enter monastic life (Chr.)
رھبة rahba fear, fright, alarm, terror;
awe
رھبى rahbā, ruhbā fear
رھبوب rahbūb great fear, fright, terror
رھيب rahīb dreadful, awful, fearful,
terrible; solemn, grave
ترھيب tarhīb intimidation
ارھاب irhāb intimidation, frightening;
threatening; terror, terrorism (pol.);
sabotage
ارھابي irhābī terrorist(ic); sabotage
(used attributively); (pl. -ūn) terrorist
ترھب tarahhub monasticism, monastic
life (Chr.)
راھب rāhib pl. رھبان ruhbān monk
(Chr.)
راھبة rāhiba pl. -āt nun (Chr.)
مرھوب marhūb terrible, dreadful
رھبن II tarahbana to become a monk,
enter monastic life (Chr.)
رھبنة rahbana and رھبانية rahbānīya
monasticism; monastic order,
congregation (Chr.)
رھج rahj, rahaj dust
رھط rahaṭa a to gobble, gulp greedily
رھط rahṭ, rahaṭ pl. ارھاط arhāṭ, ارھط
arhuṭ, اراھط arāhiṭ اراھيط , 2 arāhīṭ2 group
(of people), band, troop
رھط rahṭ pl. رھاط rihāṭ leather loincloth
رھف rahufa u ( رھافة rahāfa) to be thin; to be
sharp (sword); -- rahafa a (rahf) and IV to
make thin ( ھ s.th.); to make sharp,
sharpen ( ھ s.th., esp. fig.) │ ارھف الأذن
(udn) to prick up one’s ears ( لفلان so as to
catch the words of s.o.), (رھف السمع ل (الى
(sam‘) to listen closely to
رھف rahif thin
رھيف rahīf thin; slender, slim;
sharpened, sharp
ارھاف irhāf sharpening
مرھف murhaf thin, fine; sharpened,
sharp │ مرھف الحس m. al-ḥ. delicate,
sensitive
رھق rahiqa a (rahaq) to come over s.o. or s.th.
ھ، ه) ), overtake ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) III to
approach ( ھ an age); to approach the age
of sexual maturity; to be adolescent IV to
bring down ( ھ ه upon s.o. s.th.), make ( ه
s.o.) undergo or suffer ( ھ s.th.); to
oppress, burden, overburden ( ه s.o., ب
with s.th.), lie heavily, bear down ( ه on
s.o.) │ ارھقه جذبا (jadban) to tug at s.o.
violently or too violently
مراھقة murāhaqa puberty
ارھاق irhāq pressure, oppression;
suppression; heavy load (e.g., of work)
مراھق murāhiq adolescent
مرھق murhiq oppressive (burden, heat)
رھل rahila a to be flabby, soft; to be
bloated, fat (flesh, body) V do.
راھل rāhil flaccid, flabby, soft, ترھل 362
tarahhul obesity, fatness
مترھل mutarahhil flaccid, flabby, soft;
bloated, fat
رھمة rihma pl. رھم riham, رھام rihām drizzle,
lasting fine rain
مرھم marham pl. مراھم marāhim2 salve,
ointment; cream, cold cream; pomade
رھن rahana a (rahn) to pawn, deposit as
security ( ھ s.th., عند or ه with s.o.); to
mortgage ( ھ real estate) III to bet, lay a
wager ( ه with s.o., على on, that ... ) IV to
deposit in pledge, give as a security, pawn
ھ) s.th.) VIII to receive or take in pledge,
as a security ( ھ من s.th. from s.o.); to
pawn, deposit in pledge ( ھ s.th.); to make
ھ) s.th.) subject ( ب to), make ( ھ s.th.)
conditional ( ب on); pass.: urtuhina to be
subject ( ب to) │ ارتھن نفسه ب (nafsahū) to
pledge o.s. or dedicate o.s. to the cause of
X to demand as a security ( ه ھ from s.o.
s.th.)
رھن rahn pawning, mortgaging,
pledging; -- (pl. رھون ruhūn, رھونات
ruhūnāt, رھان rihān) pawn, pledge;
security ( ب for s.th.); hostage; mortgage.
hypothec; رھن ب depending on,
conditional on, subject to; -- rahna (prep.)
pending; depending on, conditional on;
subject to, liable to │ محل رھونات maḥall r.
pawnshop; رھن اشارته rahna išāratihī at
s.o.’s beck and call; رھن سيطرته r.
saiṭaratihī under s.o.’s power or
dominion; ھذا رھن ذاك this depends on that;
المسألة رھن اھتمامه al-mas’ala r. ihtimāmihī
the problem is being given every attention
by him; اودع السجن رھن التحقيق ūdi‘a s-sijna
rahna t-taḥqīq he was taken into custody
pending investigation
رھنية rahnīya mortgage (deed)
رھين rahīn pawned, mortgaged,
pledged, given as security; held in pledge;
security ( ب for); responsible ( ب for);
subject ( ب to); (prep.) subject to,
depending on │ كان رھينه (rahīnahū) to be
under obligation to s.o.; to be dependent
on s.o.
رھينة rahīna pl. رھائن rahā’in2 pawn,
pledge, security; hostage; mortgage,
hypothec
رھان rihān bet, wager; competition,
contest
مراھنة murāhana pl. -āt bet, wager
راھن rāhin pledger, mortgagor; fixed,
established, certain; lasting, permanent;
current; present, actual │ الظروف الراھنة
present circumstances; الحالة الراھنة the
present condition; the status quo
مرھون marhūn pawned, pledged,
mortgaged, given as security; subject ( ب
to) │ الأمور مرھونة بأوقاتھا (bi-auqātihā) there
is a time for everything
مرتھن murtahan mortgagee, pledgee;
pawnbroker
رھا (رھو 2 ) rahā u (rahw) to amble
رھو rahw quiet, calm, peaceful,
tranquil; stillness, calm, peace, tranquility;
(pl. رھاء rihā’) crane (zool.)
رھوان rahwān ambler (horse); pal-frey
الرھاء 2 ar-ruhā’ the city of Urfa (Gr. Edessa)
رھون rahwana and II tarahwana to amble
(horse)
رھوان see رھو
راب (روب 1 ) rāba u (raub) to curdle (milk) II
and IV to (cause to) curdle ( ھ milk)
روب raub curdled milk, curds
رائب rā’ib curdled (milk)
روب 2 (Fr. robe) rōb pl. ارواب arwāb dressing
gown
روبابيكا (It. roba vecchia) rōbabēkiyā: بائع
الروبابيكيا junk dealer 363
روبصة raubaṣa sleepwalking, somnambulism
تروبص taraubuṣ sleepwalking,
somnambulism
روبل rūbel ruble
روبية rūbīya pl. -āt rupee
روتانية rūtāniyā Ruthenia
راث (روث ) rāta u (raut) to drop dung
روث raut (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. ارواث arwāt
dung, dropping (of horse, camel, and the
like)
راج ( روج 1 ) rāja u ( رواج rawāj) to be spread,
circulate, be current; to find a good
market, sell well, be in demand
(merchandise); to be or become brisk,
pick up (market); to be at band, be
available ( ل for s.o.) II to spread ( ھ
rumors, news, etc.), circulate, put into
circulation ( ھ s.th.; currency, rumors,
news, etc.); to push the sale ( ھ of s.th.),
open a market ( ھ for an article); to sell,
bring on the market ( ھ an article); to
promote, further ( ھ، ل s.th.); to make
propaganda ( ل for), propagate ( ل s.th.)
رواج rawāj circulation; marketability,
salability; sales
اروج arwaj2 more widespread, more
common; better selling
ترويح tarwīj spreading, propagation,
circulation; sale, distribution (of an article
of commerce); promotion, furtherance
رائح rā’ij circulating, current; universal,
widespread, common; salable, marketable,
in demand, selling well (merchandise);
brisk (business market)
روج 2 (Fr.) rūž rouge
روح ) and ريح) راح rāḥa u ( رواح rawāḥ) to go
away, leave, go; (with foll. imperf.) to
begin, set out to do II rawwaḥa to fan
(air); to refresh, animate, revive ( ھ the
heart, the spirits); -- rayyaḥa to give ( ه
s.o.) rest, make ( ه s.o.) relax, make ( ه s.o.)
comfortable, provide rest and recreation ( ه
for s.o.); to rest ( ھ e.g., عينيه one’s eyes) │
روح عن نفسه to find recreation, relax,
amuse o.s. III to go in the evening ( ه to
s.o.); to alternate, vary ( بين between two
things) IV اروح arwaḥa to stink, smell
bad; -- اراح arāḥa to give ( ه s.o.) rest, let (
ھ s.th.) rest; to deliver, release ( من ه s.o.
from); to put ( ه s.o.) at ease, soothe ( ھ the
heart, or the like); to relieve, free ( ه s.o.,
من of), ease ( من ه for s.o. s.th.); to do ( ه
s.o.) a good turn, gladden ( ب ه s.o. with),
make ( ه s.o.) happy ( ب by) │ اراح نفسه من
(nafsahū) to find recreation from, relax
from V to fan o.s. ( بالمروحة bi-l-mirwaḥa
with the fan) VI to fluctuate, alternate,
vary ( بين between; esp. with two figures
following); to intervene, lie ( بين between
two events) VIII to find rest ( من from); to
rest, relax, find recreation; to be satisfied,
be pleased ( الى with s.th.), agree, consent (
الى to s.th.); to like ( ل or الى s.th.), be
happy, be glad ( ل or الى about s.th.) │ ارتاح
للمعروف to be happy to be of service, like
doing favors X استروح to inhale air,
breathe; to smell, sniff ( ھ s.th.); to be
refreshed ( الى by or with s.th.); -- استراح to
be calm; to become calm; to find rest; to
take a rest, have a break; to be refreshed (
الى by or with s.th.); to rest, relax ( من
from); to be delivered, be saved ( من from),
be relieved ( من of); to calm down, relax; to
rely ( الى on); to be happy, be glad ( الى
about), be pleased ( الى with)
راح rāḥ wine
ريح rīḥ f. (occasionally m.) pl. رياح
riyāḥ, ارواح arwāḥ, ارياح aryāḥ wind; fart;
smell, odor │ ابو رياح abū r. weather vane;
scarecrow; سكنت ريحه sakanat rīḥuhū to
expire, become obsolete, fall into
oblivion; ھبت ريحه habbat rīḥuhū 364 he
was in clover, he was in luck’s way; ذھب
مع الريح to go with the wind, vanish
ريح rayyiḥ windy
روح m. and f., pl. ارواح arwāḥ breath of
life, soul; spirit (in all senses); gun barrel
│ روح القدس r. al.quds (qudus), also الروح
القدس the Holy Ghost; لا روح فيه (rūḥa)
spiritless, insipid, inane; خفيف الروح
likable, amiable, charming; ثقيل الروح dull,
boring, unpleasant (person); طويل الروح
long-suffering, patient; حرصا على الروح
(ḥirṣan) dangerâ (on warning signs)
روحي rūḥī spirituous; spiritual; pl. -āt
spiritual things │ حالة روحية state (or frame)
of mind; مشروبات روحية alcoholic
beverages, spirits
روح rauḥ refreshment
روحة rauḥa pl. -āt journey or errand in
the evening
راحة rāḥa rest, repose; recreation; ease,
leisure; vacation; comfort; (pl. -āt, راح
rāḥ) palm of the hand, hand │ بالراحة
leisurely, gently, slowly, at one’s ease; بكل
راحة unhurriedly, leisurely; easily, with
ease; بيت الراحة bait ar-r. water closet,
toilet; اسباب الراحة luxury; معدات الراحة
mu‘iddāt ar-r. conveniences; فترة الراحة
fatrat ar-r. pause, rest, break, recess; راحة
الحلقوم r. al-ḥulqūm Turkish delight; راحة
اليد r. al-yad palm of the hand; راحة القدم r.
al-qadam sole of the foot
ريحة rīḥa smell, odor
روحية rūḥīya spirituality; mentality,
mental attitude, frame of mind
رواح rawāḥ departure; going, leaving;
return, return trip (as opposed to ;(جيئة
rest, repose │ في غدوه ورواحه (gudūwihī)
(lit.: in his coming and going, i.e.) in
everything he did
رياح rayyāḥ pl. -āt (eg.) large irrigation
canal, main canal (in the Egyptian
irrigation system)
اروح arwaḥ2 more calming, more
soothing
اريحي aryaḥī generous, liberal,
openhanded
اريحية aryaḥīya generosity, liberality,
munificence
ريحان raiḥān (coll.) sweet basil
(Ocimum basilicum; bot.); (pl. رياحين
rayāḥīn2) aromatic plants │ قلم الريحان
qalam ar-r. or القلم الريحاني (raiḥānī) a
highly decorative style of Arabic
calligraphy
روحاني rūḥānī spiritual, immaterial;
divine, sacred, holy; (pl. -ūn) clergyman,
minister (Chr.)
روحانية rūḥānīya spirituality;
transfiguration
مراح marāḥ place visited in the
evening; -- murāḥ, also marāḥ pasture;
daytime pasture
مروحة mirwaḥa pl. مراوح marāwiḥ2 fan;
ventilator; O propeller │ المروحة الخوص
(kūṣ) palm-leaf fan; مروحة الخيش m. al-kaiš
punkah, a canvas-covered frame
suspended from the ceiling for fanning a
room
O مرواح mirwāḥ fan; ventilator (mor.)
مرياح miryāḥ causing flatulence (food)
ترويح tarwīḥ fanning; ventilation,
airing; refreshment; diversion, amusement
(also (الترويح عن النفس
ترويحة tarwīḥa: ترويحة نفس t. nafs walk,
stroll
صلاة التراويح ṣalāt at-tarāwīḥ prayer
performed during the nights of Ramadan
ترييح taryīḥ (eg.) installation; fitting in,
insertion
ارتياح irtiyāḥ satisfaction, gratification;
pleasure; joy, delight 365
استرواح istirwāḥ airing, ventilation; air
intake; respiration │ استرواح صدري (ṣadrī)
pneumothorax (med.)
استراحة istirāḥa rest, repose, relaxation,
recreation; - (pl.- at) intermission, recess,
pause, root, break; public resthouse (for
travelers; Eg.)
رائح rā’iḥ: رائح وغاد (gādin) going back
and forth, walking up and down
رائحة rā’iḥ pl. روائح rawā’iḥ2 odor,
smell; fragrance, perfume; pl. روائح
perfumes; flavorings (e.g., those used in
baking)
مريح murīḥ restful, reposeful; calming,
soothing; cozy; comfortable; flatulent │
كرسي مريح (kursī) armchair; club chair,
easy chair
مراح murāḥ see above under marāḥ
مرتاح murtāḥ resting, relaxing; relaxed,
calm, serene; reassured, satisfied, content;
pleased, delighted │ مرتاح البال at ease,
relaxed, serene, tranquil; مرتاح الضمير of
peaceful mind, undisturbed by scruples
مستريح mustarīḥ resting, relaxing;
relaxed, calm, reassured
مستراح mustarāḥ water closet, toilet
راد (رود 2 ) rāda u (raud) to walk about, move
about, prowl; to look, search ( ھ for s.th.)
in to seek to win ( على ه s.o. for s.th.), try to
entice or tempt ( ه على s.o. to do s.th.); to
approach, accost ( ه s.o.); to seek to
alienate or lure away ( ه عن s.o. from); to
attempt to seduce ( ھا a woman) │ راوده عن
نفسه to seek to tempt s.o. IV to want ( ھ
s.th., ان to do s.th.), wish. have a mind, be
willing ( ان to do s.th.); to want to have ( ھ
s.th.), desire, covet ( ھ s.th.), strive ( ھ for
s.th.); to be headed. be bound ( ھ for a
place); to intend ( ھ s.th., ان to do s.th.); to
aim ( الى or من ھ with s.th. at), purpose,
have in view ( من ھ by s.o. s.th.); to drive (
الى at s.th., من with s.th.); to be out ( الى or
ھ for), be bent ( الى or ھ on); to mean ( ه
s.o., ھ s.th., ب by); to have s.o. ( ه) in mind
with s.th. ( ب), aim at s.o. ( ه) with s.th. ( ;(ب
to have (good or evil) designs ( ھ ) on s.o. (
ب), intend or plan to do s.th. ( ھ ) with s.o. (
ب); to be on the point ( ھ or ان of doing
s.th.), be about ( ھ or ان to do s.th.); to
urge, induce, prompt ( ه على s.o. to do s.th.)
│ اراد به ان by this he meant that ...; he
understood it to mean that ...; اراد به خيرا
(kairan) to wish s.o. well; اراد على ان to
seek to induce s.o. to (do s.th.); اراد العاصمة
on his way to the capital; اراد نفسه على الشيء
(nafsahū) he tried to bring himself to do it
VIII to repair, betake o.s. ( ھ to a place); to
explore ( ھ s.th.)
رود raud exploration
ريادة riyāda exploration
رويدا ruwaidan slowly, gently, leisurely
│ رويدا رويدا gradually, slowly, by and by;
رويدك ruwaidaka take it easy! slowly!
مرود mirwad pl. مراود marāwid2 pencil,
little stick (originally for applying kohl to
the eyelids)
ارادة irāda will, volition; wish; desire;
(pl. -āt) irade, decree (of a ruler); will
power │(ḥasaba) at will
ارادي irādī intentional, willial,
voluntary
ارتياد irtiyād visit (to a place);
exploration
رائد rā’id pl. رواد ruwwād visitor; scout,
reconnoiterer; boy scout; explorer; leader;
major (mil.; U.A.R.); precept, guiding
principle. rule (of conduct)
مريد murid pl. -ūn novice (of a Sufi
order); aspirant; adherent, follower,
disciple
مراد murād wanted, desired, intended;
design, purpose, intention 366
رود 2 see رؤد
رودس rudūs Rhodes (chief island of the
Dodecanese)
روديسيا rōdīsiya Rhodesia
راز (روز ) rāza u (rauz) to weigh ( ھ
s.th.); to examine ( ھ s.th.); to consider ھ
s.th.)
روزنامة rūznāma almanac
1□ روس II (from رأس ) to point, sharpen ( ھ
s.th.); to taper ( ھ s.th.); to supply with a
heading or title ( ھ essay, book)
□ ترويسة tarwīsa head, heading, title,
caption
مراوس 2 mirwās race track
مراويس marāwīs2 race horses
الروس 3 ar-rūs the Russians
روسي rūsī Russian
الروسية ar-rūsīya the Russian language
روسيا rūsiyā Russia │ روسيا البيضاء
(baḍā’) Byelorussia
روستو (It. arrosto) rostō, لحم روستو
(laḥm) fried meat; rout
روشن raušan pl. رواشن rawāšin2
skylight, scuttle
راض (روض ) rāḍa u (rauḍ, رياضة
riyāḍa) to tame, domesticate ( ھ an
animal); to break in, train ( ھ an animal);
to train, coach ( ه s.o.); to pacify, placate ( ه
s.o.) │ راض نفسه to practice ( على s.th.),
exercise o.s. ( على in) II = I; to tame,
regulate ( ھ e.g., a river) III to seek to
make tractable, try to bring round ( ه s.o.)
V to practice, exercise o.s.; -- تريض
tarayyaḍa (denominative of رياضة ) to
(take a) walk, promenade; to do physical
exercise, go in for sports VI to haggle,
bargain (with one another, over a price)
VIII to practice, exercise o.s.; to train o.s.,
school o.s. ( ب on or by means of); to (take
a) walk, promenade X to be or become
glad, happy, cheerful
روضة rauḍa pl. روض rauḍ, -āt, رياض
riyāḍ, ريضان rīdān garden; meadow │
روضة الأطفال (pl. رياض ) kindergarten,
nursery school
الرياض ar-riyāḍ Riyadh (capital of
Saudi Arabia)
رياضة riyāḍa pl. -āt practice, exercise;
physical exercise, gymnastics; sport; walk,
promenade; relaxation, rest; spiritual
exercise; رياضات religious exercises,
devotions (Chr.); mathematics │ رياضة نفسه
r. nafshī walking, promenading; الرياضة
البحتة (baḥta) pure mathematics; الرياضة
التطبيقية (taṭbīqīya) applied mathematics;
رياضة عقلية (‘aqlīya) exercise of wits,
intellectual games
رياضي riyāḍī sportive, sports (adj.); (pl.
-ūn) sportsman; mathematic(al) │ اخبار
رياضية sports news; مراسل رياضي (murāsil)
sports reporter; الألعاب الرياضية sports
رياضات riyāḍīyāt mathematics
ترويض tarwīḍ sports
راع (روع ) rā‘a u (rau‘) to frighten, scare, alarm
ه) s.o.); to startle, surprise ( ه s.o.); to
awaken s.o.’s ( ه) admiration, appeal ( ه to
s.o.), please, delight, thrill ( ه s.o.) │ ما
راعني الا مجيؤك (illā majī’uka) your arrival
has been a complete surprise to me II and
IV to frighten, scare, alarm, awe ( ه s.o.) V
and VIII to be frightened, be alarmed ( من
at, by)
روع rau‘ fright, alarm, dismay, fear; --
rū‘ heart, mind, soul │ ھدئ روعك (haddi’)
and سكن روعك (sakkin) take it easy! relax!
القى (ادخل) في روعه to persuade s.o., make
s.o. believe, talk s.o. into believing ( ان
that), inspire ( ھ s.th.); خطر بروعه it
occurred to him, it came to his mind
روع rawa‘ beauty 367
روعة rau‘a fright, alarm, fear; awe;
astonishment, surprise; perplexity; charm,
beauty, magnificence, splendor
اروع arwa‘2 more wonderful, more
marvelous; more charming, more
delightful; more magnificent; more
obvious, clearer
ارتياع irtiyā‘ alarm, dismay, shock
رائع splendid, admirable, wonderful,
marvelous, glorious, magnificent;
charming, delightful; awesome, imposing,
impressive, thrilling; clear as daylight │ في
رائعة النھار fī r. in-nahār in broad daylight;
في رائعة شبابه fī r. šabābihī in the prime of
his years; الحقيقة الرائعة plain truth
رائعة rā’i‘a pl. روائع rawā’i‘ an
imposing thing │ روائع الفن r. al-fan
masterpieces of art
مروع murawwi‘ terrible, dreadful,
frightening
مروع murawwa‘ frightened, terrified,
alarmed
مريع murī‘ dreadful, terrible, horrible
مرتاع mutā‘ frightened, terrified,
alarmed
راغ (روغ ) rāga u (raug, روغان rawagān) to turn
off, swerve; to dodge, evade ( عن، من s.o.),
get out of the way of ( عن، من ); furtively to
turn away; to go away ( الى to), depart,
leave ( الى for) III to deal in an
underhanded, fraudulent manner ( ه with
s.o.), double-cross ( ه s.o.); to dodge,
engage in low trickery, play fast and
loose; to light with unfair means ( ه s.o.)
رواغ rawāg dodge, shift, artifice, sly
trick
رواغ rawwāg sly, wily, insidious, crafty
رويغة ruwaiga dodge, shift, artifice, sly
trick
اروغ arwag2 more cunning, more
insidious
روغان rawagān turning off; swerving;
dodging, evasion
مراوغة murāwaga sly, underhanded
dealings; humbug, trickery; artifice,
cunning; pl. -āt distortions, prevarications,
lies; tricks, wiles
راق (روق ) rāqa u ( روق rauq) to be clear, be
pore (liquid); to surpass, excel ( على s.o.,
s.th.), prove superior ( على to); to please,
delight, ( ه or ل s.o., also في عينه fī ‘ainihī
s.o.), give s.o. pleasure, appeal to s.o. (، ه
ل، في عينه ) II to clarify, purify, filter ( ھ a
liquid) │ روق دمعه (damahū) to refresh s.o.
(drink); to pacify, placate s.o., cool s.o.
off; روق البضاعة to make a clearance sale
IV to pour out ( ھ a liquid); to shed, spill (
ھ s.o.); to make ( ھ a liquid) flow │ اراق ماء
وجھه (mā’a wajhihī) to eacri1ice one’s
honor, lose all respect, lose face V to have
breakfast
راق rāq pl. -āt layer, stratum
روق rauq pl. ارواق arwāq portico; horn
روقة rauqa beautiful, pretty, handsome
(of persons; for both gender, sing. and pl.)
رواق riwāq, ruwāq pl. اروقة arwiqa tent;
curtain, screen; flap of the tent for
protection against the wind (used by
Syrian Bedouins); sun roof of mate over a
bazaar (syr.); portico; open gallery,
colonnade, loggia; porch, veranda (syr.);
pavilion of an exposition; living quarters,
dormitories and workrooms of the
students of Al Azhar University in Cairo,
divided according to provinces and
nationalities │ ضرب رواقه to pitch one’s
tent, take up quarters, settle down
رواقي riwāqī stoic(al); (pl. -ūn) a stoic;
friar; الرواقية ar-riwāqīya Stoicism 368
راووق rāwūq filter
ترويق tarwīq filtration, clarification,
purification
ترويقة tarwīqa (syr.) breakfast
اراقة irāqa pouring out; shedding,
spilling │ اراقة الدم bloodshed
رائق rā’iq clear, pure
مال الروك māl ar-rōk (eg.) public property,
community property
رول 1 II to slaver, slobber, drool
روال ruwāl slaver, slobber
رول 2 (Fr. rôle) rōl role
رام ( روم 1 ) rāma u (raum, مرام marām) to
desire, wish, want, covet ( ھ s.th.), crave (
ھ for); to wish ( ل ھ s.o. s.th.); to look ( ھ
for) │ على ما يرام (yurāmu) as well as one
could possibly wish, in excellent order
رام rāmallāh Ramallah (town in W
Jordan, N of Jerusalem)
روم raum wish, desire
مرام marām pl. -āt wish, desire, craving,
longing; aspiration
الروم 2 ar-rūm the Romaeans, the
Byzantines; Byzantium; pl. الأروام alarwām
(the adherents of) the Greek
Orthodox Church │ بحر الروم baḥr ar-r. the
Mediterranean
رومي rūmī pl. اروام arwām Romaean,
Byzantine; Greek Orthodox (Church) │
ديك رومي (dīk) turkey (eg.); جبنة رومي
(gibna) a brand of cheese (eg.)
روما rōmā and رومة rōma Rome
رومية rūmiya Rome
الرومان ar-rumān the Romano; the
Romanic peoples
روماني rūmānī Roman; Romanian;
Romanic
رومانيا rūmāniyā Romania
روماتزم (Engl.) rūmātism rheumatism
روند riwand, راوند rāwad rhubarb
رونق see رنق
روى 1 rawiya a ( ري ray, riyy) to drink one’s
fill, quench one’s thirst; to be irrigated; --
rawā i to bring ( على or ل s.o.) water, give (
ه s.o.) to drink; -- rawā i ( رواية riwāya) to
tell, relate ( ھ ل s.th. to s.o.), report ( ھ
s.th.), give an account of ( ھ ); to pass on,
transmit ( ھ عن s.th. on the strength of an
authoritative source), quote ( عن from a
source) II to quench s.o.’s ( ه) thirst; to
water, irrigate ( ھ s.th.) IV to give ( ه s.o.)
to drink, quench s.o.’s ( ه) thirst; to water (
ھ flowers, etc.); to moisten. wet ( ھ s.th.)
V to draw, obtain ( عن ھ s.th. from); to
ponder ( ھ عن s.th.), reflect ( في on) VIII to
quench one’s thirst; to be supplied with
water for drink, be given to drink; to be
watered, be irrigated; to draw (on a
source, i.e., to obtain information from it)
ري riyy quenching (of thirst); -- riyy,
rayy watering, irrigation; moistening,
wetting
ريا rayyan aroma, fragrance
روي rawīy thirst-quenching
روي rawīy final letter, rhyming letter
(in Arabic verse); rhyme │ ذو روي واحد
monotonous (song)
رواء rawā’ fresh (water)
رواء ruwā’ prettiness, comeliness
pleasing appearance
روية rawīya deliberation, reflection,
consideration │ عن روية deliberately, on
purpose, عن غير روية offhand, casually
رواية riwāya pl. -āt tale, narrative;
report, account; story; novel; play, drama;
motion picture, film │ رواية
محزنة (muḥzina) tragedy; رواية مسرحية
(masraḥīya) play, stage play; رواية سينمائية
motion 369 picture, film; رواية مضحكة
(muḍḥika) comedy; رواية غنائية (ginā’īya)
opera; رواية قصصية (qiṣaṣīya, qaṣaṣīya)
novel; رواية تمثيلية (tamtīlīya) play, drama;
رواية ناطقة sound film; رواية ھزلية (hazlīya)
comedy
روائي riwā’ī novelist; dramatist,
playwright; author, writer
ريان rayyān2, f. ريا rayyā, pl. رواء riwā’
sated with drink; well-watered, wellirrigated;
luxuriant, lush, verdant; full,
plump (face); succulent, juicy, fresh,
pretty; see also alphabetically
تروية tarwiya deliberation, reflection,
consideration
اروائي irwā’ī irrigational; irrigated
ترو tarawwin deliberation, reflection,
consideration
راو rāwin pl. rāwiyūn, رواة ruwāh and
راوية rāwiya pl. روايا rawāyā transmitter
(esp. of ancient Arabic poetry); relater;
narrator, storyteller
مرويات marwīyāt tales, stories, reports
راية 2 see راى
رؤيا 3 see رأي
ري، ريان، ريا 1 see روى
2□ رية riyya = رئة ri’a (see (رء
رياء 3 see رأى
﷼ riyāl pl. -āt riyal, a silver coin: in Eg. = 20
qirš šāg (piasters); in Ir. = 200 fals; ﷼
ماريا تريزا Maria Theresa dollar
ريان Riyan (town and airport in S Hadhramaut,
on Gulf of Aden)
راب ( ريب ) rāba i (raib) to disquiet, alarm, fill
with suspicion or misgivings ( ه s.o., ھ
about s.th.); to give pause (. ه to s.o.), make
ه) s.o.) 8top and think ( ان that), make ( ه
s.o.) uneasy; to cast a suspicion ( ه on s.o.),
show ( ه s.o.) in a suspicious light; to
doubt, question, suspect ( ه s.th.) IV to
disquiet, alarm, startle, fill with suspicion
or misgivings ( ه s.o.) V to have doubts or
misgivings ( ب، في about), be suspicious ( ب
or في of) VIII to be suspicious, smell a rat;
to suspect, doubt, question ( ب or في s.o.,
s.th.), have doubts or misgivings ( ب or في
about), wavervdoubtfully ( بين between) X
to be invdoubt, be skeptical ( في about), be
suspicious,vhave misgivings, entertain
doubts
ريب raib doubt; suspicion; uncertainty
│ بلا ريب (bilā) no doubt, undoubtedly,
doubtless; لا ريب فيه (raib) there is no
doubt about it; ريب المنون r. al-manūn
unpredictable turn of fortune, threatening
fate; misfortune
ريبة rība pl. ريب riyab doubt, suspicion,
misgiving
ارتياب irtiyāb doubt, suspicion, distrust,
misgiving
مريب murīb arousing suspicion,
suspicious
مرتاب murtāb doubting, doubtful,
skeptical; doubter, skeptic; ( به or فيه) مرتاب
doubted, questionable, doubtful; suspect,
suspicious │ مرتاب في امره (amrihī)
suspicious, suspect, under suspicion
مستريب mustarīb doubtful, in doubt ( في
about); suspicious
مستراب (فيه ) mustarāb (fīhi) suspect,
suspicious
راث ( ريث ) rāta i (rait) to hesitate, delay, tarry
V to hesitate, tarry, be tardy; to give ( ب or
في s.th.) long and thorough consideration;
to stop; to stay, linger ( في at a place); to be
patient, bide one’s time, temporize, wait
ريثما raitamā (conj.) as long as, while;
when; until
ريح, ريحة, رياح, ريحان, اريح, اريحية, ارياح, مرياح see
روح ٣٧٠
ريخ (G.) raik Reich
□ ريس rayyis (= رئيس ra’īs) mate (Eg. Naval
rank) │ ريس ممتاز (mumtāz) a naval rank
(approx.: petty officer 3rd class; Eg. 1939)
□ رياسة riyāsa (= رئاسة ri’āsa) see رأس
رياسي riyāsī presidential
راش (ريش ) rāša i (raiš) to provide with
feathers, feather ( ھ s.th.); to feather one’s
nest, become wealthy II to provide with
feathers, feather ( ھ s.th.); to fledge, grow
feathers (bird) V to fledge (bird); to
become wealthy
ريش rīš (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. رياش riyāš,
ارياش aryāš feathers; feathering, plumage;
clothes, attire, exterior; bristles (e.g., of a
brush)
ريشة rīša (n. un.) pl. -āt feather; quill;
writing pen (also ريشة الكتابة ); brush (of a
painter); plectrum; lancet; (eg.) reed (of
certain wind instruments, e.g., of the oboe;
mus.) │ وزن الريشة wazn ar-r. featherweight
(athlet.)
ريشي rīšī feather (adj.), feathery,
feathered, plumed, pinnate
رياش riyāš household effects; furniture;
equipment
تريض، رياض، رياضة، رياضي، رياضيات see روض
راع (ريع ) rā‘a i (rai‘, ريوع ruyū‘, رياع riyā‘,
ريعان raya‘ān to increase, grow, flourish,
thrive II to increase, augment ( ھ s.th.)
ريع rai‘ pl. ريوع ruyū‘ yield; returns,
proceeds, income (accruing from an
estate), interest; profit share royalty;
prime, choicest part │ ريع الشباب r. aššabāb
the prime of youth
ريعان rai‘ān prime, choicest part │ في
ريعان الشباب fī r. iš-šabāb in the prime of
youth; في ريعان النھار fī r. in-nahār in broad
daylight
ارض مريعة arḍ marī‘a productive land
□ تاريع tārī‘ (eg.) cadastre; (also مساحة
الريع ) land survey
رائعة rā’i‘a: في رائعة النھار fī r. in-nahār
in broad daylight (see also (روع
ريف rīf pl. ارياف aryāf fertile, cultivated land;
country (as opposed to city), countryside,
rural الريف or ريف مصر Lower Egypt;
seashore. seacoast; Er Rif (hilly coastal
region of NE Morocco)
ريفي rīfī rural, rustic, peasant (adj.),
country (used attributively); peasant,
farmer; provincial, yokel, bumpkin;
inhabitant of Er Rif (in Morocco)
راق (ريق ) rāqa i ( ريق raiq) to shine, glisten,
glow, burn; to flow out, pour forth IV to
pour out, shed, splll (see also (روق
ريق rīq and ريقة rīqa pl. ارياق aryāq
saliva, spittle │ على الريق before break-fast,
on an empty stomach; بلع ريقه and ابتلع
(rīqahū) (lit.: to swallow one’s saliva, i.e.)
to catch one’s breath, rest a while, take a
short break; to hold back, restrain o.s. (of
s.o. in a rage); بلعه ريقه (balla‘ahū rīqahū)
to allow s.o. a break, let s.o. catch his
breath; اجرى الريق (ajā) to make the saliva
flow, i.e., to make the mouth water,
stimulate the appetite; لايجف له ريق (yajiffu)
be is untiring (in speaking), he talks
incessantly
ريق rayyiq: في ريق الشباب r. iš-šabāb in
the full bloom of youth
رال (ريل 2 ) rāla i and II to slobber, slaver, drool
مريلة maryala (string) apron
مريول maryūl bib
2﷼ look up alphabetically
رام ( ريم 1 ) rāma i (raim) to go away, move,
budge; to leave ( ھ a place) │ ما رام مكانه
٣٧١ (makānahū) not to budge, not to
move from the spot II to stay, remain (
بالمكان at the place); (eg.) to bluff ( على s.o.)
ريم rīm (eg.) froth, foam
ترييم taryīm (eg.) swaggering, bluffing,
swindle
ريم 2 rīm (= رئم ) addax, white antelope
ران (رين 1 )rāna i to take possession ( على or ھ of
s.th.), seize, overcome ( على، ب or ه s.o.,
said of passion); to descend or come upon
s.th. ( على ); to reign, prevail ( على in, e.g.,
silence in a room)
ريان 2 , f. ريا see روي
ريان 3 look up alphabetically
ز
زاء zā’ name of the letter ز
زاؤوق zā’ūq quicksilver, mercury
زئبق zi’baq quicksilver, mercury
زاج zāj vitriol
زاجورا zāgōra Zagora, a brand of Egyptian
cotton
زأر za’ara a (za’r, زئير za’īr) to roar, bellow
زئير za’īr roaring, roar, bellowing
زأط za’aṭ a ( زئاط zi’āṭ) to clamor, be vociferous
زاغ zāg pl. زيغان zīgān crow
موت زؤام maut zu‘āam a sudden or violent
death
زؤان 1 zu’ān darnel (Lolium temulentum; bot.)
زان 2 (syr., eg.) beech │ ثمر زان tamar z.
beechnuts
زانة zāna pl. -āt spear; pole │( الوثب (القفز
بالزانة al-watb (al-qafz) bi-z-z. pole
vaulting (athlet.)
زاووق zāwūq quicksilver, mercury
زاي zāy name of the letter ز
زب zubb pl. ازباب azbāb penis
زبيب zabīb (coll.; n. un. ة) dried grapes,
raisins; (eg.) a strong colorless liquor
made of raisins, milky white when diluted
with water
ازب azabb2, f. زباء zabbā’2, pl. زب zubb
hairy, hirsute, shaggy
زبد zabada a to chum ( ھ milk) II to foam,
froth, cream (milk) IV to froth, become
foamy, foam (also, with rage)
زبد zabad pl. ازباد azbād foam, froth;
dross │ زبد البحر z. al-baḥr meerschaum
زبدة zubda (fresh) butter (as opposed to
سمن samn); cream; -- (pl. زبد zubad)
choicest part, prime, cream, flower, elite;
extract, quintessence; essence, substance;
gist, main point
زبدية zabdīya pl. زبادي zabādīy bowl
زباد zabād civet │ سنور الزباد sinnūr azz.
civet cat
زبادي zabādī and لبن زبادي (laban)
curdled milk (eg.)
مزبد mizbad, مزبدة mizbada pl. مزابد
mazābid2 churn
زبر zabara u i to scold ( ه s.o.)
زبر zubr penis
زبرة zubra pl. زبر zubar piece of iron
زبور zabūr (Book of) Psalms, Psalter
زبرج zibrij ornament, ornamentation,
decoration, embellishment
زبرجد zabarjad chrysolite (min.)
زبط zabaṭa i (zabṭ) to quack (duck)
زبط zabaṭ (eg.) mud, mire
زباطة zubāṭa (eg.) bunch of dates
زوبعة zauba‘a pl. زوابع zawābi‘2 storm,
hurricane
زبق zabaqa u i (zabq) to tear out, pluck out ( ھ
hair) VII to slip in
زبل II to dung, manure
زبل zibl, زبلة zibla dung, manure
زبال zabbāl street sweeper; garbage
collector
زبالة zubāla refuse, rubbish, garbage,
sweepings
مزبلة mazbala, mazbula pl. مزابل
mazābil2 dunghill; garbage can
زبون zabūn kicking (camel); hot, fierce, cruel
(battle); stupid, foolish; fool; -- (pl. زبائن
zabā’in2) customer, client, buyer; guest (of
a hotel, end the like) │ زبون دائم patron,
regular customer
زبون zubūn undergarment (nejd, ir.)
زبانة zibāna clientele, patronage,
custom
زبانى zubānā pedipalpus or claw of a
scorpion, of a crayfish (usually dual: زبانيا
(العقرب
زبانية zabāniya myrmidons; engels who
thrust the damned into Hell
زبية zubya pl. زبى zuban elevated place above
the waterline │ بلغ السيل الزبى balaga s-sailu
z-zubā the matter reached a climax, things
came to a head
زت zatta (syr.) to throw
زج zajja (1st pers. perf. zajajtu) u (zajj) to
throw, hurl ( ھ s.th.); to push, shove, urge,
drive ( ب or ھ، ه s.o. or s.th.); to press,
squeeze, force, cram ( ب or ھ، ه s.o. or
s.th., في into) │ زج به في السجن (zujja, sijn)
he was thrown into prison II to pencil (
الحاجبين al-ḥājibain the eyebrows); to
glaze, coat with glass ( ھ s.th.); to enamel (
ھ s.th.)
زج zujj pl. زجاج zijāj ferrule;
arrowhead; spearhead
ازج azajj2, f. زجاء zajjā’, pl. زج zujj
having beautifully arched eyebrows
زجاج zujāj glass (as substance)
زجاجة zujāja (u. un.) pl. -āt piece of
glass; (glass) bottle, flask; (drinking)
glass, tumbler
زجاجي zujājī glass (adj.), glassy,
vitreous
زجاج zajjāj glazier
مزجج muzajjaj glazed, enameled;
مزججات and مصنوعات مزججة enameled ware
زجر zajara u (zajr) to drive back, drive away;
to hold back, restrain, prevent ( عن ه s.o.
from); to rebuke, scold, upbraid ( ه s.o.)
VII and VIII ازدجر izdajara pass. of I
زجر zajr forcible prevention;
suppression (of customs, abuses, crimes);
rebuke, reprimand
زجري zajrī reformatory, penitentiary
(adj.) │ معھد زجري (ma‘had) reformatory,
reform school
مزجر mazjar: قعد منه مزجر الكلب qa‘ada
minhu mazjara l-kalb to sit at a fitting
distance from s.o.
زاجر zājir handicap, impediment,
obstacle
زاجرة zājira pl. زواجر zawājir2 check,
curb; restriction, limitation
زجل zajala u (zajl) to let go, release ( ھ a
carrier pigeon) 373
زجل zajal pl. ازجال azjāl popular Arabic
poem in strophic form; soft humming
sound produced by the jinn at night
زجال zajjāl reciter of azjal (see above)
حمام الزاجل ḥamām az-zājil carrier
pigeon, homing pigeon
زجا (يزجو ) zajā u to drive, urge on ( ه، ھ s.th.,
s.o.); to squeeze, press, force, cram ( ه، ھ
s.th., s.o., في into) II to shove, push ( ھ
s.th., ه s.o.); to drive, urge on ( ھ s.th., ه
s.o.); to jostle, crowd, cram, jam ( ه، ھ
s.th., s.o., الى into); to take or bring
(forcibly) ( ھ الى، ه s.o., s.th. into); to make
ھ) time) pass; to pass, spend ( ھ time) IV
to shove, push ( ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to drive,
urge on ( ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to jostle, crowd,
cram, jam ( ه، ھ s.th., s.o., الى into); to take
or bring (forcibly) ( الى ھ، ه s.o., s.th. into);
to make pass, while away ( ھ time); to
extend ( ھ ل s.th. to s.o.; greetings,
compliments, thanks); to bestow ( ھ ل s.th.
on s.o.; e.g., praise) │ ازجى الى الذھن ان
(dihn) to suggest (the idea or assumption)
that ...
مزجى muzjan little, scanty, paltry,
trivial, insignificant
زحر zaḥara a i ( زحير zaḥīr, زحار zuḥār) to
groan, moan
زحير zaḥīr, groan, moan(s)
زحار zuḥār, groan, moan(s); dysentery
(med.)
زحزح zaḥzaḥa ( زحزحة zaḥzaḥa) to move ( ھ
s.th., from its place); to tear, rip ( ھ عن s.th.
off) II tazaḥzaḥa to budge, move( عن away
from)
زحف zaḥafa a (zaḥf) to crawl, creep on the
ground; to crawl about; to advance
(army); to march, be on the march ( على
against or toward)
زحف zaḥf advance, march (of an army);
(pl. زحوف zuḥūf) soldiery, army
زحف creeping, crawling
زحافة zaḥḥāfa pl. -āt reptile; implement
for leveling the ground, leveler; ski
زاحف zāḥif creeping, crawling; pl.
زواحف zawāḥif2 reptiles
زحل zaḥala a (zaḥl, زحول zuḥūl) to move away,
withdraw, retire ( عن from a place) II to
remove ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) V = I
زحل zuḥal2 the planet Saturn
زحلقة zaḥlaqa to roll, slide ( ھ s.th.) II
tazaḥlaqa to glide, slide, slip, skid
زحلقة zaḥlaqa: ميدان الزحلقة maidān az-z.
skating rink
تزحلق tazaḥluq skating; sikiing
زحلاوي zaḥlāwī from Zaḥle (Lebanon), made
in Zaḥle (e.g., arrack)
زحم zaḥama a (zaḥm) to push, shove, hustle,
jostle, crowd, press, beset ( ه s.o.) III to
push, shove, hustle, jostle, crowd, press,
beset ( ه s.o.); to compete, vie ( ه with s.o.)
VI to press together, crowd together,
mill .bout; to be closely packed lei in); to
compete with one another VIII ازدحم
izdaḥama to be crowded, teem, swarm ( ب
with); to jostle, crowd together, mill about
(e.g., people)
زحمة zaḥma crush, jam; crowd, throng
زحام ziḥām crush, jam; crowd, throng
مزاحمة muzāḥama pl. -āt competition;
rivalry │ لا يقبل المزاحمة (yaqbalu)
unrivaled, matchless without competition
تزاحم tazāḥum (mutual) competition
ازدحام izdiḥām crowd, crush, jam; overcrowdedness
مزاحم muzāḥim pl. -ūn competitor; rival
مزاحمة muzāḥima (female) rival
مزدحم muzdaḥim overcrowded, packed,
jammed; teeming, swarming, crowded,
crammed ( ب with); -- muzdaḥam crowd,
crush, jam 374
زخة zakka pl. -āt downpour, heavy shower
زخر zakara a (zakr, زخور zukūr) to swell, rise
(e.g., river); to be overfull, brimful ( ب of);
to boast ( ب of s.th.), vaunt ( ب s.th.) V to
swell; to rise; to abound ( ب in), be full ( ب
of)
زاخر zākir and زخار zakkār full,
brimful, filled to overflowing; abounding
in water (seas); excessive, profuse;
exuberant (feeling)
زخرف zakrafa to adorn, embellish, decorate,
ornament ( ھ s.th.) II tazakrafa to adorn
o.s.; to be embellished, ornamented
زخرف zukruf pl. زخارف zakārif
decoration, ornament, embellishment;
makeup, getup (e.g., of a book); vain,
trifling finery │ زخارف لفظية (lafẓīya)
flowers of speech, rhetorical flourishes;
زخارف الدنيا z. ad-dunyā the vanities of this
world
زخرفة zakrafa pl. -āt decoration (also
stage decoration); ornamentation
زخرفي zukrufī ornamental, decorative
مزخرف muzakrif interior decorator; --
muzakraf embellished, ornamented │ الخط
الكوفي المزخرف (al-kaṭṭ al-kūfī) floriated
Kufic writing
زخم zakama a (zakm) to throat back ( ه s.o.); --
zakima a (zakam) to stink
زخم zakim stinking
ازخم azkam2 stinking
زخمة zakma plectrum
زخمة zakama stench
زر zarra u to button, button up ( ھ s.th.); to
screw, contort ( عينه ‘ainahū one’s eye) II
to button, button up ( ھ s.th.)
زر zirr pl. ازرار azrār, زرور zurūr
button; push button; knob, pommel; bud
(of a plant); tassel (of the tarboosh, etc.)
زرب zariba a to flow (water) II to pen, corral (
ھ livestock)
زربية zurbīya, zirbīya pl. زرابى zarābīy
carpet, rug
زريبة zarība pl. زرائب zarā’ib2 zareba,
cattle pen, corral, stockade, fold; (cattle)
barn; (North Af.) hut made of branches
زاروب zārūb pl. زوارب zawārib2 a long,
narrow lane
مزراب mizrāb pl. مزاريب mazārīb2 spout
زربول zarbūl pl. زرابيل zarābīl2 and زربون
zarbūn pl. زرابين zarābīn a kind of shoe
زرد zarada u (zard) to choke ( ه s.o.). strangle (
ھ s.o.’s neck); to gulp, swallow, devour (
ھ s.th.) VIII ازدرد izdarada to swallow ( ھ
s.th.)
زردة zarda sweet dish made of rice and
honey
زرد zard pl. زرود zarūd chain mail, coat
of mail │ حمار الزرد zebra
زردة zarada chain link
زردية zardīya pliers
مزرد mazrad throat, gullet
زرزر zarzara to chirp
زرزر zurzur and زرزور zurzūr pl. زرازير
zarāzīr2 starling (zool.)
زرزوري zurzūrī gray with white spots
(horse)
زرع zara‘a a (zar‘) to sow ( ھ s.th.); to spread,
scatter ( ھ s.th.); to plant, raise, grow ( ھ
plants); to till, cultivate ( الأرض al-arḍa
land); to lay ( لغما lugman mine) VII pass.
of I; VIII ازدرع izdara‘a to sow
زرع sowing; (pl. زروع zurū‘) seed;
young standing crop, green crop;
plantation; field(s) │ الزرع والضرع (ḍar‘)
agriculture and stock farming
زراعة zirā‘a agriculture; tilling, tillage;
cultivation (of land); growing, raising (of
crops); farming │ زراعة البساتين horticulture
375
زراعي zirā‘ī agricultural, agrarian,
farm- (in compounds) │ ارض زراعية (arḍ)
arable land; طريق زراعي field path, dirt
road
زريعة zarī‘a that whicb is sown or
planted; crop
زراع zarrā‘ pl. ة, -ūn peasant, farmer;
planter
مزرع mazra‘ (arable) land
مزرعة mazra‘a pl. مزارع mazāri‘ field
under cultivation; farm; plantation;
country estate
مزرعاني mazra‘ānī farmer
مزارعة muzāra‘a temporary
sharecropping contract (īsl. Law)
زارع zāri‘ pl. زراع zurrā‘ seedsman,
sower; peasant; farmer; planter
مزروع mazrū‘ cultivated, planted
مزروعة mazrū‘a pl. -āt young standing
crop, green crop
مزارع muzāri‘ pl. -ūn peasant, farmer;
agronomist
زرافة zarāfa pl. -āt body, group, cluster (of
people) │ زرافات ووحدانا see واحد
زرافة zarāfa, zurāfa pl. زرافى zarāfā,
zurāfā, زرائف zarā’if2 giraffe
زرق 2 zaraqa u i (= ذرق ) to drop excrement
(bird); -- zaraqa u (zarq) to hit, pierce ( ب ه
s.o. with); to jab, bore ( ھ، ه into s.o. or
s.th.); to throw, hurl ( ھ s.th.)
زرق zarq: زرق الإبر z. al-ibar injections,
injectings
مزراق mizrāq pl. مزاريق mazāriq2 javelin
زرق 2 zariqa a (zaraq) and IX to be blue
زرق zaraq blue, blueness, blue color; O
glaucoma (med.)
زرقة zurqa blue, blueness, blue color; O
cyanosis
ازرق azraq2, f. زرقاء zarqā’2, pl. زرق
zurq blue; dark-colored; الزرقاء the blue
sky, the blue
ازرقاق izriqāq blueness, blue │ داء
الازرقاق dā’ al-izriqāq cyanosis
زورق 2 look up alphabetically
زرقون zarqūn a bright red
زركش zarkaša to embellish with brocade
embroidery; to adorn, embellish, decorate,
ornament ( ھ s.th.)
زركش zarkaš brocade, gold and silver
embroidery
مزركش muzarkaš embellished with
brocade embroidery, brocaded;
embroidered ( ب with silver and gold
thread); embroidered; embellished,
decorated, ornamented │ القلم المزركش
(qalam) ornamental writing
زرنيخ zirnīk, zarnik arsenic
زرى zarā i ( زراية zirāya) to rebuke, scold,
upbraid ( على s.o.), find fault ( ھ على with
s.o. because of s.th.); to revile, disparage (
ب or J- s.0.), detract ( ب or على from) IV to
derogate, detract ( ب from s.o. or s.th.),
belittle, ridicule ( ب s.o. or s.th.) V = I;
VIII ازدرى izdarā to slight ( ب or ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), make light, think little ( ب or ھ، ه
of), defy ( ب or ھ e.g., danger) X = VIII
زرى zarīy bad, poor, miserable,
despicable, contemptible
زراية zirāya contempt, disdain;
revilement, disparagement
ازراء izrā’ contempt, disregard
ازدراء izdirā’ contempt, disdain, scorn
مزرى muzran despicable, contemptible
زعبر za‘bara to deceive, cheat ( على s.o.)
زعبوط za‘abūṭ pl. زعابيط za‘ābīṭ2 a woolen
fabric; woolen garment with a low
neckline, worn esp. by the fellahin (eg.)
376
زعتر za‘tar = سعتر
زعج za‘aja a and IV to disturb ( ه s.o.); to
trouble, inconvenience, molest, pester,
harass ( ه s.o.); to disquiet, alarm make
uneasy, upset (. s.o.); to stir up ( ه s.o. من or
عن from a place), rouse ( من or ه عن s.o.
from a state. e.g., from sleep, etc.), drive (
من or ه عن s.o. from) VII to be stirred up,
be roused; to be alarmed ( من by or at), feel
uneasy ( من about s.th.)
زعج za‘aj uneasiness, unrest
ازعاج iz‘āj disturbance
انزعاج inzi‘āj inconvenience, trouble,
discomfort; disturbance, confusion
مزعج muz‘aj annoying, troublesome,
irksome, inconvenient, unpleasant;
harrying; disquieting; unsettling; pl.
مزعجات troubles, discomforts
زعر za‘ir thin-haired
ازعر az‘ar 2, f. زعراء za‘rā’ thin-haired;
tailless
ازعر az‘ar pl. زعران za‘rān (leb., pal.)
highwayman, brigand; crook, scoundrel
زعارة za‘āra maliciousness, meanness
زعرور zū‘rūr pl. زعارير za‘ārīr2 illtempered,
peevish, testy, irascible;
azarole, Neapolitan medlar (Crataegus
azarolus; bot.)
زعزع za‘za‘a to shake violently, convulse,
rock ( ھ s.th.); to shake, upset ( ھ e.g., a
resolve, a belief, etc.) II taza‘zaa to be
convulsed; to work loose, wobble, be
loose; to shake, rock, totter │ لا يتزعزع
unshakable
ريح زعزع rīḥ za‘za‘ and ريح زعزعان
(za‘za‘ān) violent gale, hurricane
زعزعة za‘za‘a pl. زعازع convulsion,
shock, concussion
زعزوع za‘zū‘ lean, skinny, lanky,
spindling
مزعزع muza‘za‘ convulsed, shocked;
upset, disorganized; tottering, shaky,
wobbly, unsteady, precarious
متزعزع mutaza‘zi‘ unsteady, shaky,
wobbly, precarious; tottering, rocking;
fickle, uncertain, changeable
زعط za‘aṭa (za‘ṭ) to drive away
زعف za‘afa a (za‘f) to kill instantly ( ه s.o.) IV
do.
سم زعاف samm zi‘āf a rapidly killing,
deadly poison
زعفران za‘farān saffron
زعق za‘aqa a (za‘q) to cry, yell, shriek,
scream
زعق za‘q clamor, shouting, crying,
screaming, yelling
زعقة za‘qa pl. za‘aqāt cry, outcry, yell,
scream, shriek
زعيق za‘īq clamor, shouting, crying,
screaming, yelling
زعل za‘ila a (za‘al) to be bored, be fed up ( من
with s.th.), be tired ( من of); to be annoyed,
angry II to annoy, vex ( ه s.o.) IV to
trouble, annoy ( ه s.o.)
زعل za‘al displeasure, annoyance,
irritation, vexation
زعل za‘il annoyed, angry, vexed, put
out
زعلان za‘lān2 annoyed, angry, vexed,
put out
زاعولة zā‘ūla annoyance, anger,
irritation) vexation
زعم za‘ama u (za‘m) to maintain, allege,
claim, pretend ( ان that), declare ( ل ان to
s.o. that); to believe; to take ( ه ھ s.o. for or
to be ...), regard ( ه ھ s.o. as); │ زعم لنفسه to
claim for o.s. ( ھ s.th.) V to set o.s. up as
leader; to 377 be the leader ( ه of), lead,
command ( ھ a body of soldier, or the
like); to pretend to be the leader, pose as
leader, be bossy
زعم za‘m allegation, claim │ في زعمھم as
they claim, III they say
زعيم za‘īm, pl. زعماء zu‘amā’2 leader;
ringleader; colonel (Ir. 1922); brigadier
general (mil.; formerly syr.); guarantor ( ب
of)
زعامة za‘āma leadership; leading
position in politics
مزاعم mazā‘im2 allegation; claims,
pretensions; assumptions, conjectures
مزعوم maz‘ūm pretended, claimed;
alleged, so-called
زعنفة zi‘nifa pl. زعانف za‘ānif2, horde, pack,
mob, rabble, rifraff; low hue, mean;
pl. fins (of fish); flippers (of whale,
seal, and the like)
زغب zagab down, lid, fuzz
زغب zagib downy, fluffy, fuzzy,
covered with fuzz
ازغب azgab2 downy, fluffy, fuzzy,
covered with fuzz
زغبر zagbar nap (of a fabric) │ اخذ بزغبره he
took all of it
زغد zagada a to nudge, poke ( ه s.o.)
زغر zagara a (eg.) to eye ( الى or ل s.th., s.o.),
lear ( الى or ل at)
زغرد zagrada ( زغردة zagrada) to utter shrill,
long-drawn and trilling sounds (as a
manifestation of joy by Arab women)
زغاريد zagārīd2 shrill, trilling cries of
joy (of women)
زغرط zagraṭa = زغرد
زغاريط zagārīṭ زغاريد = 2
زغزغ zagzaga to hide, conceal ( ھ s.th.); (eg.)
to tickle ( ه s.o.)
زغطة zuguṭṭa (eg.) hiccup
زغل zagala a (zag,) to pour out ( ھ s.th.); to
counterfeit ( ھ e.g., coins), adulterate,
debase ( ھ s.th.)
زغل zagal counterfeit money
مزغل mazgal pl. مزاغل mazāgil2
loophole, embrasure
زغلل zuglala to dazzIe ( النظر an-naẓar the
eyes)
زغلول zuglūl pl. زغاليل zagālīl2 baby,
infant; zaglūl (eg.) squab, young pigeon
زف zaffa (1st pers. perf. zafaftu) i (zaff, زفوف
zufūf) to hurry; -- u (zaff, زفاف zifāf) to
conduct in solemn procession ( ھا the
bride, على or الى to the bridegroom); pass.
زفت الى zuffat ilā to be married off to, be
given in marriage to; to conduct in solemn
procession to her new home ( ھا the bride,
also said of the bridegroom); to inform (
الى s.o., ھ of s.th.), tell ( الى ھ s.th. to s.o.)
│ زف البشرى الى (bušrā) to bring glad
tidings to
زفة zaffa procession (of people),
wedding procession; -- one time; زفة
zaffatan once (= marratan)
زفاف zifāf wedding, wedding ceremony
│ ليلة الزفاف lailat az-z. wedding night
زفوف zafūf ostrich; fleet, swift (camel)
زفيف zafīf sough(ing) (of the wind)
مزفة mizaffa bridal sedan
زفت II to smear with pitch, to pitch; to asphalt
ھ) a road)
زفت zift pitch; asphalt │ زفت وقطران
(qaṭrān) (lit., pitch and tar) unpleasant,
annoying, awkward; damned (bad luck)!
O مزفتة mizfata pl. مزافت mazāfit2
asphalting machine
تزفيت tazfīt asphalting
زفر 2 zafara i (zafr, زفير zafīr) to sigh
deeply, heave deep sighs; to pant, groan,
moan; 378 to blow off, exhaust, puff out (
ھ air, breath)
زفرة zafra pl. zafarāt sigh, moan
زفير zafīr exhaling, exhalation,
expiration; sighing, moaning, moans; see
also alphabetically
زفر 2 II to soil with grease begrime ( ھ s.th.)
زفر zafar grease, greasy food │ ثلاثاء
الزفر talātā’ az-z. Mardi Gras, Shrove
Tuesday (Chr.)
زفر zafir greasy; grimy; unclean, dirty,
filthy; stinking, rancid, rank
زفزفة zafzafa soughing, whistling (of the wind)
زفن zafana i to dance, gambol
زفير zafīr zephyr cloth
زق zaqqa u (zaqq) to feed ( ھ its young ones;
of a bird)
زق ziqq pl. ازقاق azqāq, زقاق ziqāq, زقان
zuqqān skin (as a receptacle)
زقاق zuqāq m. and f., pl. ازقة aziqqa
lane, alley; strait, corridor (geogr.)
زقزق zaqzaqa ( زقزقة zaqzaqa) to peep, chirp,
cheep; to feed ( ھ its young ones; of a
bird); to dandle, rock in one’s arms ( ه a
child)
زقزاق zaqzāq pewit, lapwing
الزقازق az-zaqāzīq2 Zagazig (city in N
Egypt)
زقلة 1 zuqla and زقلية zuqlīya (eg.) club, cudgel,
truncheon
زقيلة 2 zaqīla pl. زقائل zaqā’il2 narrow road, path,
trail
زقم zaqama u (zaqm) to swallow gulp, gobble (
ھ food) IV to make ( ه s.o.) swallow or
gulp down ( ھ s.th.) VIII ازدقم izdaqama =
I
زقوم zaqqūm zaqqum, an infernal tree
with exceedingly bitter fruit, mentioned in
the Koran
زقا (زقو ) zaqā u to cry, crow, peep, cheep
زقاء zuqā’ crowing (of a rooster)
زكب zakaba u ( زكوب zukūb) to fill up, fill ( ھ
s.th.)
زكيبة zakība pl. زكائب zakā’ib2 (eg.)
sack, bag, gunny sack
زكرة zukra pl. زكر zukar small (wine)skin; -- a
wind instrument resembling the oboe
(tun.)
زكم pass. zukima to catch a cold
زكام zukām (common) cold, catarrh
زكمة zakma (common) cold, catarrh
زكانة zakāna flair; intuition
زكو) and زكى ) زكا zakā u ( زكاء zakā’) to thrive;
to grow, increase; to be pure in heart, be
just, righteous, good; to be fit, suitable ( ب
for s.o.), befit ( ب s.o.); --zakiya a to grow,
increase II to increase, augment, make
grow ( ھ s.th.); to purify, chasten ( ھ s.th.);
to justify, vindicate ( ه s.o.), vouch for, or
bear witness to, s.o.’s ( ه) integrity, declare
ه) s.o.) honest, upright or just, attest the
honorable record of s.o. ( ه); to attest the
truth, validity or credibility of s.th. ( ھ ); to
command, praise ( ه s.o.); to recommend
IV to cause to grow; to grow ( ھ s.th.) V to
be purified, be chastened
زكي zakīy pl. ازكياء azkiyā’2 pure;
chaste; guiltless, blameless, sinless; also =
ذكي dakīy, e.g., (رائحة زكية
زكاء zakā’ growth; (moral) purity,
integrity, honesty, righteousness
زكوة) زكاة) zakāh pl. زكا zakan, زكوات
zakawāt purity; justness, integrity,
honesty; justification, vindication; alms-
379 giving, alms, charity; alms tax (Isl.
Law) │ زكاة الفطر z. al-fiṭr obligatory
donation of foodstuffs required at the end
of Ramadan, the month of fasting
ازكى azkā purer; more befitting, more
appropriate; better
تزكية tazkiya purification, chastening;
pronouncement of s.o.’s integrity or
credibility; attentation of (a witness’)
honorable record (Isl. Law)
زل zalla (1st pers. perf. zalaltu) i (zall) and zalla
(1st pers. perf. zaliltu) a ( زلل zalal) to slip;
to make a mistake, commit an error, a slip;
to slide off s.o. ( عن ), fail to affect s.o. ( ;عن
said of evil) IV to cause ( ه s.o.) to slip; to
make ( ه s.o.) stumble or trip
زل zall a kind of reed (syr.)
زلة zalla slip, lapse │ زلة اللسان z. lisān
slip of the tongue
زل zalal slip, slipping; lapse; mistake,
error, oversight
زلال zulāl cold water زلال البيض z. albaiḍ
white of egg, albumen
زلالي zulālī albuminous; زلاليات
zulālīyāt proteins │ مواد زلالية (mawādd2)
proteins
زلابية zalābiya pl. -āt a kind of doughnut
cooked in oil and sprinkled with sugar
زلج 1 zalaja a ( زلوج zulūj) and zalija a to slip; to
slide along, glide along V do. │ تزلج على
الثلج (talj) to skate VII = V
زلج zalj slippery
زليج zalīj slippery
مزلج mizlaj pl. مزالج mazālij2 skate
مزلاج mizlāj pl. مزاليج mazālīj2 (sliding)
bolt (on a door)
زليج 2 zulaij faïence, ornamental tile
زليجي zulaijī faience, ornamental tile
زلزل zalzala to shake, rook, convulse,
cause to tremble ( ه، ھ s.th., s.o.); pass.
zulzila also: to waver, stumble II tazalzala
to quake (earth)
زلزلة zalzala pl. زلازل zalāzil earthquake
زلزال zalzāl, zilzāl concussion, shock,
convulsion; earthquake
زلط zalaṭa u to swallow, gulp down, gobble ( ھ
s.th.) II to strip, undress ( ه s.o.) V to
undress, strip
زلط zulṭ nakedness, nudity
زلط zalaṭ (coll.; n. un. ة) (eg.) gravel,
pebbles; road metal, ballast
زلعة zal‘a pl. زلع zila‘ (eg.) a kind of tall clay
jar
زلعوم zal‘ūm pl. زلاعيم zalā‘īm2 gullet, throat
زلف zalafa u (zalf, zalaf, زليف zalīf) to
approach ( الى s.o. or s.th.), advance ( الى
toward), go near II to exaggerate, blow up
ھ) a report, في in) IV to bring near, bring
close ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) V to flatter ( الى s.o.),
fawn ( الى upon s.o.), curry favor, ingratiate
o.s. ( الى with s.o., also ل) VIII ازدلف
izdalafa to flatter
زلف zalaf servile flattery, sycophancy,
toadyism, bootlicking
زلفة zulfa and زلفى zulfā servile flattery,
sycophancy, toadyism, bootlicking
متزلف mutazallif sycophant, toady,
bootlicker
زلق zaliqa a (zalaq) and zalaqa u (zalq) to
glide, slide; to slip II to make slippery ( ھ
s.th.); to slip, glide ( في ھ s.th. into) IV to
cause ( ه s.o.) to slip │ ازلقه ببصره (bibaṣarihī)
to look at s.o. sternly or
disapprovingly V and VII to glide, slide;
to skid, slither, slide ( الى into s.th.), to slip;
to ski; to skate │ انزلق على الثلج (talj) 380 to
ski; to skate VII to slip from s.o.’s ( (عن
hand, from s.th. ( (عن
زلق zaliq slippery
زلقة zalqa (n. vic.) slip, skid, slideslip
زلاقة zalāqa slipperiness
زلاقة zallāqa pl. -āt sleigh, sledge, sled;
toboggan; toboggan chute, sledding
course; gutter, eaves trough
مزلق mazlaq pl. مزالق mazāliq2 slippery
spot; slide, chute; esp. pl. treacherous,
perilous ground, pitfalls, dangers, perils
مزلقان mazlaqān (dual) (loading) ramp;
gradient, ramp, driveway, access road
مزلق mizlaq skate; مزلقان a pair of skates
│ O مزلق ذو عجلات (‘ajalāt) roller skate
مزلقة mizlaqa pl. مزالق mazāliq2 sleigh,
sledge, sled; toboggan
انزلاق inzilāq slipping, sliding,
skidding; skiing; skating
منزلق munzaliq: باب منزلق sliding door
زلم 1 zalam pl. ازلام azlām arrow without head
and feathers, used in divination
زلومة 2 zullūma, zallūma pl. زلالم zalālim2 trunk
(of an elephant)
زم zamma u (zamm) to tie up, fasten, tighten (
ھ s.th.); to truss up ( ھ s.th.) │ زم بانفه (bianfihī)
to turn up one’s nose, be
supercilious II to bridle ( ھ a camel), put
the bridle ( ھ on a camel)
زمام zimām pl. ازمة azimma camel
halter, nose rope of the camel; rein, bridle;
halter; day hook; register; ground, land │
بزمامه under his supervision, under his
direction, زمام الأمر z. al-amr reins of
power, قبض على ازمة الأمر to hold the reins
of power in one’s hand, be in control of
power, wield power; تولى زمام الحكم tawallā
z. al-ḥukm to seize the reins of power,
assume power
زمت V to be prim, sedate, staid
زمت tazammut primness gravity,
sedateness
متزمت mutazammit grave, stern, staid,
sedate (character); prim; narrow-minded
J'!-j zam;ara (;j~j zam;ara) to .oold, to
storm, rage, rave
زمجر zamjara ( زمجرة zamjara) to scold; to
storm, rage, rave
زمر 1 zamara i u (zamr, زمير zamīr) to blow,
play (a wind instrument) II do.
زمر zamr blowing, playing (of a wind
instrument)
زمر zamr pl. زمور zumūr a wind
instrument resembling the shoe; horn (of
an automobile; syr.)
زمرة zumra pl. زمر zumar troop; group
(of people); زمرة دموية blood group
زمار zammār player (on a wind
instrument), piper
زمارة zammāra, zummāra pl. زمامير
zamāmīr2 (eg.) a wood-wind instrument
consisting of two pipes, related to the
clarinet; siren │ زمارة الإنذار z. al-indār
warning siren
مزمار mizmār single-pipe wood-wind
instrument resembling the oboe
مزمور mazmūr pl. مزامير mazāmīr2
psalm
ازمير 2 izmīr2 Izmir, Smyrna (seaport in W
Turkey)
زمرد zumurrud emerald
زمردى zumurrudī emerald(-colored)
زمزم zamzama to rumble, roll (thunder); to
murmur
زمزم zamzam copious, abundant (esp.
water); Zemzem, name of a well in Mecca
زمزمية zamzamīya water flasak,
canteen; O thermos bottle
زمزمة zamzama pl. زمازم zamāzim2 roll
of thunder; roar of a lion 381
زمط zamaṭa to escape, slip away
زمع II end IV to determine ( على، ھ on), decide,
resolve, be determined ( على، ھ to do s.th.)
مزمع muzmi‘ determined, rseolved; --
muzma‘ and مزمع عليه decided; imminent;
forthcoming, prospective │ المؤتمر المزمع
عقده في ... al-mu’tamar al-m. ‘aqduhū fī the
conference which is to be held on (with
following date)
زمل 1 III to keep ( ه s.o.) company, be s.o.’s ( (ه
companion, be a colleague or associate ( ه
في of s.o. in s.th.); to accompany ( ه s.o.) VI
to be comrades, be close companions
زملة zumla party, company (of people)
زميل zamīl pl. زملاء zumalā’2
companion, crony, associate, comrade;
colleague; accomplice
زميلة zamiīla pl. -āt (woman)
companion; (woman) colleague; sister
ship
زمالة zamāla comradeship;
colleagueship; fellowship │ زمالة دراسية
(dirāsīya) scholarship, stipend (ir.)
ازميل 2 izmīl pl. ازاميل azāmīl2 chisel
زمن zamina a ( زمانة zamāna) to be chronically
ill IV to stay long, remain ( ب at a place);
to last long; to be chronic (disease)
زمن zaman pl. ازمان azmān time; period,
stretch of time; duration; زمنا zamanan for
some time
زمنة zamana period or time
زمن zamin, زمين zamīn pl. زمنى zamnā
chronically ill
زمان zamān pl. ازمنة azmina time;
duration; fortune, late, destiny │ من زمان
for some time (past), for quite a while; على
الزمان always, ever; اھل زمانه ahl z. his
contemporaries
زمنى zamanī temporal, time (adj.);
worldly, earthly; passing, transient,
transitory; secular │ الغام زمنية mines with
time fuse; قنبلة زمنية (qunbula) time bomb
زماني zamānī temporal, time; worldly,
earthly; passing, transient, transitory;
secular
زمنية zamanīya and زمانية zamānīya
period or time, given time
زمانة zamāna chronic illness
مزمن muzmin lasting, enduring, long,
lived; old, deep-seated, inveterate; chronic
زمھر zamhara to become red, flushed, bloodshot
IV ازمھر izmaharra do.
زمھرير zamharīr bitter cold, severe frost
زن zanna u (zann) to buzz, drone (insect)
زن zann buzz(ing), drone
زنأ zana’a to be limited, be restricted, be
confined, be curbed, be suppressed II to
restrict, keep within bounds, beset, harry,
drive in a corner ( على s.o.)
زنبر II tazanbara to display proud, haughty
manners ( على toward s.o.)
زنبور zunbūr pl. زنابير zanābīr2 hornet
زنبرك zanbarak, zunburuk, zunburak pl. زنابك
(metal) spring; spiral spring; cock (of a
rifle, etc.)
زنبق zanbaq (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. زنابق zanābiq2
lily; iris (bot.)
□ زنبلك zanbalik = زنبرك
زنبيل zanbīl, zinbīl pl. زناببيل zanābīl2 basket
made of palm leaves
زنتاري zintārī dysentery
زنج zanj, zinj (coll.) pl. زنوج zunūj Negro(es)
زنجي zanjī, zinjī Negro (adj. and n.)
زنجبار zanjabār Zanzibar (island and seaport of
E African coast) 382
زنجبيل zanjabīl ginger
زنجر 1 zanjara to flip, snap (with the fingers)
زنجار 2 zinjār verdigris
زنجفر zunjufr, zinjafr cinnabar
زنجير zinjīr pl. زناجير zanājīr2 chain │ حساب
الزنجير double-entry bookkeeping
زنخ zanika a (zanak) to turn rancid
زنخ zanik rancid, rank
زند zand m. and f., pl. زناد zinād, زنود zunūd
stick of a fire drill, a primitive device for
kindling fire; by extension, the whole fire
drill; -- zand, zind (pl. زنود zunūd) ulna
(anat.); forearm
زناد zinād pl. ازند aznida fire steel; cock,
hammer (of a rifle, etc.) │ حجر الزناد ḥajar
az-zinād flint
زندق II tazandaqa to be a freethinker, an
atheist
زندقة zandaqa atheism
زنديق zindīq pl. زنادقة zanādiqa zendik,
unbeliever, freethinker, atheist
زنر II: زنر اليه بعينه (bi-‘ainihī) to glare at s.o.
زنار zunnār and زنارة zunnāra pl.
زنانير zanānīr2 belt, girdle; sash; band or
rope worn around the waist; cross stripe,
traverse band
زنزانة zinzāna pl. -āt prison cell (eg.)
زنلخت zanzalakt China tree (Melia azedarach;
bot.)
زنطارية zinṭārīya dysentery
زنق zanaqa i (rang) to tighten, constrict ( ھ
s.th.); to hobble ( ھ an animal) II to keep
on short rations, scrimp ( على s.o.), be
stingy, tight-fisted ( على toward)
زنقة zanaqa (magr. zanga) pl. زنق zinaq
narrow street, lane, alley, dead-end street
زنق zināq neckband, collar
زنك zink zinc
زنمردة zanmarda virago, termagant
زنيم zanīm low, despised, ignoble, mean;
bastard; stranger, outsider
زنى zanā i ( زنى, زنا zinan, زناء zinā’) to commit
adultery, fornicate, whore
زنى zinan adultery; fornication
زناء zinā’ adultery; fornication
زان zānin pl.; زناة zunāh fornicator,
adulterer
زاننية zāniya pl. زوان zawānin2 whore,
harlot; adulteress
زھد zahada a, zahida a and zahuda u (zuhd) to
abstain ( في from, also عن, ھ ), renounce,
abandon, foresake ( في s.th., also ,(عن، ھ
withdraw ( في، ھ from), refuse to have
anything to do with ( زھد في │ ( في، ھ
الدنيا (dunyā) to renounce pleasure in
worldly things, become an ascetic, lead a
pious, ascetic life II to induce ( ه s.o.) to
withdraw or abstain ( في from); to spoil
s.o.’s ( ه) pleasure in ( في ), arouse a dislike (
في ه in s.o. for) V to practice asceticism,
withdraw from the world X to deem little,
insignificant, trifling, small
زھد zuhd (voluntary) renunciation ( في of
s.th.); jndifference ( في to, esp. to worldly
things); abstemiousness, abstinence;
asceticism │ الزھد في الدنيا (dunyā)
asceticism
زھيد zahīd little, low, moderate (esp.
price), insignificant, peltry, trifling. small;
a little, a small amount ( في of)
زھادة zahāda smallness, lowness,
moderateness
تزھد tazahhud asceticism, life of
retirement devoted to the service of God
زھد zāhid pl. زھاد zuhhād abstemious,
abstinent, continent, self-denying; ascetic
383
زھر zahara a ( زھور zuhūr) to shine, give light,
be radiant IV to glow, gleam, glare, shine;
to blossom, be in bloom (plant, flower)
VIII ازدھر izdahara to shine brightly, be
radiant; to blossom, be in bloom; to
flourish, prosper, thrive
زھر zahr, (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. زھور zuhūr,
ازھر azhur, ازھار azhār, ازاھر azāhir ازاھير , 2
azāhīr2 flowers; blossoms; --cast iron
(also زھر الثالوث │ ( زھر الحديد z. at-tālūt
pansy; زھر الربيع primrose; زھر العسل
al-‘asal honeysuckle; زھر اللؤلؤ z. al-lu’lu’
daisy; ماء الزھر orange-flower water
زھرة zahra (n. un.) pl. āt flower,
blossom; splendor, beauty
زھرة zuhra brilliancy, light, brightness;
beauty │ زھرة الغسيل bluing
الزھرة az-zuhara the planet Venus
زھرى zuharzi syphilis │ امراض زھرية
venereal diseases
زھر zuhrīya pl. -āt flower vase
زھار zahhār, florist
زھراوى zahrāwī gay, merry, cheerful
(person)
ازھر azhar2 shining, luminous, radiant,
brilliant; bright; -- (elative) more radiant
│ الأزھران sun and moon; جامع الأزھر and
الجامع الأزھر Al Azhar Mosque and
University in Cairo
ازھرى azharī of or pertaining to Al
Azhar; (pl. -ūn) Azhar student
مزھر mizhar pl. مزاھر mazāhir2 ancient
Arabic variety of the lute; (now
pronounced mazhar) a kind of tambourine
(eg.)
مزھرية mazharīya flowerpot
تزھير tazhīr bloom, florescence
ازھار izhār florescence
ازدھار izdihār flourishing, florescence,
bloom, heyday
زاھر zāhir shining, luminous, radiant,
brilliant; bright
مزھر muzhir blooming, in bloom;
shining, luminous, bright
زھف zahafa a ( زھوف zuhūf): زھف الى الموت to
be on the verge of death VIII ازدھف الى
الموت do.
زھق zahaqa a (zahq, زھوق zuhūq) to die, pass
away, run out, come to nothing; زھقت نفسه
(nafsuhū) and زھقت روحه (rūḥuhū) to give
up the ghost, die; to weary, become tired (
من of s.th.), be disgusted ( من with s.th.) IV
to bring about the ruin or downfall of s.th.
ھ) ); to destroy, annihilate ( ھ s.th.); (( الروح
ازھق النفس to be disgusting, be revolting
زھوق zuhūq dying, passing, bound to
vanish
زھم zuhm offensive smell
زھم zahm malodorous, fetid
زھمة zuhma offensive smell
زھومة zuhūma offensive smell
زھا (زھو ) zahā u (zahw) to blossom, flower, be
in bloom; to grow, thrive; to shine
brightly, be radiant, glow, gleam; to give
o.s. airs, be haughty, conceited; to pride
o.s. ( ب upon, both in a favorable and a
pejorative sense); pass. زھى zuhiya to be
proud, conceited ( ب of), pride o.s. ( ب on),
boast ( ب of), vaunt ( ب s.th.) IV to
blossom, flower, be in bloom; to grow,
thrive; to give o.s. airs, be conceited, be
boastful VIII ازدھى izdahā and pass.
uzduhiya to be self-satisfied, complacent,
conceited, proud; izdahā to shine ( ب at, in
s.th.), have ( ب an accomplishment) to
show; to boast ( ب of s.th.), vaunt ( ب s.th.)
زھو zahw and zuhuw bloom,
florescence; splendor; beauty; pride;
haughtiness, arrogance; vanity, a vain or
futile thing or things; fun, play,
amusement 384
زھى zahīy brilliant, splendid,
magnificent, gorgeous, sumptuous
زھاء zahā’ radiance, brilliancy,
splendor
زھاء zuhā’ number, amount; zuhā’a
roughly, about, some (with foll. figure)
ازھى azhā more flourishing; prouder,
more conceited
ازدھاء izdihā’ bloom, florescence,
flourishing; heyday; shining; glittering,
splendor, radiance; pride (both in a
favorable and a pejorative sense)
زاه zāhin shining, brilliant, radiant,
resplendent; glowing; splendid, gorgeous,
magnificent, gaudy, beautiful
مزھو mazhūw proud ( ب of); haughty,
supercilious, vainglorious; cocky,
overbearing
زوبعة see زبع
زوج 2 II to pair, couple ( من or ب ھ s.th. with),
join in pairs or couples ( ھ s.th.); to
double, geminate ( ھ s.th.); to employ
parallelism (rhet.); to marry off, give in
marriage ( ه، ھ، ھا من a girl to s.o.) III to
form a pair or couple; to use in parallel
construction, join in a pair ( بين two words,
rhet.); to marry, join in wedlock, unite in
matrimony ( بين -- و s.o. with) V to get
married ( من, ب، على، ه with), marry (, من, ب
على، ه s.o.) VI to intermarry; to pair, come
together forming a pair, be in pairs, be
double VIII ازدوج izdawaja to pair, he in
pairs, be double, appear twice
زوجة zauja pl. ازواج azwāj one of a pair;
husband; wife; mate, partner; couple, pair
(also, e.g., of shoes); dual زوجان couple
زوجة zauja pl. -āt wife
زيجة zīja marriage, wedding
زوجي zaujī in pairs, paired; double;
marital, matrimonial, conjugal; doubles
(tennis)
زيجي zījī marital, matrimonial,
conjugal, connubial
زوجية zaujīya pl. -āt matrimony,
marriage
زواج zawāj marriage ( من with);
wedding; matrimony, wedlock │ وحدة
الزواج wahdat az-z. monogamy
مزاوج mizwāj frequently marrying
تزويج tazwīj marrying off (of a woman,
من to)
زواج zawāj doubling, duplication;
parallelism (rhet.)
مزاوجة muzāwaja pairing, coupling,
close union (of two things)
تزوج tazawwuj marriage
تزاوج tazāwuj intermarriage
ازدواج izdiwāj pairedness doubleness; O
coupling (el.) │ ازدواج ضريبي (ḍarībī)
double taxation
متزوج mutazawwij married
مزدوج muzdawij double, twofold, two-
(e.g., of a railroad: two-track)
زاج 2 look up alphabetically
زاح (زوح ) zāḥa u = ( زيح) زاح zāḥa i
زود II to supply with provisions ( ه ھ s.o.),
provision ( ھ ب , s.o. with); to provide,
supply, equip ( ب ھ، ه s.o., s.th. with); to
endow ( ه ب s.o. with); to enrich ( ھ ب s.th.
with) IV to supply with provisions ( ه s.o.)
V to be supplied (with provisions); to take
along provisions (on a journey); to learn (
من from s.o.); to provide o.s., supply o.s
equip o.s. ( ب with)
زاد zād pl. ازواد azwād, ازودة azwida
provisions, supplies, stores
زواد zawād provisions
زوادة zuwwāda provisions
مزود mizwad pl. مزاود mazāwid مزائد , 2
mazāid2 provision bag, haversack 385
مزادة mazāda provision bag, haversack
تزويد tazwīd supply, purveyance ( ب of).
provision, equipment ( ب with); manning
(of ships)
زائدة pl. زوائد see زيد
مزود muzawwid pl. -ūn contractor,
supplier, furnisher, purveyor, victualer,
caterer
مزود muzawwad provided, supplied,
furnished ( ب with); equipped ( ب with);
armed ( ب with guns) ; conneoted ( ب with),
attended, accompanied ( ب by)
زار (زور ) zāra u (zaur, زيارة ziyāra) to visit ( ه
s.o.), call ( ه on s.o.), pay a visit ( ه to); to
afflict ( ه s.o.) II to forge, falsify,
counterfeit ( ه s.th.); to fake, simulate VI to
exchange visits IX to turn aside, turn
away, dissociate o.s. ( عن from); to be
averse ( عن to s.th.); ازور به to turn s.o.
away, alienate s.o. ( عن from) X to desire
s.o.’s ( ه) visit
زور zaur upper part of the chest; throat
│ آلام الزور sore throat
زور zūr lie, untruth; falsehood │ شھادة
الزور šahādat az-z. false testimony
زور zūr force │ بالزور by force, forcibly
زور zawar inclination, obliqueness,
slant; crookedness; falseness; perfidy,
insidiousness; squint
زورة zaura (n. vic.) pl. -āt visit, call
زيارة ziyāra pl. -āt visit; call (social, of
a doctor)
ازور azwar2, f. زوراء zaurā’2, pl. زور zūr
inclined, slanting, oblique; crooked,
curved; squint-eyed, cross-eyed
مزار mazār pl. -āt place which one
visits; shrine, sanctuary
تزوير tazwīr forgery, falsification │
تزوير في السندات (sanadāt) falsification of
documents
ازورار izwirār turning away;
averseness, aversion, dislike, distaste
زائر zā’ir pl. -ūn, زوار zuwwār, f. زائرة
zā’ira pl. -āt, زور zuwwar visitor, caller,
guest
مزور mazūr visited
مزور muzawwar forged, false,
counterfeit; obtained by swindle, faked
زورق zauraq pl. زوارق zawāriq2 boat, rowboat,
skiff │ زورق بخاري (bukhārī) steam launch;
زورق الصيد z. aṣ-ṣaid fishing boat; زورق
النجاة z. an-najāh lifeboat; O زورق ناصف
torpedo boat
زاغ (زوغ 1 ) zāga u (zaug, زوغان zawagān) to
turn aside, depart, deviate ( عن from),
swerve; to deviate from truth, to swindle;
see also زيغ VI to turn aside, swerve
زاغ 2 look up alphabetically
زوفاء zūfā’, زوفى zūfā hyssop (bot.)
زوق 1 II to adorn, embellish, ornament,
decorate ( ھ s.th.); to picture, visualize ( ھ
a story, in one’s imagination)
زواق zawāq embellishment, adornment,
ornamentation; decoration; finery, attire;
face painting, make-up, cosmetics
مزوق muzawwaq adorned, embellished,
ornamented, decorated; florid, flowery
(speech); dressed up, meretricious, showy,
gaudy
زاووق، زاؤوق 2 look up alphabetically
زول ) and زال (زيل zāla (1st pers. perf. zultu) u (
زوال zawāl) to go away, withdraw ( عن or
من from), abandon, leave ( عن or من s.o. or
s.th.); to disappear, vanish; to abate, calm
down, die down, come to an end; to go
down, set; -- (1st pers. perf. ziltu) a (zail)
to cease (with negations only) │of : زول
زال منه الغضب (gaḍab) his wrath abated; زال
عن الوجود to cease to exist; -- of زيل : with
neg. ما زال، لم يزل ٣٨٦ (yazal), لا يزال
equivalent to Engl. “still, yet”: ما زلت افعله
(af‘aluhū) I have not ceased to do it, I
(am) still do(ing) it; ما زال قائما he is still
standing, ما زال في he has not ceased to be
or to remain in, he is still in; لا يزال في حاجة
اليه he is still in need of it, he still needs it;
لا يزال على ذكر منه (dikrin) he still
remembers him II زول zawwala to remove,
eliminate ( ھ s.th.), -- زيل zayyala to
separate, break up, disperse, scatter ( ھ
s.th.) III زاول zāwala to pursue ( ھ s.th.),
devote o.s. apply o.s. ( ھ to); -- زايل zāyala
to separate, part ( ھ، ه from), leave, quit,
abandon ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to separate
بين) s.th.) │ زايل الدار to move out of the
house, leave the house IV to cause to
cease or stop, make disappear or vanish ( ھ
s.th.), to remove, eliminate ( ھ s.th.), put
an end ( ھ to s.th.), do away ( ھ with s.th.),
make a clean sweep ( ھ of s.th.) VI تزايل
tazāyala to be disjointed, incoherent; to
pass away, cease, stop
زول zaul pl. ازوال azwāl person, body,
figure, nightly apparition, specter, ghost,
phantom, spirit
زوال zawāl end, passage, extinction,
disappearance, vanishing, cessation;
setting (of the sun); noon │ سريع الزوال
ephemeral, evanescent, fleeting, بعد الزوال
in the afternoon; عند الزوال around noon, by
noon; خط الزوال kaṯṭ az-z. meridian
زوالي zawālī: في الساعة الرابعة زوالية atfour
o’clock in the afternoon, at four p.m.
زولية zūlīya pl. زوالي zawālī (ir., saud.)
knotted rug
مزولة mizwala pl. مزاول mazāwil2
sundial
مزاولة muzāwala pursuit (of s.th.),
application (to); assiduous study; practice
(of some work, of a profession)
ازالة izāla removal, elimination
زائل zā’il transitory, passing,
evanescent, fleeting, ephemeral, shortlived
زولوجيا zōlōjiyā zoology
زولوجي zōlōjī zoologic(al)
زام (زوم ) zāma u (eg.) to growl, snarl (dog) II
to mumble, mutter
زوم zūm pl. ازوام azwām juice, sap
زان، زانة 1 look up alphabetically
زوان 2 ziwān, zuwān = زؤان (q.v.)
زوى zawā i to contract, wrinkle, knit ( ھ
s.th., e.g., the eyebrows), to remove ( ھ
s.th.); to hide, conceal ( ھ s.th.) │ زوى ما بين
عينيه (‘ainaihi) he knitted his eye-brows,
he frowned (in anger, and the like) II and
V to withdraw into a corner, go into
seclusion, retire VII do., to keep to o.s.,
live in seclusion or retirement │ انزوى في
جلده (jildihī) to crawl inside o.s. (out of
shame, and the like)
انزواء inziwā’ retirement, seclusion,
isolation
زاوية zāwiya pl. زوايا zawāyā corner,
nook; angle (math.); a small mosque,
prayer room; (North Afr.) small cupolaed
mosque erected over the tomb of a
Muslim saint, with teaching facilities and
a hospice attached to it, usually the
establishment of a religious order │ الزاوية
الحادة (ḥādda) acute angle, الزاوية الخارجة
external angle, متساوى الزوايا mutasāwī azz.
equiangular, الزاوية المنفرجة (munfarija)
obtuse angle, الزاوية القائمة right angle, حجر
الزاوية ḥajar az-z. cornerstone; من زوايا
مختلفة (muktalifa) from different angles
(i.e., aspects)
منزو munzawin seclusive, secluding;
retired, secluded, outlying, remote, out-ofthe-
way, obscure
زي II زيى، زيا zayyā to dress, clothe, costume ( ه
ب s.o. in) V تزيى، تزيا tazayyā to dress, put
on a dress or costume; to dress up,
smarten o.s. up, to be dressed, be clad ( ب
in), wear ( ب th.) 387
زي ziyy pl. ازياء azyā’ clothing, dress,
apparel, attire; O uniform; outward
appearance, make-up; costume; style of
dress, manner of dressing; fashion;
exterior, guise, form, shape │ على الزي
الجديد fashionable, modish, stylish
زيبق zībaq (= زئبق zi‘baq) quicksilver,
mercury
زيت II to oil, lubricate, grease ( ھ a
machine, and the like); to add oil ( ھ to
some food)
زيت zait pl. زيوت zuyūt oil (edible, fuel,
motor oil, etc.) │ زيت حار (ḥārr) linseed
oil; زيت حلو (ḥulw) sweet oil, oil free of
hydrogen sulfide; زيت الحوت z. al-ḥūt codliver
oil; زيت الخروع z. al-kirwa‘ castor oil;
زيت السمك z. as-samak cod-liver oil; زيت
التشحيم lubricating oil; زيت الاستصباح fuel
oil; زيت الغاز z. al-gāz kerosene
زيتي zaitī oily, oil (adj.), oil-bearing │
صورة زيتية or لوحة زيتية (ṣūra, lauḥa) oil
painting
زيات zayyāt oil dealer, oilman
زيتون zaitūn (coll.; n. un. ة) olive tree;
olive(s) │ احد الزيتون aḥad az-z. Palm
Sunday (Chr.); جبل ازيتون jabal az-z.
Mount of Olives (Jerusalem)
زيتونة zaitūna (n. un.) pl. -āt olive tree;
olive │ جامع الزيتونة the Zaitouna Mosque
(large mosque and university in Tunis)
زيتوني zaitūnī olivaceous, olive-colored,
olive-green; (pl. -ūn) student of the Great
Mosque of Tunis
زيتونية zaitūnīya, احد الزيتونية aḥad az-az.
Palm Sunday (Cop.-Chr.)
مزيتة mazyata oil can, oiler
مزيت muzayyat oiled
زيج 1 zīj leveling line (used by masons);
ephemeris, astronomical almanac
زيجة 2 zīja and زيجي zījī see زوج
زاح (زيح ) zāḥa i (zaiḥ, zuyūḥ, زيحان zayaḥān) to
go away, depart, leave IV to remove, drive
away, banish ( ھ s.th.), do away with ( ;(ھ
to take away ( ھ s.th.); to pull away, throw
back ( ھ a curtain, a veil, etc., عن from
s.th.) │ ازاح اللثام عن to reveal, disclose s.th.;
ازاح الستار عن تمثال (timtāl) to unveil a
monument VII to go away, depart, leave;
to be pulled away, be thrown back
(curtain)
زيح zīh pl. ازياح azyāḥ (straight) line
زياح zayyāḥ pl. -āt religious procession
ازاحة izāḥa removal, abolition │ ازاحة
الستار unveiling (of a monument)
زاد (زيد ) zāda i ( زيادة ziyāda) to become greater,
become more, grow, increase, be
compounded, multiply; to be greater, be
more, amount to more ( عن or على than),
exceed ( عن or على s.th., an amount, ب by),
go beyond an amount or number ( على ); to
augment, increase, compound ( ھ s.th.),
make ( ھ s.th.) grow or increase; to step
up, raise ( من، ھ s.th., الى ھ s.th. to); to add
على ھ) s.th. to); to add, make additions (
على to), enlarge ( على s.th.); to extend,
expand, further, advance, promote,
intensify ( في or من s.th.); to give more ( ھ ه
to s.o. of s.th.) │ لا يزيد على it is no more
than ... , it is only .. ; زاد قائلا he added (in
speech followed by quotation); زد على ذلك
(zid) (prop.: add to it that ...) in addition to
that there is ..., what’s more, there is ...;
furthermore, moreover; زاده علما (‘ilman) to
tell s.o. more about it, supply s.o. with
more information II to increase, augment,
compound, make grow m to make a
higher bid ( ه than s.o.), outbid ( ه s.o.; at an
auction) V to increase; to nee, go up
(prices); to make additions, add
embellishments of one’s own, exaggerate
(in telling s.th.); to be long-winded,
verbose │ تزيد من العلم، من المعرفة (‘ilm,
ma‘rifa) to acquire additional knowledge,
increase one’s knowledge VI 388 to
outbid one another; to increase gradually,
be growing; to become more intense,
intensify; to become more and more,
exceed more and more ( من s.th.) VIII ازداد
izdāda to grow, be growing, increase, be
compounded, multiply │ ازداد بكاء
(bukā’an) he wept more and more X to
demand more, ask for more, go up with
one’s demands; to try to achieve more; to
aim or work at an increase, expansion or
extension ( ھ of); to ask ( ه s.o.) to give
more of s.th.
الزيدية az-zaidīya a Shiitic group
forming an independent commonwealth
(Yemen)
الزيود az-zuyūd the Zaidites, adherents
of the Zaidiya sect
زيادة ziyāda increase, increment,
accretion, growth; surplus, overplus,
excess; increase, augmentation, raising,
stepping up; enhancement, elevation,
intensification; extra pay, allowance (in
addition to the salary); addition; زيادة
ziyādatan in addition, additionally │ زيادة
عن (ziyādatan) over and above, beyond, in
excess of; regardless of; aside from; حمله
زيادة عن تحمله ḥammalahū z. ‘an
taḥammulihi he loaded him with more
than he could carry; زيادة على ذلك
(ziyādatan) moreover, besides; زيادة المواليد
excess of births; لزيادة الإيضاح (īḍāḥ) in
order to make it even clearer, for further
elucidation
ازيد azyad2 more excessive, higher,
greater, bigger
مزاد mazād pl. -āt auction, public sale
مزيد mazīd an exceeding ( على of s.th.);
excess, superabundance; high degree,
large extent; utmost, maximum; (with foll.
genit.) excessive, extreme, utmost,
highest, greatest, superlative; pass. partic.
of I: increased, etc.; the derivative stems
of the verb (gram.) │ بمزيد الشكر bi-m. iššukr
with many, many thanks; بمزيد الأسف
bi-m. il-asaf with the greatest regret; بمزيد
الارتياح with extreme satisfaction; ليس له من
مزيد it is unsurpassable, it’s not to be
outdone
مزايدة muzāyada pl. -āt auction, public
sale
تزيد tazayyud exaggeration (in
reporting), one’s own embellishments or
additions, fables, yarn
تزايد tazāyud (gradual) increase,
increment, growth
ازدياد izdiyād increase, growth, rise,
intensification
استزادة istizāda a striving for more;
pursuit of an increase, expansion or
extension; desire or request for more │ لم
يبق استزادة لمستزيد (yabqa, li-mustazīdin)
there is nothing to be added, nothing more
need be said about it
زائد zā’id increasing, growing;
excessive, immoderate; exceeding ( عن
s.th.), in excess ( عن of); additional, extra,
supernumerary │ زائد على الحاجة more than
necessary, surplus
زائدة zā’ida pl. زوائد zawā’id2
appendage, appendix (anat., zool., bot.);
outgrowth (med.) │ زائدة معوية (mi‘awīya)
and زائدة دودية (dūdīya) vermiform
appendix (anat.)
مزايد muzāyid pl. -ūn bidder, outbidder
(at an auction)
متزايد mutazāyid steadily increasing,
swelling
زير 1 II (mor.) to close ( ھ a button)
زير 2 zīr pl. ازيار azyār, زيار ziyār (eg., magr.)
large, almost conical jar, made of porous
clay, for storing water
زير 3 zīr the highest string of stringed
instruments (mus.) 389
زيز zīz (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. زيزان zīzān
cicada; chrysalis
زيزفون zaizafūn jujube (Zizyphus; bot.);
linden tree
زاغ (زيغ 1 ) zāga i (zaig, زيغان zayagān) to turn
aside; to depart, deviate ( عن from); to
swerve; to turn away ( عن from), turn one’s
back ( عن on); to wander, stray, roam
(eyes) IV to cause ( ھ s.th.) to deviate │
ازاغ عني بصره (baṣarahū) he looked past
me, he snubbed me
زيغ zaig and زيغان zayagān a turning
aside; deviation, departure ( عن from) │ زيغ
وسداد (sadād) erring and doing right,
wrong and right
زائغ zāig deviating, divergent; false,
wrong, distorted, perverted │ نظرات زائغة
(nazarāt) wandering glances
زاغ 2 look up alphabetically
زاف (زيف ) zāfa i (zaif) to be false, be spurious
II to counterfeit ( ھ money); to declare ( ھ
s.th.) to be false or spurious
زيف zaif falseness; pride; (pl. زيوف
zuyūf) false, spurious, forged, counterfeit
ازيف azyaf2 falser, more spurious
تزييف tazyīf falsification, forgery,
counterfeiting
زائف zā’if false; forged, counterfeit,
spurious │ اخبار زائفة false reports; نقود زائفة
counterfeit money
مزيف muzayyif forger, counterfeiter
مزيف muzayyaf forged; counterfeit,
false, spurious; pseudo-
زيق 1 II (eg.) to creak, screech
زيق 2 zīq pl. ازياق azyāq collar, neckband;
border, hem (of a garment)
زال (زيل ) and II, III, VI see زول
زان (زين 1 ) zāna i (zain) to decorate, adorn ( ھ
s.th.) II to adorn, decorate, embellish,
ornament ( ھ s.th.); to grace ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.);to shave ( ه s.o.); زينت نفسھا (nafsahā)
to make herself up (lady); to paint in
glowing tones, present in a favorable light,
extol ( ل، الى ھ s.th. to s.o.); to conjure up (
ه s.th., ل before s.o.’s eyes), create visions
ھ) of s.th., ل in s.o.’s mind), lead s.o. ( (ل
to believe ( ان that); to give ( ل s.o.) the idea
ان) to do s.th.), suggest ( ل ان to s.o. to do
s.th.) V to be decorated, be adorned; to
dress up, smarten o.s. up, spruce up, preen
o.s.; to shave, get a shave VIII ازدان
izdāna to be decorated, be adorned; to be
graced
زين zain beauty; beautiful, nice, pretty
زينة zīna pl. -āt embellishment,
adornment, ornament, decoration; cloth.,
attire, finery; toilette │ زينة الوجه z. al-wajh
make-up; بيت الزينة bait az-z. beauty shop;
اشجار الزينة ornamental tress; نباتات الزينة
nabātāt az-z. ornamental plants; خوان الزينة
kuwān az-z. dressing table; غرفة الزينة
gurfat az-z. dressing room
زيان zayyān beautiful
زيان ziyān embellishment, adornment,
decoration; ornament
زيانة ziyāna barber’s or hairdresser’s
trade
تزيين tazyīn adorning, decoration,
ornamentation; make-believe, sham,
pretense
مزين muzayyin barber, hairdresser
مزين muzayyin decorated, ornamented,
adorned ( ب with); graced ( ب with)
مزدان muzdān decorated, ornamented,
adorned ( ب with); graced ( ب with)
زان 2 look up alphabetically
زينكو zinkō zinc 390
س
س sa shortened form of سوف saufa (q.v.)
ساتان sātān satin
ساج sāj pl. سيجان sījān teak, Indian oak
ساجات sījān castanets
سادة sāda simple; plain, unicolored, uniform
(fabric) │ قھوة سادة (qahwa) unsweetened
coffee
سؤدد see سود 2
سئر sa’ira a to remain, be left
سؤر su’r pl. اسآر as’ār rest, remainder,
remnant, leftover (esp. of food and
beverages)
سؤرة su’ra rest, remainder, remnant,
leftover (esp. of food and beverages);
vestige of youthful vigor
سائر sā’ir remaining; rest, remainder;
(with foll. det. genit.) all
الساسانيون as-sāsānīyūn the Sassanidae, a
dynasty of Persian kings (226-651 A.D.)
ساغو sāgō sago
ساكو sākō, ساكوه sack coat, lounge jacket
سأل sa’ala a ( سؤال su’āl, مسألة mas’ala, تسآل
tas’āl) to ask ( عن or ه ھ s.o. s.th. or about
s.th.); to inquire ( عن ه of s.o. about); to ask
ھ من) or ه s.o. for s.th.), request, demand,
claim ( من ھ or ه from s.o. s.th.) سأله الا
sa’alahū illa to implore, adjure s.o. that he
سأله عن اخباره ;... to ask s.o. about s.o. else;
سأله رأيه (ra’yahā) to ask s.o.’s opinion,
consult s.o.; سأله سؤالا to ask s.o. a
question; يسأل (yus’alu) he is responsible,
answerable ( عن for) III to ask, question,
interrogate ( ه s.o.); to call ( ه s.o.) to
account IV اسأله سؤله (as’alahū) to fulfill
s.o.’s wish, comply with s.o.’s request V
tasa’’ala and تسول tasawwala to beg VI to
ask; to ask o.s.; to ask one another; تساءل
ھل (عن ) to ask o.s. whether (about); to
inquire ( عن about)
سؤل su’l demand, request, wish
سؤلة su’la demand, request, wish
سؤال su’āl pl. اسئلة as’ila question ( عن
about); request ( عن for); inquiry ( عن
about); demand, claim
سأال sa’’āl given to asking questions,
inquisitive, curious
سؤول sa’ūl given to asking questions,
inquisitive, curious
مسألة (مسئلة ) mas’ala pl. مسائل masā’il2
question; issue, problem; matter, affair,
case; request
مساءلة musā’ala questioning,
interrogation
تسول tasawwu1 begging, beggary
تساؤل tasā’ul (self-directed) question;
questioning
سائل sā’il pl. –ūn, سؤال su’āl, سألة sa’ala
questioner; petitioner; beggar
مسؤول mas’ūl responsible, answerable,
accountable ( عن for)
مسئولية mas’ūlīya pl. -āt responsibility (
عن for)
متسول mutasawwil pl. -ūn beggar
سام 1 sām Shem (eldest son of Noah)
سامي sāmī Semitic; (pl. -ūn) Semite
اللاسامية al-lā-sāmīya anti-Semitism
سئم 2 sa’ima a ( سأم sa’m, سآمة sa’āma) to be
weary, tired ( من or ھ of s.th.), be bored,
fed up ( من or ھ with s.th.); to dislike,
detest, loathe ( ان doing s.th.), have an 391
aversion ( ان to doing s.th.) IV to cause or
arouse weariness or boredom ( ه in s.o.),
weary, bore ( ه s.o.)
سئم sa’im weary, tired, bored
سؤوم sa’ūm disgusted, weary, fed up
سآمة sa’āma weariness, disgust,
boredam, ennui
سب sabba u (sabb) to insult, abuse, call names,
revile ( ه s.o.), rail ( ه at); to curse ( ه s.o.); to
blaspheme, curse, swear II to cause,
provoke, arouse, produce, bring about,
effect, occasion ( ھ s.th.), give occasion ( ھ
to s.th.) III to exchange insults or abusive
language ( ھ with s.o.) V to be caused, be
produced ( عن by), be the consequence or
result ( عن of), follow, arise, spring, result (
عن from); to be the reason or cause, be at
the bottom ( ب or في of), be to blame ( في
for), be instrumental ( في in); to seek
reason or motives ( الى for s.th.); to
account, give a reason or explanation ( الى
for), justify, motivate ( الى s.th.); to use ( ب
s.th.) as a means ( الى for); to trade, be in
the retail business VI to insult each other,
call one another names, rail at each other
VIII = VI
سب sabb abuse, vituperation, insults,
cursing
سبة sabba period of time, (long) while
سبة sibba: سبة الآلام s. al-ālam Passion
Week (Chr.)
سبة subba disgrace, shame, dishonor
سبب sabab pl. اسباب asbāb rope, tent
rope; means for obtaining s.th.; reason,
cause, motive, occasion (with fall. genit.
or في : of); means of subsistence; (esp. pl.)
relations (between people) │ سبب اكبر main
reason; اسباب الحكم a. al-ḥukm opinion
(jur.); اسباب الراحة luxury; بسبب bi-sababi
because of, on account of, due to, by; بسبب
ذلك because of that, for that reason,
therefore; كان السبب فيه (sababa) to be the
cause of s.th., be to blame for s.th.; يرجع
السبب الى (yarji‘u) the reason is to be found
in ...; اخذ سأسباب الحضارة الحديثة (ḥaḍāra) to
adopt modern civilization; وصل اسبابه بأسبابه
(asbābahū) to join forces with s.o.; تقطعت
الأسباب بين relations between ... are broken
out, they no longer have anything in
common; شاطره أسباب المسرة šāṭarahū
asbāba al-masarra to share s.o.’s joy
سببية sababīya causality
سباب sabbāb abuser, vituperator, reviler
سبابة sabbāba index finger
سبيب sabīb pl. سبائب sabā’ib2 strand of
hair
مسبة masabba pl. -āt vilification, abuse,
insult
تسبيب tasbīb mediate causation (Isl.
Law)
سباب sibāb abuse, vituperation,
revilement
مسابة musābba abuse, vituperation,
revilement
مسبب musabbib causer, originator,
author; مسببات musabbibāt causative
factors
مسبب musabbab caused ( عن by) │ السبب
والمسبب (sabab) cause and effect
متسبب mutasabbib causer; cause;
retailer, small storekeeper
سبا sabā and سبأ saba’ Sheba │ ( ذھبوا ايدي (ايادي
سبا d. aidiya (aydiya) sabā they were
scattered to the four winds
سبانخ sabānak, sabānik spinach
سباھى see سبايس
سبايس sabāyis and سباھي sibāhī spahis, Algerian
native cavalry in the French army
سبت 1 sabata u to rest; to keep the Sabbath IV
to enter on the Sabbath 392
السبت as-sabt pl. السبوت as-sabūt
Sabbath, Saturday │ يوم السبت yaum as-s.
do.; سبت النور s. an-nūr Holy Saturday
(Chr.)
سبات subāt lethargy; slumber, sleep
سباتي subātī lethargic │ اللالتھاب المخى
السباتي (mukkī) encephalitis lethargica,
sleeping sickness (med.)
مسبت musbit lethargic, inactive,
motionless
سبت 2 sabat pl. -āt, اسبتة asbita basket
سبت 3 sibitt dill (Anethum graveolens; bot.)
سبتمبر sibtambir September
سبج sabaj jet (min.)
سبح sabaḥa a (sabḥ, سبح sibāḥa) to swim (, في
ب in); to float (fig.); to spread II to praise,
glorify ( لله allāha, 􀍿 li-llāhi God, by
saying سبحان لله subḥāna llāh praise the
Lord!); to praise, extol ( ب s.th.) │ سبح بحمده
(ḥamdihī) to sing s.o.’s praise, glorify s.o.
سبحة sabḥa (n. un.) a swim, swimming
سبحة sabḥa pl. سبحات subuḥāt, سبح
subaḥ beads of the Muslim rosary;
Muslim rosary; supererogatory salat (Isl.
Law)
سبحة subḥa, sabḥa pl. سبحات subuḥāt,
sabaḥāt majesty (of God) │ سبحات وجه لله
subuḥātu wajhi llāh the sublimity, or the
august splendor, or God’s countenance;
سبحات رفيعة (sabaḥāt) lofty heights
سبحان لله subḥāna llāh exclamation of
surprise, etc. (prop.: praise the Lord! God
be praised!); سبحان لله عن God is far
above ..., God is beyond …
سباح sabbāḥ swimmer
سبوح sabūḥ a good swimmer; swift and
smooth-running (lit.: floating; of horses)
سباحة sibāḥa (art of) swimming
مسبح masbaḥ pl. مسابح masābiḥ2
swimming pool
مسبحة misbaḥa pl. مسابح masābiḥ2 rosary
تسبيح tasbīḥ pl. -āt, تسابيح tasābīḥ2
glorification of God (by exclaiming سبحان
(لله
تسبيحة tasbīḥa pl. -āt, تسابيح tasābīḥ2
glorification of God; hymn, song of praise
تسبحة tasbiḥa hymn, song of praise
سابح sābiḥ pl. -ūn, سباح subbāḥ, سبحاء
subaḥā’2 swimmer; bather │ سابح في افكاره
lost in thought
O سابحة sābiḥa glider, sailplane, cargo
glider
سابحات sābiḥāt and سوابح sawābiḥ2
floating ones (epithet for race horses)
مسبحة musabbiḥa index finger
سبحلة sabḥala glorification of God
سبخ sabaka u (sabk) to be sound asleep II do.;
to manure, fertilize ( الأرض al-arḍa the
land)
سبخ sabak dung, manure, fertilizer │ سبخ
بلدي (baladī) manure
سبخ sabik briny (soil)
سبخة sabaka, sabka pl. سباخ sibāk salt
marsh, salt swamp │ ارض سبخ do.
سباخ sibāk pl. اسبخة asbika dung,
manure, fertilizer │ سباخ بلدي (baladī)
manure
سبيخ sabīk pl. سبائخ sabā’ik2 loose
(unspun) cotton
تسبيخ tasbīk deep, sound sleep; O coma,
somnolence (med.)
سبر sabara u i (sabr) to examine with a
probe, to probe ( ھ a wound); to measure,
sound ( ھ s.th., e.g., the depth); to fathom,
explore, examine ( ھ s.th.) │ سبر اغوار
الشيء ٣٩٣ to probe the depth of s.th., get to
the bottom of s.th., study s.th. thoroughly
سبر sabr probing (of a wound);
fathoming, exploration, examination
سبار sibār pl. سبر subūr probe (med.)
سبورة sabūra slate; blackboard
مسبر misbar pl. مسابر masābir2 probe
(med.)
مسبار misbār pl. مسابير masābīr2 probe
(med.)
سبس sibs small wind instrument resembling the
oboe (eg.)
سبسب II tasabsaba to be lank (hair); to flow
(tears)
سبسب sabsaba pl. سباسب sabāsib2 desert,
wasteland │ قفر سبسب (qafr) desert,
wasteland, desolate region
سبط sabuṭa u ( سبوطة subūṭa, سباطة sabāṭa) to be
lank (hair)
سبط sabiṭ, sabṭ, sabaṭ pl. سباط sibāṭ lank
(hair) │ سبط اليدين sabṭ (sabiṭ) al-yadain
liberal, openhanded, generous; سبط القامة s.
al-qāma shapely, well-built, of graceful
stature
سبط sibṭ pl. اسباط asbāṭ grandson; tribe
(of the Israelites)
سباط sabbāṭ pl. سبابيط sabābīt shoe
سباطة subāṭa bunch, cluster (of fruit)
ساباط sābāṭ pl. سوابط sawābīṭ2 arcade,
roofed lane or street; archway
سيباط sībāṭ and (eg.) سباط subāṭ arcade,
roofed lane or street; archway
سبع II to make sevenfold ( ھ s.th.); to divide
into seven parts ( ھ s.th.)
سبع sab‘ pl. اسبع asbu‘, سبوع subū‘, سبوعة
subū‘a predatory animal, beast of prey;
lion
سبع sabu‘ pl. سباع siba‘ predatory
animal, beast of prey; lion
سبعة sab‘a (f. سبع sab‘) seven; سبعة عشر
sab‘ata ‘ašara (f. سبع عشرة sab‘a ‘ašrata)
seventeen
سبع sub‘, subu‘ pl. اسباع asbā‘ oneseventh
سباعي subā‘ī consisting of seven parts;
seven-lettered, consisting of seven letters
سبعون sab‘ūn seventy
سبعوني sab‘ūnī septuagenarian
الترجمة السبعينية at-tajyama as-sab‘īnīya
the Septuagint
السبوعات (Hebr. šebū‘ōt) as-sabū‘āt
Shabuoth, the Feast of Weeks, or
Pentecost, of the Jews
اسبوع usbū‘ pl. اسابيع asābī‘2 week │
اسبوع الآلام Passion Week (Chr.)
اسبوعي usbū‘ī weekly; اسبوعيا weekly,
by the week
اسبوعية usbū‘īya weekly feature (radio)
السابع as-sābi‘ the seventh
سبغ sabaga u a ( سبغ subūg) to be long and
wide; to abound, be abundant IV to make
wide, widen ( ھ s.th.); to make ( ھ s.th.)
complete; to bestow amply ( على upon s.o.,
ھ s.th.), shower ( ھ على s.o. with); to lend,
impart liberally ( ھ على to s.th. s.th.); to
attribute, ascribe ( على to s.o., ھ qualities)
│ اسبغ الوضوء to perform the ritual ablution
properly (Isl. Law)
سابغ sābig pl. سوابغ sawābig2 long and
loose-fitting (garment); full, complete,
perfect; excessive, abundant, ample
سبق sabaqa i u (sabq) to be, come, go, get, or
act, before or ahead of s.o. or s.th. ( ,(ھ، ه
precede, antecede ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th., in place
and time), arrive before s.o. ( ه) at ( الى ); to
outstrip, outdistance, leave behind ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to forestall ( ھ s.th.); to
anticipate (o s.th.); to do 394 or say s.th. (
الى ) spontaneously before one can be
stopped; to turn spontaneously,
instinctively, without knowing why ( الى to
s.th.); to surpass, beat ( على or ه s.o.) │ سبق
له ان فعله (an fa‘alahū) he had already done
it before; سبق له ان قابله (an qābalahū) he
had met him before (paraphrasing the
pluperfect); سبق لنا القول ان (qaulu) we have
previously (already) said that ...; سبق الحكم
عليه ب (ḥukmu) he had been previously
sentenced to …; سبق لي it happened to me
before, I experienced before ( ان that); لم
يسبق لي ان I have never before ...; لم يسبق له
مثيل (as) there has never been one before,
(which is) unprecedented; سبق السيف العذل s.
s-saifu l-‘adla (the sword anticipated
censure, i.e.) one has to accept the
accomplished fact, there is (was) nothing
one can (could) do about it, it is (was)
already too late; سبقه لسانه (lisānuhū) to
burst out impulsively (with an utterance)
II to cause ( ھ s.th.) to precede or
antecede; to premise ( ھ s.th.); to do or
give ( ھ s.th.) prematurely III to try to get
ahead of s.o. ( ه); to try to defeat or beat ( ه
s.o.), seek to get the better of s.o. ( ه); to
race ( ه s.o.), run a race ( ه with s.o.); to
compete, vie ( ه with s.o.) VI to try to get
ahead of one another, seek to outdo one
another. compete, vie; to try to beat one
another ( الى to ) VIII = VI
سبق sabaq antecedence; precedence,
priority │ سبق الإصرار s. al-isrār
premeditation, willfulness (jur.); ميزة السبق
mīzat as-s. initiative; احرز قصد السبق see
احرز
سبق sabaq pl. اسباق asbāq stake (in a
race)
سبق sabqa: سبقة القلم s. al-qalam slip of
the pen, lapsus calami
سبقة subqa stake (in a race)
سباق sabbāq anticipatory; precursory;
triumphant │ قطار سباق fast train, express
train; -- (pl. -ūn) precursor; winner in
contest; O race-car driver
اسبق asbaq2 earlier, antecedent;
preceding, previous, prior; former, ex- │
المقيم الأسبق (muqīm) the ex-resident
اسبقية asbaqīya precedence, priority;
seniority
سبق sibāq race (esp. of horses); contest
│ ١٠٠ متر × سباق تتابع ٤ (s. tatābu‘) 4X100 m
relay race; حصان السباق race horse; حلبة
ميدان) السبق ) ḥalbat (maidān) as-s. race
track; سباق القوارب regatta, boat race; سباق
التسلح s. at-tasalluḥ arms race
مسابقة musābaqa pl. -āt race (esp. of
horses); contest; competition; emulation
تسابق tasābuq emulation; competition
سابق sābiq pl. -ūn, سباق subbāq
antecedent, preceding, foregoing,
previous, prior; former, ex-; retired, ret.;
سابقا sābiqan formerly, previously │ سابق
لأوانه (li-awānihī) premature; في السابق
formerly, at one time, once; كالسابق as
before; كسابق العادة as it was customary
before; as usual; المبلغ السابق صرفه (mablag,
ṣarfuhū) the payment already effected
سابقة sābiqa precedence, priority;
previous case, precedent; previous, earlier
publication of an author; pl. سوابق
sawābiq2 antecedents; previous
convictions │ ذوي) السوابق or) من اصحاب
previously convicted; من له سوابق (man)
(one) previously convicted; recidivous
criminal
سابقية sābiqīya: سابقية القصد s. al-qaṣd
premeditation (jur.)
غير مسبوق gair masbūq unprecedented
مسبقا musabbaqan prematurely, in
advance
مسابق musābiq pl. -ūn competitor;
contestant; racer, runner
متسابق mvla.tdbiq competitor;
contestant
سبك sabaka i u (sabk) to found, cast ( ھ metal),
smelt ( ھ ore); to form, shape, mold ( ه
s.o.); to formulate ( ھ s.th.); to polish the
style ( ھ of s.th.) II to found, cast ( ھ
metal), smelt ( ھ ore); to braise, stew ( ھ
s.th.) VII to be poured into a mold, be cast
سبك sabk founding, outing; cast (also
fig., = arrangement); formulation (of an
expression); shaping, forming (of a
person) │ صناعة سبك المعادن metallurgic
industry; سبك ودقة (diqqa) accuracy,
precision
سباك sabbāk smelter, founder
سباكة sibāka founder’s trade and activity
سبيكة sabīka pl. سبائك sabā’ik2 ingot
مسبك masbak pl. مسابك masābik2 foundry
تسبيك tasbīk stewing, braising (in a
covered dish, with scant moisture)
سبل II to dedicate to charitable purposes ( ھ
s.th.) IV to let ( ھ s.th.) hang down; to let
fall, drop ( ھ a curtain, drape, etc. على
over); to close, shut ( على the eyes); to shed
على) tears); to ear, form ears
سبل sabal (coll.; n. un. ة) ears (of
cereals)
سبلة sabla manure, dung
سبلة sabala pl. سبال sibāl mustache
سبيل sabīl m. and f., pl. سبل subul, اسبلة
asbila way, road, path; access; means,
expedient, possibility ( الى to, for; -- pl. اسبلة
asbila) public fountain); -- pl. سبلان siblān)
clay pipe bowl, clay pipe (of the
Bedouins) │ ابن السبيل ibn as-s. vagabond,
tramp; wayfarer, traveler; في سبيل for the
sake of, for, in behalf of, in the interest of;
بسبيل or عن سبيل by means of, through, by;
في سبيل لله for the cause of God, in behalf
of God and his religion; علي سبيل by way
of, for: e.g., على سبيل التجربة (tajriba) for a
try, tentatively, على سبيل الفكاھة (fukāha) for
fun, ذكر الشيء على سبيل المثال to quote s.th.
as an example; خلى سبيله see خلو؛ ضاقت به
السبل he was at his wit’s end; ليس علي في ذلك
سبيل (laisa ‘alayya) there is nothing to
keep me from doing that, I am free to do
that, it is no sin if I do that
سابل sābil: طريق سابلة a public, muchfrequented
road
السابلة as-sābila the passers-by
مسبول masbūl lowered, down (curtain)
الأسبان، اسباني look up alphabetically
سبنسة (eg.) sibinsa pl. -āt caboose, brake van;
baggage car (railroad)
سبه sabah dotage
عقل مسبوه ‘aql masbūh impaired mind
(esp. due to old age), feeble-mindedness
سبھللا sabahlalan indifferently, aimlessly,
haphazardly, at random
سباھلة sabāhila people without work,
idlers, loafers
سباھى look up alphabetically
سبا look up alphabetically
سبور (Fr. sport) sbōr sport(s)
سبى sabā i (saby, سباء sibā’) to take prisoner,
capture; to lead into captivity (esp. in
war); to captivate, fascinate, enchant,
charm, beguile, intrigue ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
VIII = I
سبي saby capture; captivity
سبي sabīy pl. سبايا sabāyā captive,
prisoner( of war)
سبية sabīya (female) prisoner
سبيداج sibīdāj white lead, ceruse
سبيذاج sibīdāj white lead, ceruse
س ت abbreviation of سجل تجاري sijill tijārī
commercial register
است buttocks, backside 396
ستة 1 sitta (f. ست sitt) six; ستة عشر sittata ‘ašara
(f. ست عشرة sitta ‘ašrata) sixteen
ستون sittūn sixty
ستونى sittūnī sexagenarian
السات as-sātt the sixth
2 □ ست sitt pl. -āt lady │ ست الحسن s. al-ḥusn a
variety of morning-glory (Ipomoea cairica
Webb.; bot.); also = belladonna, deadly
nightshade (bot.)
استاذ pl. اساتذة look up alphabetically
ستر satara u i (satr) to cover, veil ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to hide, conceal ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th., عن
from); to disguise ( عن ھ s.th. from s.o.); to
shield, guard, protect ( ه s.o., ھ s.th., عن
against or from); to forgive ( ھ على s.o
.s.th.), overlook, condone s.th. ( ھ ) done
by s.o. ( على ) II = I; V to be covered, be
veiled; to cover o.s., hide o.s., be
concealed ( على from) VIII to cover o.s.,
hide o.s.; to be veiled, be hidden, be
concealed ( على from)
ستر sitr pl. ستور sutūr, استار astār veil;
screen; curtain, drape, window curtain;
covering; cover (also mil.); protection,
shelter, guard, shield; pretext, excuse
سترة sutra pl. ستر sutar jacket; tunic
ستري sutarī (eg.) clown, buffoon
ستار sitār pl. ستر sutur veil, screen;
covering; curtain, drape; pretext, excuse │
الستار الحديدي the Iron Curtain (pol.); الستار
الفضي (fiḍḍī) motion-picture screen; ستار من
النار (النيران ) barrage (mil.); رفع الستار عن
الشيء to disclose, unveils, s.th. (also a
monument); من وراء الستار behind the
scenes, backstage (fig.)
الستار as-sattār the Veiler, the Coverer
(attribute of God)
ستارة sitāra pl. ستائر satā’ir2 veil;
screen; curtain, drape, window curtain;
cover, covering
تستر tasattur cover (mil.)
O ساتر sātir screen, folding screen
مستور mastūr hidden, invisible; masked;
chaste; (one) having a blameless record
(Isl. Law); pl. مساتير masātīr2 hidden,
secret things
متستر mutasattir O anonymous
مستتر mustatir hidden, concealed,
latent; understood, implied (pronoun)
ستف II to stack up, store up, stow ( ھ goods); to
arrange
تستيف tastīf stacking, stowing, storage
سته sath, sith, satah pl. استاه astāh buttocks,
backside
سجارة sigāra pl. -āt, سجائر sagā’ir سجاير , 2
sagāyir2 (Eg. spelling) cigarette
اسجح asjaḥ2 f. سجحاء sajḥā’2 wellshaped,
shapely, beautiful
سجد sajadah u ( سجود sujūd) to bow down, bow
in worship; to throw o.s. down, prostrate
o.s. ( ل before); to worship (􀍿 God)
سجدة sajda pl. sajadāt prostration in
prayer │ احد السجدة aḥa as-s. Whitsunday
(Chr.)
سجود sujūd prostration, adoration,
warship; also pl. of ساجد sājid (see below)
سجاد sajjād pl. -ūn worshiper (of God)
سجادة sajjāda, coll. سجاد sajjād pl. سجاجيد
sajājīd2 prayer rug; rug, carpet │ صاحب
السجادة and شيخ السجادة title of the leaders of
certain dervish orders in their capacity of
inheritors of the founder’s prayer rug
مسجد masjid pl. مساجد masājid2 mosque
│ مسجد جامع (jāmi‘) large mosque, mosque
where the Friday prayer is conducted;
المسجد الحرام (ḥarām) the Holy Mosque in
Mecca; المسجد الأقصى (aqṣā) name of a
mosque on Jerusalem’s Temple Square;
المسجدان 397 the two Mosques (of Mecca
and Medina)
ساجد sājid pl. سجد sujjad, سجود sujūd
prostrate in adoration, worshiping
سجر 1 sajara u to fire up, heat ( ھ a stove, an
oven, etc.) II to cause to overflow ( ھ
water)
مسجر musajjar long and flowing (of
hair)
سجارة 2 look up alphabetically
سجس II to upset ( ه s.o.)
سجع saja‘a a (saj‘) to coo (pigeon); to speak in
rhymed prose II to speak in rhymed prose
سجع rhymed prose
سجعة saj‘a a passage of rhymed prose
ساجع composer of rhymed prose
سجف sajf, sijf pl. اسجاف asjāf, سجوف sujūf
curtain, veil
سجاف sijāf pl. سجف sujuf curtain, veil
سجق (Turk. sucuk) sujuq sausage │ سجق محمر
(muḥammar) fried, or grilled, sausage
سجل II to register, enter ( ھ s.th.), make an
entry ( ھ of s.th.); to note down, record ( ھ
s.th.), make a note of ( ھ ); to have ( ھ s.th.)
recorded, put ( ھ s.th.) on record, make a
deposition or statement for the official
records; to document, prove by
documentary evidence ( ھ s.th.); to give
evidence ( ھ or s.th.); to score ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., اصابة a hit); to put down, write down,
book ( على ھ s.th. to s.o.’s debit); to record
ھ) s.th., said of an apparatus; also, e.g., في
الشرائط المسجلة on tape); to capture, catch ( ھ
a scene); to set ( ھ a record; athlet.); to
register ( ھ a letter); to enter ( ھ s.th.) in the
commercial register; to have ( ھ an
invention) patented, secure a patent ( ھ on)
│ سجل على نفسه ان to go on record for (doing
or being s.th.) III to rival, contend; to
dispute, debate ( ه with s.o.); to contest ( ه
s.o.’s right ھ to s.th.) │ ساجله الحديث
(ḥadīta) to draw s.o. into a conversation,
have a talk with s.o.
سجل sijill pl. -āt scroll; register; list,
index; سجلات records, archives │ السجل
التجاري (tijārī) commercial register; السجل
الذھبي (dahabī) Golden Book; سجل الزيارات
visitors’ book, guest book; سجل التشريفات
list of visitors (dipl.); or سجل الأطيان
سجلات ) or) cadastre, land register; السجل
العقاري (‘aqārī) do.
تسجيل tasjīl pl. -āt entering, entry,
registration; documentation;
authentication; booking; recording; taperecording;
registering (of mail) │ تسجيل
عقاري (‘aqārī) entry in the land register; آلة
تسجيل الصوت (t. aṣ-ṣaut) tape recorder
سجال sijāl contest, competition with
alternate success │ كانت الحرب بينھم سجالا
(ḥarb) their battle had its ups and downs,
they fought each other with alternate
success
مساجلة musājala pl. -āt contest,
competition; discussion, talk
مسجل musajjil pl. -ūn registrar; notary
public; (pl. -āt) tape recorder │ شريط مسجل
pl. شرائط مسجلة magnetic tape; مسجل الكلية
m. al-kullīya secretary of the faculty
مسجل musajjal registered, etc. (see II) │
رسالة مسجلة registered letter; مراسلات مسجلة
(murāsalāt) registered mail; اطنان مسجلة
register tons; حفلة مسجلة (ḥafla) concert of
recorded music
سجم sajama u ( سجوم sujūm, سجام sijām) to flow,
stream, well forth (tears, water); -- sajama
i (sajm, سجوم sujūm, سجمان sajamān) to
pour forth ( ھ water), shed ( ھ tears) IV to
shed ( ھ tears) VII to flow, stream, well
forth (water); to be fluent, elegant
(speech); to be harmonious; to harmonize,
be in keeping ( مع with 398
انسجام insijām fluency; harmony; order
منسجم munsajim harmonious
سجن sajana u (sajn) to jail, imprison ( ه s.o.)
سجن sajn detention, imprisonment
سجن sijn pl. سجون sujūn prison, jail
سجين sajīn pl. سجناء sujanā’ سجنى , 2
sajnā imprisoned, jailed, captive; prisoner,
prison inmate, convict
سجينة sajīna pl. -āt female prisoner
سجان sajjān jailer, prison guard, warden
مسجون masjūn pl. مساجين masājīn2
imprisoned, jailed, captive; prisoner,
prison inmate, convict
سجا (سجو ) sajā u ( سجو sajw, سجو sujūw) to be
calm, quiet, tranquil (night, sea) II to
cover with a winding sheet, to shroud (
الميت al-mayyita the deceased) V to cover
o.s. ( ھ with a garment)
سجية sajīya pl. -āt, سجايا sajāyā nature,
natural disposition, temper, character; pl.
characteristics, traits │ عن سجية of one’s
own accord, spontaneously
ساج sājin quiet, calm, tranquil; dark
(night)
مسجى musajjan covered with a winding
sheet, shrouded (corpse); laid out (corpse)
سح saḥḥa u i (saḥḥ, سحوح suḥūḥ) to flow
down, flow, fun, stream │ سحت السماء
saḥḥat is-samā’ it rained cats and dogs
عين سحاحة ‘ain saḥḥāḥ tearful eye
سحب saḥaba a (saḥb) to trail on the ground,
drag along ( ھ s.th.); to withdraw ( ھ، ه s,o.,
s.th., also, e.g., a measure, an order, etc.);
to pull out ( ھم troops, عن from); to take
away ( ھ من from s.o. s.th.), strip,
dispossess, divest ( ھ من s.o. of); to draw (
ھ water); to take out, withdraw ( ھ money,
from an account); to draw ( ھ a bill of
exchange, a lot); to unsheathe, draw ( ھ a
sword); to apply, make applicable ( على ھs.
th. to; said of a law or statute) │ سحب
العمل به على (‘amala) to extend the
applicability of s.th. to ... VII to drag o.s.
along, struggle along; to retreat, withdraw,
pull out, fall back ( من from); to be drawn
out; to be applied ( على to; of a law or
statute)
سحب saḥb withdrawal (of troops, of
measures, of rights, of money from an
account, etc.); (pl. سحوبات suhūbāt)
drawing (in a lottery)
سحاب saḥāb (coll.) clouds
سحابة saḥāba (n. un.) pl. سحائب suḥub,
سحائب saḥā’ib2 cloud; (pl. -āt) umbrella
(magr.); سحابة saḥābata during, in the
course of │ سحابة النھار (اليوم ) saḥābata nnahār
(l-yaum) all day long; سرنا سحابة
sirnā saḥābata yauminā we have bean
traveling all day; سحابة اربعة قرون in the
course of four centuries
سحابة suḥāba film on the eye
سحاب saḥḥāb (Syr., Pal.) zipper, slide
fastener
مسحب maṣḥab: مسحب الھواء m. al-hawā’
source of the breeze or draft; draft (of air)
انسحاب insiḥāb withdrawal, retreat,
pulling out, evacuation (esp. mil.);
resignation; stretching, extension
ساحب sāḥib drawer (of a bill of
exchange)
المسحوب عليه al-masḥūb ‘alaihi drawee
(of a bill of exchange)
سحت suḥt, suḥut pl. اسحات asḥāt s.th. forbidden
or banned; illegal possessions, ill-gotten
property
سحتوت saḥtūt Eg. square measure of 0.304 m2
(= 1/24 sahm); -- suḥtūt penny
سحج saḥaja a (saḥj) to scrape off, shave off,
scratch off, rub off ( ھ s.th.); to graze,
abrade ( ھ the skin), strip off ( ھ s.th.) II to
scrape off, abrade, strip off ( ھ s.th.) 399
مسحج misḥaj pl. مساحج masāḥij2 plane
(tool)
مسحجة misḥaja pl. مساحج masāḥij2
planing machine, planer
مسحاج misḥāj pl. مساحيج masāḥij2 plane
(tool)
مسحوج masḥūj raw, sore (like a skin
abrasion)
سحر saḥara a (siḥr) to bewitch, charm,
enchant, infatuate, fascinate ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to wheedle, coax ( ه s.o.) II = I; V to
have a light meal (shortly before
daybreak)
سحر saḥar, suḥr pl. سحور suḥūr, اسحار
asḥār lungs, pulmonary region of the
body
سحر siḥr bewitchment, beguilement,
enchantment, fascination; -- (pl. اسحار
asḥār, سحور suḥūr) sorcery, witchcraft,
magic; charm (of a woman)
سحري siḥrī magic(al) │ فانوس سحري
(fānūs) magic lantern, slide projector
سحر saḥar pl. اسحار asḥār time before
daybreak, early morning, dawn
سحور saḥūr last meal before daybreak
during the month of Ramadan
سحار saḥḥār pl. -ūn sorcerer, magician,
wizard, charmer
سحارة saḥḥāra sorceress, witch
سحارة saḥḥāra pl. -āt culvert; (pl.
سحاحير (saḥāhīr2) case, crate, chest, box
مساحر masāḥir انتفخت مساحره : 2 (intafakat)
his lungs became inflated (out of fear or
pride)
ساحر sāḥir charming, enchanting; (pl.
-ūn, سحرة saḥara, سحار suḥḥār) sorcerer,
enchanter, magician, wizard, charmer
ساحرة sāḥira pl. -āt, سواحر sawāḥir2
sorceress, witch
سحق saḥaqa a (saḥq) to crush ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to pound, bruise, powder,
pulverize ( ھ s.th.); to annihilate, wipe out
ھ) s.th., e.g., an army); to wear out ( ھ
clothing); -- saḥiqa a, saḥuqa u (suḥq) to
be distant, far away, remote II to crush; to
annihilate, destroy V and VII to be
crushed, be pounded, be bruised, be
pulverized
سحق saḥq crushing, bruising,
pulverization; (pl. سحوق suhūq) worn
garment, rag
سحق suḥq, suḥuq distance, remoteness;
depth, vastness (of an abyss) │ سحقا له
suḥqan lahū away with him! to hell with
him!
سحيق saḥīq far away, distant, remote;
deep, bottomless (abyss, depth)
مساحقة musāḥaqa and سحاق siḥāq
tribady, Lesbianism
انسحاق القلب insiḥāq al-qalb contrition,
penitence, repentance
ساحق sāḥiq crushing; overwhelming
(majority)
مسحوق masḥūq ground, grated (bread,
nutmeg, etc.); (pl. مساحق masāḥiq2)
powder │ مسحوق الفحم m. al-faḥm coal dust
منسحق القلب m. al-qalb contrite, penitent,
repentant
سحل saḥala a (saḥl) to scrape off, shave off,
peel ( ھ s.th.); to smooth, make smooth ( ھ
s.th.); to plane ( ھ s.th.); to file ( ھ s.th.)
سحالة saḥāla filings, file dust
سحلية siḥlīya pl. saḥālin lizard (eg.)
مسحل misḥa1 pl. مساحل masāḥil2 tool for
smoothing, plane; file
ساحل sāḥil pl. سواحل sawāḥil2 littoral,
coast, seashore; (Eg.) river harbor,
anchorage (on the Nile) │ حفر السواحل kafar
as-s. coast guard; لا ساحل له (sāḥila)
shoreless
ساحلي sāḥilī coastal, littoral; (pl. سواحلة
sawāḥila) coastal inhabitant; Swahili 400
سحلب saḥlab salep (dried tuber of various
species of Orchis); a sweet drink made of
salep
سحم saḥam blackness, black color
سحمة suḥma blackness, black color
سحام suḥām blackness black color
اسحم asḥam2, f. سحماء saḥmā’2, pl. سحم
suḥum black
سحن saḥana a (saḥn) to crush, pound, bruise,
grind ( ھ s.th.); to smooth by rubbing ( ھ
s.th.)
سحنة saḥna and saḥana pl. saḥanāt, سحن
suḥan (external) appearance, look(s);
facial expression, air, mien
مسحنة misḥana pl. مساحن masāḥin2
pestle
سحاءة siḥā’a pl. سحايا saḥāyā cerebral
membrane, cortex
سحائي siḥā’ī meningeal │ مرض الالتھاب
السحائي (maraḍ al-ilt.) meningitis
مسحاة misḥāh pl. مساح masāḥin iron
shovel, spade
سختيان suktiyān, siktiyān morocco (leather)
سخر sakira a (sakar, sakr, sukur, sukr, سخرة
sukra, مسخر maskar) to laugh, scoff, jeer,
sneer ( من or ب at), mock, ridicule, deride (
من or ب s.o., s.th.), make fun ( من or ب of)
II to subject, make subservient ( ه s.o., ھ
s.th., ل to or for the purpose of); to make
serviceable ( ل ھ s.th. to), employ, utilize,
turn to profitable account ( ل ھ s.th. for),
make use ( ھ، ه of, ل for); to exploit ( ه s.o.,
ھ s.th., ل for) V to reduce to servitude,
subjugate ( ه s.o.); to scoff, jeer, sneer
سخرة sukra laughingstock, target of
ridicule; corvée, statute labor, forced labor
│ رجال السخرة serfs, bondsmen; اعمال السخرة
forced labor, slave labor
سخري sukrī, sikrī laughingstock, target
of ridicule; corvée, statute labor, forced
labor
سخرية sukrīya scorn, derision, mockery,
irony; laughingstock, object of ridicule
مسخرة maskara pl. -āt, مساخر masākir2
object of ridicule, laughingstock;
ridiculous, droll, ludicrous; masquerade
تسخير taskīr subjugation, subjection;
exploitation
مسخر musakkir oppressor
سخط sakiṭa a (sakal) to be annoyed ( على or ھ، ه
at s.o., at s.th.), be displeased, be angry ( ھ
or ه with s.o.), resent ( على or ھ s.th.) IV to
discontent, embitter ( ه s.o.); to anger,
exasperate, enrage ( ه s.o.) V = I
سخط sukut, sukṭ, sakat discontent,
annoyance, displeasure, indignation,
anger, irritation, exasperation; wrath,
bitterness, grudge, resentment
مسخطة maskaṭa pl. مساخط masākiṭ2
object of annoyance, of wrath, of anger
مسخوط maskūt loathsome, hated,
odious; (pl. مساخيط masākīṭ) (eg.) idol
تسخط tasaḳḳut annoyance, displeasure,
anger, wrath
سخف sakafa u (sukf, سخافة sakāfa) to be feeble
(wit); to be stupid, foolish
سخف sakufa feeble-mindedness,
dimwittedness; imbecility, idiocy;
nonsense, foolishness, folly
سخيف sakīf pl. سخاف sikāf stupid,
fatuous, simple-minded; absurd, silly,
ridiculous, foolish; despicable, inferior;
(pl. سخفاء sukafā’) fool
سخافة sakāfa feeble-mindedness
dimwittedness; (pl. -āt) folly, silly thing to
do, childish prank
سخائف sakā’if silly things 401
سخلة sakla pl. سخال sikāl lamb
سخم II to make black, blacken with soot,
besmut ( ھ s.th.) │ سخم بصدره (bi-ṣadrihī) to
irritate s.o., make s.o. angry V to hate ( على
s.o.), harbor resentment ( على against s.o.),
be angry ( على with)
سخم sakam blackness
سخمة sukma blackness; hatred,
resentment, ill will
سخام sukam soot, smut
سخيمة sakīma pl. سخائم sakā’im hatred,
resentment, ill will
سخن sakuna u, sakana u and sakina a (
سخونة sukūna, سخانة sakāna, سخنة sukna) to
be or become hot or warm; to warm (up);
to be feverish II to make hot, to beat,
warm ( ھ s.th.) IV = II
سخن sukn hot, warm
سخانة sakāna heat, warmth
سخونة sukūna heat, warmth
O سخان sakkān, سخان مياه s. miyāh
boiler, hot-water tank
O سخانة sakkāna hot-water bottle │ سخانة
الحمام s. al-ḥammām bath heater, geyser
سخانات sakkānāt hot springs
ساخن sākin pl. سخان sukkān hot, warm
سخو) and سخي) سخا sakā u, سخي sakiya a ( سخاء
sakā’) and سخو sakuwa u ( سخاوة sakāwa)
to be liberal. generous ( ب على with s.th.
toward s.o.); to grant, award ( ب s.th., على
to s.o.), confer, bestow ( ب s.th., على upon
s.o.) V to show o.s. generous, display
liberality; to endeavor to be liberal or
generous VI = V
سخاء sakā’ liberality, munificence,
generosity
سخي sakīy pl. اسخياء askiyā’ liberal,
openhanded, generous; giving generously
ب) s.th.), being lavish ( ب with) │ سخية أموال
ample funds; سخي النفس عن الشيء (s. annafs)
only too glad to relinquish or give up
s.th.
سخاوة sakāwa generosity
سد sadda u (sadd) to plug up, close up, stop up
ھ) s.th.); to clog, congest ( ھ s.th.); to bar,
obstruct, block up, barricade ( ھ s.th., على
ھ to s.o. s.th.); to block, blockade ( ھ
s.th.); to cork, plug, stopper ( ھ s.th.); to
pay, defray, settle, cover ( ھ s.th., esp.
expenses, a debt, etc.); to fulfill, satisfy,
meet ( ھ a claim, and the like) │ سد
ثغرة (tugratan) to fill a gap, close a breach;
سد ثلمة (tulmatan) to fill a gap; سد خلة
(kallatan) to remedy a shortcoming; سد
حاجته (ḥājatahū) to meet s.o.’s need,
provide for s.o.; سد رمقه (ramaqahū) to
keep s.o. or o.s. barely alive, eke out an
existence; to provide s.o. with a bare
existences; to allay s.o.’s hunger; سد مسده
(masaddahū) to fill s.o.’s place, replace
s.o.; سد مطاعمه to satisfy or fulfill s.o.’s
claims; سد فراغا (farāgan) to fill a gap; سد
النواقص to remove or remedy deficiencies;
-- sadda i ( سدود sudūd, سداد sadād) to be
sound, right, in proper condition; to hit the
right thing, say or do the right thing; to be
apposite, be to the point II to block, bar,
obstruct ( ھ s.th.); to pay, defray, settle,
cover ( ھ expenses, debts, etc.); to guide (
نحو s.o. to), show ( ه s.o.) the right way ( نحو
to); to direct ( ھ الى s.th. to), point, level ( ھ
الى s.th. at); to aim ( الى at); to sight, take
aim by a sight; to focus ( الى on; phot.); to
draw a bead ( الى or نحو on s.th.) │ سدد
دينا (dainan) to pay or settle a debt; سدد عجزا
(‘ajzan) to cover a deficit; سدد خطاه
(kuṭāhu) to guide s.o.’s stepa IV to hit the
right thing, say or do the right thing; to be
apposite, be to the point V to be guided,
be directed, be shown ( الى to) VII to be
blocked, be obstructed, be plugged up,
become or be clogged or congested 402
سد sadd plugging, closing, stopping up;
obstruction, barring, barricading;
blocking; defrayment (of costs), payment,
settlement (of a debt, of expenses);
fulfillment, satisfaction (of a claim, etc.);
-- sadd, sudd pl. سدود sudūd, اسداد asdād
obstruction, block, obstacle; barrier;
rampart, bank, mound; dike; dam; weir;
barrage, river dam; bar, rail; hurdle
(athlet.); bulwark (fig.) │ السد العالى (‘ālī)
the High Dam (near Aswān); سد المناطيد
balloon barrage (mil.); حارة السد blind alley,
dead end
سدة sadda block, barrier; obstruction,
obstacle; barricade; dam │ السدة الشريانية
(širyānīya) embolism (med.)
سدة sudda pl. سدد sudad gate, door;
threshold; seat; couch. divan │ السدة الرسولية
الباباوية )) (rasūlīya) the Holy See
سدد sadad obstruction, clogging (of a
pipe)
سداد sadād payment, defrayment,
settlement, discharge, liquidation; the
proper, right thing to do, the apposite
thing to say; appropriateness, appositeness
(of a remark), lucky hand (in one’s
actions) │ تحت السداد outstanding, due,
unpaid (com.); بسداد appropriately,
appositely; سداد الرأي s. ar-ra’y
levelheadedness
سداد sudād obstruction in the nose
سداد sidād pl. اسدة asidda plug, stopper,
cork │O سداد التوصيل plug (el.)
سدادة sidāda plug, stopper, cork; O sight
(of a gun)
سديد sadīd hitting the target (arrow,
spear); apposite, pat, pertinent, relevant,
right, correct (answer, view)
اسد asadd2 more apposite, more relevant
تسديد tasdīd payment, defrayment,
settlement, discharge, liquidation │ تحت
التسديد outstanding, due, unpaid (com.)
ساد sādd obstructive
مسدود masdūd closed (circuit; el.)
□ سدب (eg.; sadab) = سذاب sadāb
سدر sadira a (sadar, سدارة sadāra) to be
dazzled (eye); to be confused, bewildered,
startled, dazed; to be deluded
سدر sidr (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. سدر sidar,
-āt, سدور sudūr a variety of Christ’s-thorn
(Zizyphus spina Christi; bot.); lotus tree │
سدرة المنتھى s. al-muntahā the lotus tree in
the Seventh Heaven; بلغ سدرة المنتھى to
attain the highest goal, achieve ultimate
results
سدارة sidāra pl. سدائر sadā’ir an Iraqi
headgear, commonly of black velvet;
overseas cap
سيدارة sīdāra pl. -āt = سدارة sidāra
سادر sādir reckless ( في in s.th.)
سدس II to make sixfold ( ھ s.th.); to multiply by
six ( ھ s.th.); to make hexagonal, make
hexangular ( ھ s.th.)
سدس suds, sudus pl. اسداس asdās onesixth
سداسي sudāsī sixfold; consisting of six
parts
السادس as-sādis the sixth
مسدس muaaddas hexagonal; hexagon;
hexahedral; hexahedron; (pl. -āt) revolver,
sixshooter │ مسدس اشارة m. išāra Very
pistol
مسدسة musaddasa pistol, gun, revolver
سدف sadaf pl. اسداف asdāf darkness, twilight,
dusk
سدف sudfa pl. سدف sudaf darkness,
twilight, dusk; curtain
سدل sadala u i (sadl) to let ( ھ s.th.)
hang down or fall down; to let down,
drop, lower ( على s.th. on); pass. sudila to
hang down ( على on) II and IV = I; V to
403 hang down, be lowered, be down VII
to descend ( على on)
سدل sidl, sudl pl. سدول sudūl, اسدال asdāl
veil, curtain
سدم VII to dry up (spring)
سدم sadam sorrow, sadness, affliction,
grief
سديم sadīm pl. سدم sudum mist, haze;
nebula (astron.)
سديمي sadīmī nebular; nebulous
سدانة sidāna office of gatekeeper or custodian
(of a shrine, specif. of the Kaaba)
سادن sādin pl. سدنة sadana custodian,
gatekeeper of the Kaaba; sexton, sacristan
(Chr.); keeper, curator; pl. سدنة crew (of a
machine gun, of a tank, etc.)
سدو) and سدى ) II to confer ( الى ھ a benefit on
s.o.) IV to confer ( ل or الى ھ a benefit on
s.o.); to render, perform, do ( ھ s.th.) │
اسدى اليه خدمة (kidma) to render s.o. a
service; اسدى اليه الارشادات (iršādāt) to make
suggestions to s.o., advise s.o.; اسدى اليه
الشكر (šukr) to extend one’s thanks to s.o.,
thank s.o.; اسدى فائدة to be beneficial; اسدى
اليه (له) النصح (nuṣḥ) to give s.o. (a word of)
advice; اسدى اليه يدا (yadan) to do s.o. a
favor
سدى sadan pl. اسدية asdiya warp (of a
fabric); a continuous, prevailing
characteristic or trait, thread (of a story, of
an argument, etc.)
سداة sadāh warp (of a fabric); a
continuous, prevailing characteristic or
trait, thread (of a story, of an argument,
etc.)
سدى sudan in vain, futilely, to no end,
uselessly │ ذھب سدى to be in vain, futile,
useless
سذاب sadāb rue, herb of grace (bot.)
سذبي sadabī of the rue
سذاجة sadāja simplicity; innocence,
ingenuousness, naiveté; homeliness,
plainness; guilelessness
ساذج sādaj, sādij pl. سذج suddaj simple;
plain, uncolored, uniform (fabric);
innocent, ingenuous, naive; plain, homely;
artless, guileless, candid, frank
(character); primitive
سر 1 (Pers. sar head) formerly in compounds:
head, chief; سردار sirdār (Eg.) supreme
commander; commanding general;
سرعسكر sar‘askar general (in the former
Ottoman army); سريوران saryawarān
adjutant general
سر 2 sarra u ( سرور surūr, تسرة tasirra, مسرة
masarra) to make happy, gladden, delight,
cheer ( ه s.o.); pass. surra ( سرور surūr) to
be happy, glad, delighted ( ل or من or ب at),
take pleasure ( ل or من or ب in) II to make
happy, gladden, delight, cheer ( ه s.o.) III
to confide a secret ( ه to s.o.) │ ساره في اذنه
(udnihī) to whisper in s.o.’s ear IV to
make happy, gladden, delight, cheer ( ه
s.o.); to keep secret, hide, conceal,
disguise ( ھ s.th.); to tell confidentially,
confide ( ب or ھ الى to s.o. s.th.); to tell
under one’s breath, whisper ( ب or ھ الى to
s.o. s.th.) │ اسر في اذنه (udnihī) to whisper
in s.o.’s ear ( ھ s.th.) V تسرى tasarrā (and
تسرر tasarrara) to take ( ب or ھا a woman)
as concubine ( سرية surriya) X to try to
hide; to hide, be hidden ( عن from); to take
as concubine ( ھا a woman)
سر sirr pl. اسرار asrār secret; secret
thought; heart, inmost; secrecy; mystery;
sacrament (Chr.); underlying reason (of
s.th.); سرا sirran secretly, privately │ سرا
وعلانية (‘alāniyatan) secretly and publicly;
سر الليل s. al-lail watchword, password;
اسرار القرآن the secret meaning of the
Koran; كاتب السر secretary; كاتم السر do.; كلمة
السر kalimat as-s. watchword, password;
بسركم or في سركم to your 404 health!
cheerio! skoal! في سره secretly,
Inwardly, in his heart; اتعب سره at‘aba
sirrahū to trouble, worry, bother, harass
s.o.; اجرى سرا ajrā sirran to dispense a
sacrament (Chr.); قدس لله سره qaddasa
llāhu sirrahū may God hallow his secret!
(eulogy after the name of a deceased
Muslim saint)
سري sirrī secret; private; confidential;
mysterious, cryptic; sacramental (Chr.) │
الأمراض السرية venereal diseases
سرية sirrīya secret; sportiveness
سر surr pl. اسرة asirra umbilical cord
سرة surra pl. -āt, سرر surar navel,
umbilicus; center
سري surrī umbilical │ الحبل السري (ḥabl)
umbilical cord
سرر surur, sirar umbilical cord
سرر surur line of the palm or forehead
سرار sarār: سرار الشھر s. aš-šahr last
night of the lunar month
سرار sirār pl. اسرة asirra, اسارير asārīr2
line of the palm or forehead; pl. features,
facial expression, air, also اسارير الوجه a.
al-wajh
سرور surūr joy, happiness, delight,
pleasure; glee, gaiety, hilarity, mirth
سرير sarīr pl. اسرة asirra, سرور surūr,
سراير sarāyīr2 bedstead, bed; throne,
elevated seat
سريرة sarīra pl. سرائر sarā’ir2 secret;
secret thought; mind, heart, soul │ صفاء
السريرة ṣafā’ as-s. clearness of conscience;
طيب السريرة ṭayyib as-s. guileless
simplehearted
سراء sarrā’2 happiness prosperity │ في
السراء والضراء (ḍarrā’) in good and bad
days, for better or for worse
سرية surriya pl. سراري sarārīy
concubine
مسرة masarra pl. -āt joy, happiness,
delight, pleasure; glee, gaiety, hilarity,
mirth
مسرة misarra pl. مسار masārr2 speaking
tube; telephone
تسر tasarrin concubinage
استسرار istisrār concubinage
سار sārr gladdening, gratifying, joyous,
glad, cheering, delightful
مسرور masrūr glad, happy, delighted ( ب
at), pleased ( ب with)
مسر musirr gratifying, delightful,
pleasant
مستسر mustasarr place of concealment
سرادق surādiq pl. -āt large tent, canopy,
pavilion
سراط sirāṭ = صراط ṣirāṭ way, path, road
سراى sarāy palace
سراية sarāya pl. -āt palace │ السراية
الصفراء (ṣafrā’) insane asylum (eg.)
سرب 1 sariba a (sarab) to flow; to run out, leak
II to send in groups or batches ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th., الى to) V to flow; to run out, flow off,
escape; to sneak away, slink away, steal
away; to stream, penetrate ( الى into),
infiltrate ( الى s.th.); to creep ( في into); to
sneak, slip, steal ( الى into, among); to
creep along, flow along, glide along; to
seep through, leak out ( الى to, of a report);
to spread, circulate, be passed around
(news) VII to hide, crawl into its lair
(animal)
سرب sirb pl. اسراب asrāb herd, flock,
bevy, covey, swarm; squadron, group,
wing, formation, flight (of aircraft); heart,
mind │ سرب من النحل (nahl) swarm of bees;
ھادئ السرب calm, composed, confident
سرب sarab pl. اسراب asrāb burrow,
hole, den, lair (of an animal); underground
passage; tunnel, conduit 405
سربة surba pl. سرب surab herd, flock,
bevy, covey, swarm
سراب sarāb mirage, fata morgana;
phantom; sewage
مسرب masrab pl. مسارب masārib2 course
(taken by s.th.); river bed; drain, sewer
سارب sārib conspicuous, visible
ساربة sāriba pl. سوارب sawārib2 reptile
اسرب 2 look up alphabetically
سربل sarbala to clothe ( ه s.o.) with a sirbāl
(q.v.); to clothe, dress ( ب ه s.o. in or with);
to cover, wrap ( ھ s.th., ب with) II
tasarbala to put on a sirbāl (q.v.); to put
on, wear ( ھ a garment); to be clothed,
clad, garbed ( ب in, also fig.); to wrap o.s. (
ب in); to dress up ( ب in)
سربال sirbāl pl. سرابيل sarābīl2 shirt; coat
of mail; garment
متسربل mutasarbil: متسربل بالشباب blessed
with youthfulness, evincing youthful
freshness
سرج 1 saraja to braid, plait (. ھ the hair) II do.;
to baste, tack ( ھ s.th.); to saddle, ( ھ an
animal) IV do.; to light ( السراج the lamp)
سرج sarj pl. سروج surūj; saddle
سراج sirāj pl. سرج suruj lamp, light │O
سراج الحركة s. al-ḥaraka traffic light; سراج
الليل s. al-lail firefly, glowworm
سراجة sirāja saddlery, saddler’s trade;
glanders
سراج sarrāj saddler
سروجي surūjī saddler
سروجية surūjīya saddlery, saddler’s
trade
اسروجة usrūja lie, falsehood
مسرجة masraja pl. مسارج masārij2 lamp;
lampstand
سيرج 2 look up alphabetically
سرجين 3 sirjīn dung, manure
سرح saraḥa a ( سروح surūḥ) to move away, go
away, leave; to roam freely; to graze
freely (cattle); to be distracted (mind); --
sariḥa a to proceed freely, at will, without
restraint │ سرح ومرح (mariḥa) to do as one
likes II to send ( ھ cattle) to pasture; to
send, dispatch ( ه s.o.); to let go ( ه s.o.); to
dismiss ( ھا a woman by divorce); to grant
ه) s.o.) leave, dismiss ( ه s.o.); to release
from an office, discharge, fire ( ه s.o.); to
release, set free ( ه s.o.); to let ( ھ the eyes)
wander; to demobilize, disband ( ھ an
army); to dispel s.o.’s ( عن ) worries (also
سرح غمومه ); to comb ( ھ the hair) │ سرح
شعره (ša‘rahū) to comb one’s hair, do
one’s hair; سرح نظره (naẓarahū) to set
one’s eyes on ( الى ) VII انسرح يفكر
(yufakkiru) to be deep in thought, be
absent-minded, allow one’s thoughts to
wander
سراح sarāh dismissal (of a woman by
divorce); release │ اطلق سرح aṭlaqa
sarāḥahū to release s.o., set s.o. free, set
s.o. at liberty; اطلاق سراحه iṭlāq s. his
release; مطلق السراح muṭlaq as-s. free, at
large
سريح sarīḥ and بائع سارح hawker,
peddler
سرحان sirḥān wolf
مسرح masraḥ pl. مسارح masāriḥ2
pasture; stage, theater; scene │ مسرح التمثيل
theater
مسرحي masraḥī dramatic, theatrical,
stage (adj.)
مسرحية masraḥīya pl. -āt (stage) play
تسريح tasrīḥ dismissal; discharge;
release; demobilization; (pl. تساريح
tasārīḥ2) permission, authorization
تسريحة tasrīḥa pl. -āt hairdo, coiffure
سارح sāriḥ: سارح مارح grazing freely,
roaming freely; free and unrestrained;
سارح الفكر sāriḥ al-fikr distracted,
absentminded 406
منسرح munsariḥ: المنسرح name of a
poetic meter │ منسرح الفكر m. al-fikr
distracted, absent-minded
ساروخ sārūk pl. سواريخ sawārīk2 rocket
سرد sarada u (sard) to pierce, perforate ( ھ
s.th.); to carry on, continue ( ھ s.th., e.g., a
conversation); to tell off one after another,
enumerate ( ھ facts, events); to present,
quote, detail, set forth neatly ( ھ s.th.) II to
pierce, perforate ( ھ s.th.)
سرد sard enumeration; mentioning,
quoting; neat, detailed presentation;
recital, presentation, rendition (of an
account, of a narrative, etc.); coherent,
logical
سريدة sarīda: سريدة المولد s. al-maulid
discourse dealing with the birth of the
Prophet (during celebration of
Mohammed’s birthday; tun.)
O مسرد masrad index (of a book)
سرداب sirdāb pl. سرادب sarādib سراديب , 2
sarādīb2 subterranean vault, cellar;
basement, basement flat
سردار sirdār (formerly Eg.) supreme
commander; commanding general
سرادق look up alphabetically
سردوك sardūk pl. سراديك sarādīk2 rooster, cock
(magr.)
سردين sardīn (coll.; n. un. ة) sardines
سراس sirās and سيراس see سيراس
(alphabetically)
سرسام sirsām a cerebral disease
سرط 1 sariṭa a (saraṭ, سرطان saraṭān) and
saraṭa u i to swallow, gulp ( ھ s.th.) V and
VIII do.
سرطان saraṭān pl. -āt crayfish; cancer
(med.); Cancer (astron.) │ سرطان بحري
(baḥrī) lobster
سراط 2 sirāṭ = صراط
سرع saru‘a u (sirā‘, sarā‘, سرعة sur‘a)
to be quick, fast, prompt, rapid; to hurry II
to urge ( ه s.o.) to hurry; to urge on ( ھ an
animal); to speed up, accelerate, expedite (
ھ s.th.) III to hurry, hasten, rush, run, dash
الى) to); to make a beeline ( الى for); to
hurry ( في in, with), hasten (j to do s.th.),
do in a hurry ( في s.th.); to rush, plunge
with undue haste ( في into) IV to be quick,
fast, prompt, rapid; to hurry, hasten, rush,
run, dash ( الى to); to hurry ( ب or في with.
in), hasten ( ب or j to do s.th.), do in a
hurry ( ب or في s.th.); to accelerate, speed
up, expedite ( ھ s.th.) V to hurry, hasten,
rush, run, dash ( الى to); to hurry ( ب or j
with, in), hasten ( ب or في to do s.th.), do in
a hurry ( ب or j s.th.); to be hasty, be rash (
ب or j in) VI to hurry, hasten, rush, run,
dash ( الى to)
سرع sur‘, sir‘ pl. اسراع asrā‘ reins
سرع sur‘a speed, velocity, pace;
fastness, rapidity, quickness, promptness;
hurry, haste │ سرعة الخاطر presence of
mind; سرعة التصديق credulity
سرعان ما sar‘āna, sir‘āna, sur‘āna ma
(with foll. verb) how quickly ...!; soon,
before long, presently, in no time
سريع sarī‘ pl. سرعان sur‘ān, سراع sirā‘
fast, quick, prompt, rapid, speedy,
expeditious, swift, nimble; السريع name of
a poetic meter; express train; سريعا sarī‘an
fast, quickly, rapidly, speedily, promptly
│ سريع التأثر s. at-ta’attur easy to impress,
easily affected, sensitive; سريع الخاطر
quick-witted; O سريع التردد s. at-taraddud
high-frequency (el.); سريع الزوال s. azzawal
ephemeral, fleeting, transient; سريع
التصديق credulous; سريع الطلق (الطلقات ) s. al-
ṭalq quick-firing, rapid-fire; سريع العطب s.
al-‘aṭab fragile; سريع التنقل s. at-tanaqqul
mobile, maneuverable, easily manageable
407
اسرع asra’2 faster, quicker, more rapid
│ ما اسرع ان رايته mā asra‘a an ra’aituhū
before long I saw him, it did not take very
long before I saw him
سراعا sirā‘an quickly, in a hurry
اسراع isrā‘ acceleration, speed-up;
hurry
تسرع tasarru‘ hurry, haste; hastiness,
rashness precipitance
متسرع mutasarri‘ quick, fast, prompt,
rapid; hasty, rash, precipitate
سرعسكر see سر
سرف IV to exceed all bounds, be
immoderate, be extravagant ( في in, at)
exaggerate, overdo ( في s.th.); to waste,
squander, dissipate, spend lavishly ( ھ, في
s.th., esp. money)
سرف saraf and اسراف isrāf
intemperance, immoderateness,
exaggeration; waste, dissipation,
extravagance, prodigality
مسرف musrif immoderate, intemperate,
excessive; extravagant, wasteful, prodigal
سرق saraqa i (saraq, sariq, سرقة
saraqa, sariqa, سرقان sarqān) to steal,
pilfer, filch ( من ھ or ه ھ from s.o. s.th.); to
rob ( من ھ or ه ھ s.o. of s.th.) II to accuse
of theft, call a thief ( ه s.o.) III سارق النظر اليه
(naẓara) or سارقه النظر to steal a glance at
s.o., glance furtively at s.o.; سارق النوم
(nauma) to take a short nap VII pass. of I
VIII to steal, filch, pilfer ( ھ من s.th. from
s.o.); to steal ( الى into) │ استرق السمع
(sam‘a) to eavesdrop; to monitor (radio,
telephone, etc.); استرق النظر اليه = سارق النظر
اليه؛ استرق الأنفاس to gasp, pant
سرقة sariqa stealing, filching, pilfering;
robbery; (pl. -āt) theft, larceny
سراق sarrāq thief
سارق sāriq pl. -ūn, سرقة saraqa, سراق
surrāq, f. سارقة sāriqa pl. سوارق sawāriq
thief
مسروقات masrūqāt stolen goods
منسرق musariq: منسرق القوة m. al-qūwa
debilitated, exhausted
سرقسطة sarqusṭa2 Zaragoza (city in NE Spain)
سرقين sirqīn dung, manure
سرك 1 (Fr. cirque) sirke circus
سركي 2 (Turk. sergi) sarkī (com.) bill of
exchange payable to the bearer
سرم surm pl. asrām anus
سرم sarmad endless duration, eternity
سرمدي sarmadī eternal, without
beginning or end
سرنديب sarandīb2 Ceylon
سرو 1 sarw (coll.; n. un. ة) evergreen cypress
(Cupressus sempervirens L.; bot.)
سرو 2 II ( عن قلبه or) سرى عنه to rid s.o. of
worries, and the like, dispel s.o.’s worries
(also ھ worries); pass. سري عنه and سرى
عن نفسه (suriya) to leave s.o. (grief,
sorrow, fear, and the like); to regain one’s
composure, reel at peace again (after
anger, fear or excitement); his anxiety or
unrest left him; he found relaxation; he
was cheered up, his spirits were raised VII
انسرى عنه = سري عنه (surriya)
سري sarīy pl. سرواء surawā’ اسرياء , 2
asriyā’ سراة , 2 sarāh high-ranking, high;
high-minded, noble; distinguished
personality, notable; pl. سراة elite, leading
class, the upper crust; see سرى 1
سراة sarāh pl. سرروات sarawāt hill;
back; chief, head; see also سرى sarīy │
سروات القوم s. al-qaum the leaden of the
people
تسرية tasriya pl. -āt diversion,
amusement, pastime
سرولا sirwāl, سراويل sirwāl pl. سراويل sarāwīl2
trousers, pants; drawers; panties 408
سرى 1 sarā i ( سرى suran, سريان sarayān, مسرى
masran) to travel by night; to set out,
depart by night; to circulate; to flow
(electric current); to emanate, go out ( من
from); to spread; to be valid, have
validity, be effective, be in, or come into,
force ( على for). have or take effect ( على
on); to apply. be applicable ( على to); to
penetrate ( في s.th.), enter deeply ( في into);
to pervade ( الى نفسه s.o.’s soul, of a feeling)
│ سرى سراه (surāhu) to traverse one’s
nightly course; سرى مفعوله (maf‘ūluhū) to
be valid, be effective, be in force IV to
travel by night; to make ( ب s.o.) travel by
night V تسرى see سر 2 sarra V
سرى sarīy pl. اسرية asriya, سريان suryān
little creek, brook; see also under سرو 2
سرية sariya pl. سرايا sarāyā (military)
detachment, flying column, raiding party;
company (mil.) │ سرية خيالة (kayyāla)
cavalry squadron; سرية الطائرات squadron
of aircraft
سريان sarayān spread, diffusion;
validity, effectiveness, coming into force
مسرى masran: مسرى محمد masrā
muḥammad the point of departure for
Mohammed’s midnight journey to the
seven heavens, i.e., Jerusalem
اسراء isrā’ nocturnal journey; الاسراء
Mohammed’s midnight journey to the
seven heavens
سار sārin pl. سراة surāh traveling by
night; night reveler, night hawk;
contagious (disease); in force, effective,
valid │ سارى المفعول in force, effective,
valid
سارية sāriya a mood or atmosphere
which prevails in, or pervades, a room
(e.g., سارية من الجھامة an all-pervading
gloom); -- (pl. -āt, سوار sawārin) column;
shipmast
سراى 2 and سراية look up alphabetically
سريان 3 suryān Syrians (coll.) members of the
East Syrian Church
سرياني suryānī Syriac, Syrian; a
member of the East Syrian Church
سرياوران saryāwarān (formerly) adjutant
general
سيسبان look up alphabetically
اسطبة 1 look up alphabetically
مسطبة 2 masṭaba, misṭaba pl. مساطب masāṭib2
stone bench (against a wall); mastaba
سطح saṭaḥa u (saṭḥ) to spread out, spread,
unfold, unroll ( ھ s.th.); to level, even,
plane, flatten, make smooth ( ھ s.th.); to
throw to the ground, fell ( ه s.o.) II to
spread out, spread, unfold, unroll ( ھ
s.th.) ;: to level, even, plane, flatten, make
smooth ( ھ s.th.) V to be spread out, be
unfolded; to be leveled, be evened; to lie
down on one’s back VII to be spread out.
be unfolded; to lie flat on one’s back, be
supine
سطح saṭḥ pl. سطوح suṭūḥ surface (also
geom.); plane (geom.); (pl. also اسطحة
asṭiḥa, اسطح asṭuḥ) (flat) roof, terrace;
deck (of a ship); سطوح suṭūḥ (eg., syr.)
roof terrace │ سطح البحر s. al-baḥr sea
level; سطح مائل inclined plane
سطحي saṭḥī external, outer, outward,
outside, exterior; flat; superficial; سطحيات
saṭḥīyāt externals, superficialities
سطحية satḥīya flatness; superficiality
سطيح saṭīḥ flat, spread out, stretched
out, supine
مسطاح misṭāḥ threshing floor
مسطح musaṭṭaḥ even, level, flat; (pl.
-āt) surface │ قدم مسطحة (qadam) flat foot
سطر 1 saṭara u (saṭr) and II to rule ( ھ
s.th.), draw lines ( ھ on a sheet of paper);
to write, jot down, record ( ھ s.th.); to
draw up, compose ( ھ s.th.) 409
سطر saṭr, saṭar pl. سطور suṭūr, اسطر
asṭur, اسطار asṭār line; row
ساطور sāṭūr pl. سواطير sawāṭīr2 cleaver
اسطورة usṭūra pl. اساطير asāṭīr2 fable,
legend, saga, myth; fabulous story, yarn
اسطورى usṭūrī mythical, legendary,
fabulous
مسطرة misṭara pl. مساطر masāṭir2 ruler;
underlines, guideline sheet; see also
alphabetically │O مسطرة الحساب slide rule
مسطار misṭār trowel
مسطرين masṭarīn (eg.) trowel
تسطير tasṭīr writing down, recording
مسطر musaṭṭar piece of writing, paper,
document
سيطر 2 and derivatives look up alphabetically
سطع saṭa‘a a (saṭ‘, سطوع suṭū‘) to rise; to
spread (dust, fragrance); to shine, be
brilliant, be radiant; to be or become
manifest, obvious, plain, clear
سطع saṭ‘ brilliance, radiance, glow;
brightness, luminosity
سطع saṭa‘ thump, thud, plump
سطوع suṭū‘ brilliance, radiance, glow;
brightness, luminosity
اسطع asṭa‘ more brilliant, brighter;
clearer, more obvious
ساطع sāṭi‘ pl. سواطع sawāṭi‘2 radiant,
brilliant, shining, luminous, bright;
manifest, obvious, clear, plain, patent,
evident (proof)
سطل saṭala u (saṭl) to intoxicate (s.o.) VII to
become or be intoxicated
سطل saṭl pl. اسطال asṭāl, سطول suṯūl
bucket, pail (of wood or metal)
اسطول 2 look up alphabetically
سطام sitām plug, stopper
سطو (سطو ) saṭā u (saṭw, سطو saṭwa) to rush,
pounce, jump ( ب or على upon), assail,
attack ( ب or على s.o.); to burglarize ( على
place), break into a place ( (على
سطو saṭw attack, assault; burglary,
housebreaking
سطوة saṭwa pl. saṭawāt attack, assault;
influence, authority; presumption,
cockiness, pride, power, strength
اسطوانة look up alphabetically
سعة sa‘a see وسع
سعتر sa‘tar (= صعتر ) wild thyme
(Thymus serpyllum; bot.)
سعد sa‘ida a and pass. su‘ida (sa‘d, سعادة
sa‘āda) to be happy, lucky, fortunate;
pass. سعد ب (su‘ida) to have the good
fortune of receiving or sharing s.th. III to
help, aid, assist ( ه s.o., في or على in, with),
give s.o. ( ه) a hand ( في or على in); to
support, back ( في or على ه s.o. in); to
contribute, be conducive ( في or ل، على to);
to favor, encourage ( في or على s.th.) IV to
make happy ( ه s.o); to help ( ه s.o) │ اسعد
الحظ ب (الحظ ) he had the good fortune to ...
سعد sa‘d pl. سعود su‘ūd good luck, good
fortune
الھيئة السعدية al-hai’a as-sa‘dīya the
Saadist union (formerly a political
movement in Egypt); السعديون as-sa‘dīyūn
the Saadists, the followers of Saad
Zaghlūl (1856-1927)
سعد su‘d Cyperus (bot.)
سعيد sa‘īd pl. سعداء su‘adā’ happy ( ب
about, at); radiant, blissful; lucky,
auspicious; felicitous │ سعيد الذكر s. addikr
of blessed memory, the late ...
سعادة sa‘āda happiness; bliss, felicity;
good fortune, success, prosperity, welfare;
title of a pasha; sa‘ādat … (with foll.
name) title of high officials (syr., 410
Leb.) │ سعادتكم Your Grace (form of
address to a pasha); صاحب السعادة title of a
pasha; دار السعادة “House of Bliss”, ancient
name of Istanbul
سعودي sa‘ūdī Saudi │ المملكة العربية
السعودية (mamlaka) Saudi Arabia
سعدان sa‘dān pl. سعادين sa‘ādīn2 ape
سعدانة sa‘dāna pl. -āt nipple, teat │ سعدانة
الباب doorknob
اسعد as‘ad2 happier, luckier
مساعدة musā‘ada pl. -āt support,
backing, aid, help, assistance;
encouragement, promotion
ساعد sā‘id pl. سواعد sawā‘id2 forearm │
ھو ساعده الأيمن (aiman) he is his right hand,
he is indispensable to him; اشتد ساعده
ištadda sā‘iduhū to become strong,
powerful; فت في ساعده (fatta) to weaken s.o.
ساعدة sā‘ida pl. سواعد sawā’id2 tributary
مسعود mas‘ūd pl. مساعيد masā‘īd2 happy,
lucky, fortunate
مساعد musā‘id helper, help, aide;
assistant (adj. end n.); adjutant
مسعد mas‘ad favored by fortune,
fortunate, lucky
سعر sa‘ara (sa‘r) to kindle, start ( ھ a
fire, a war); pass. su‘ira to flare up, run
mad II to kindle, start ( ھ a fire, a war); to
price ( ھ s.th.), set a price ( ھ on s.th.); to
quote on the stock market III to bargain,
haggle over the price ( ه with s.o.) IV to
kindle, light, start ( ھ fire) V to bum,
blaze; to flare up (anger) VII to become
mad, furious VIII to burn, flare, blaze; to
break out (fighting)
سعر si‘r pl. اسعار as‘ār price; rate;
exchange rate, quotation (stock market) │
سعر الخصم s. al-kaṣm discount rate, bank
rate; سعر التسليف rate of interest; سعر الفائدة
rate of interest; سعر القطع s. al-qaṭ‘
discount rate, bank rate; سعر القطعة s. alqiṭ‘
a price by the piece
سعر su‘r madness; frenzy; voracity
سعر su‘ur madness frenzy
سعار su‘ār voracity
سعير sa‘īr pl. سعر su’ur blazing flame,
fire; blaze; bell, inferno
مسعر mis‘ar pl. مساعر masā‘ir2 poker,
fire iron
مسعار mis‘ār pl. مساعير masā‘īr2 poker,
fire iron
تسعير tas‘īr pricing, price fixing
تسعيرة tas‘īra pricing, price fixing │ لجنة
التسعيرة lajnat at-t. pricing, price-fixing
commission
تسعرة tas‘ira quotation (stock exchange)
مسعور mas‘ūr mad, crazy
سعط VIII to snuff ( ھ tobacco)
سعوط sa‘ūṭ snuff
مسعط mis‘aṭ snuffbox
سعف III to help, aid, support ( ه s.o.) IV to
comply with s.o.’s ( ه) wishes ( ب for),
humor ( ب ه s.o. in), grant ( ب ه s.o. s.th.); to
help, aid, assist ( ه s.o.)
سعف sa‘af (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt palm
leaves │ احد السعف aḥad as-s. Palm Sunday
(Chr.)
اسعاف is‘āf pl. -āt aid, relief, help,
assistance; medical service; الاسعاف firstaid
│ اسعاف العجزة i. al-‘ajaza care for the
aged; جمعية الاسعاف jam‘īyat al-i. approx.:
civil ambulance service; رجال الإسعاف firstaid
men, ambulance men; medical
orderlies, hospital corpsmen; سيارة الإسعاف
sayyārat al-i. ambulance
سعل sa‘ala a ( سعل su‘la, سعل su‘al) to cough
سعلة su‘la cough
سعال su‘āl cough │ السعال الديكي (dīkī)
whooping cough 411
سعلى si‘lā pl. سعليات si‘layāt female
demon
سعلاة si‘lāh pl. سعال sa‘ālin female
demon
ابو سعن abū su‘n marabou (zool.)
سعى sa‘ā a (sa‘y) to move quickly, run, speed;
to move across the sky (moon); to head,
be headed ( الى for), proceed ( الى to or
toward); to strive ( ل or الى for), aspire ( ل
or الى to); to work ( الى، ل or وراء for),
endeavor, attempt, make an effort ( وراء or
الى، ل to get or achieve s.th.); to run after
s.th. ( وراء ), pursue, chase ( وراء s.th.); to
take stops ( في in a matter) │ سعى به الى to
lead s.o. or s.th. to ... ; سعى في الأرض فسادا
(fī l-arḍi fasādan) to spread evil, cause
universal harm and damage; سعى لحتفه بظلفه
(li-ḥatfihī bi-ẓifihī) to bring about one’s
own destruction, dig one’s own grave; سعى
في خراب الشيء (karābi š-š.) to work at the
ruin of s.th., undermine s.th.; -- sa‘ā a (
سعى sa‘y, سعاية si‘āya) to slander ( ب s.o.,
عند or الى to s.o), discredit ( عند or الى ب s.o
with) VI to run about in confusion
سعى sa‘y run, course; السعى the
ceremony of running seven times between
ṣafā and Marwa (performed during the
Pilgrimage); effort, endeavor; livestock
سعاية si‘āya slander, calumniation
مسعى mas‘ān pl. مساع masā‘in effort,
endeavor
ساع sā‘in pl. –ūn, سعاة su‘āh messenger;
office boy, delivery boy; slanderer,
calumniator │ ساعى البريد postman,
mailman
سغب sagiba (sagab) to hunger ( ل for), be or
become hungry
سغب sagab hunger, starvation
سغابة sagāba hunger, starvation
مسغبة masgaba famine
ساغب sāgib hungry, starving
سف IV to descend, link, slip, decline (fig.); to
stoop ( الى to, fig.) │ اسف النظر اليه (naẓara)
to give s.o. a sharp look VIII to eat,
swallow ( ھ s.th. dry, e.g., a medicinal
powder)
سفوف safūf medicinal powder
اسفاف isfāf decline (fig.); triviality
سفتجة suftaja pl. safātij2 bill of exchange (com.)
سفح safaḥa a (safḥ, سفوح sufūḥ) to pour out,
spill, shed ( ھ s.th.) ill to whore, fornicate (
ه with s.o.) VI to whore, fornicate
سفح safḥ pl. سفوح sufūḥ foot (of a
mountain); pl. سفوح flat, rocky surface
سفاح saffāḥ shedder of blood, killer,
murderer
سفاح sifāḥ fornication
سفد safida a and safada i ( سفاد sifād) to cover,
mount ( على or ھا the female); to cohabit ( ھا
with a woman) II to put on a skewer ( ھ
meat) ill to cover, mount ( ھا the female);
to rohabit ( ھا with a woman)
سفود saffūd pl. سفافيد safāfīd2 skewer,
spit
سفر safara i ( سفور sufūr) to remove the veil ( عن
وجھھا ‘an wajhihā from her face), unveil
o.s.; -- safara i (safr) to shine, glow
(aurora) II to unveil, uncover, disclose ( ھ
s.th.); to send on a journey, compel to
leave, send away ( ه s.o); to dispatch, send
off ( ھ s.th.); to embark, put on board ( ه
passengers) III to travel, maim a trip; to
leave, depart, go on a journey IV to shine,
glow (aurora, s.o.’s face, etc.); to disclose,
unveil, uncover ( عن s.th.); to yield,
achieve, bring ( عن s.th.); to end ( عن with,
in), result ( عن in) VII to rise, disappear
(dust, clouds)
السفر as-sifr the travelers, the
passengers
سفر sifr pl. اسفار asfār book (esp. one of
the Scriptures) 412
سفر safar departure; (pl. اسفار asfār)
journey, travel, trip, tour
سفرة safra pl. سفرات safarāt journey,
travel, trip, tour
سفرية safarīya pl. -āt journey, travel,
trip, tour; departure
سفرة sufra pl. سفر sufar dining table
سفرجي sufragī (eg.) pl. سفرجية sufragīya
waiter, steward
سفير safīr pl. سفراء sufarā’ mediator
(between contending parties); ambassador
(dipl.)
سفور sufūr uncovering of the face (of a
veiled woman); unveiling
سفارة sifāra office or function of a
mediator, mediation; embassy (dipl.)
مسافر masāfir2 (pl.) part of the face not
covered by the veil
سافر sāfir unveiled, wearing no veil;
barefaced, conspicuous, obvious; (pl. سفرة
safara) scribe
مسافر musāfir pl. -ūn traveler;
passenger; visiting stranger; guest
سفرجل safarjal (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. سفارج quince
(Cydonia; bot.)
سفسطة safsaṭa sophistry; pl. سفسطات sophistries,
casuistic arguments │ اھل السفسطة ahl as-s.
the Sophists
سفسطي safsaṭī sophistic; Sophist
سفسة safsafa pl. سفاسف safāsif2 silly talk,
nonsense; poor, inferior stuff
سفساف safsāf pl. سفاسف safāsif2 silly,
inane, trivial; poor, inferior │ سفساف الأمور
poor, inferior stuff
سفط safaṭ pl. اسفاط asfāt basket; scales (of fish)
سفع safa‘a a (saf‘) to scorch, parch, burn ( ه
s.o., ھ s.o.’s skin; esp. of a hot wind); to
flap the wings, flutter (bird); to strike, hit (
ه s.o. with the hand), slap ( ه s.o.); to lash ( ه
s.th., e.g., of a storm)
سفع saf‘ burned spot
سفعة suf‘a pl. سفع sufa‘ black stain; dark
spot, brown discoloration
اسفع asfa‘, f. سفعاء saf‘ā’2 dark-brown
سفق safaqa u (safq) to shut, bang, slam ( ھ the
door)
سفك safaka i (safk) to shed ( ھ blood) VI to
murder each other VII to be shed, flow
(blood)
سفك safk: سفك الدماء s. ad-dimā’ bloodshed
سفاك saffāk shedder of blood; bloodshedding
سفل safala u ( سفول sufūl, سفال safāl) and safila
a to be low; to be below s.th. ( -- ;(ھ
safala u to turn downward; -- safula u (
سفالة safāla) and safala u (safl) to be low,
base, despicable V to abase o.s., sink low,
go from bad to worse; to act in a base
manner
سفل sufl lowest part of s.th., bottom
سفلى suflī lower, at the bottom; low
سفلة sifla: سفلة الناس s. an-nās lowly
people, riffraff
سفالة safāla lowness; lowliness;
baseness, ignominy, despicableness
سفالة safāla lowest part
اسفل asfal2, f. سفلى suflā, pl. اسافل asāfil2
lower; lowest; lower or lowest part,
bottom; اسفل asfala (prep.) under,
underneath, below │ الأرض السفلى (arḍ) the
nether world; رده اسفل سافلين raddahū
asfala sāfilīn to reduce s.o. to the lowest
level or status
سافل sāfil pl. سفلة safala low; lowly;
base, mean, despicable 413
سفلت saflata to cover with asphalt, to asphalt
اسفلت asfalt asphalt
سفلقة saflaqa sponging
سفلاق siflāq sponger
سفن 1 safan coarse hide used for polishing;
emery paper, sandpaper
سفين 2 safīn ships (coll.); ship; see also
alphabetically
سفينة safīna pl. سفن sufun, سفائن safā’i2
ship, vessel, boat; السفينة Argo (astron.) │
سفينة مدفعية (midfa‘īya) gunboat; سفينة تعليم
and سفينة التدريس training ship
سفان saffān shipbuilder, shipwright
سفانة sifāna (art or trade of)
shipbuilding
اسفين 3 look up alphabetically
سفنج safanj, sifanj and اسفنج isfanj sponge
سفه safiha a (safah) and safuha u ( سفاھة safāha)
to be stupid, silly, foolish; to be impudent,
insolent II to call ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) stupid or
foolish; to declare ( ه s.o.) legally
incompetent; to depreciate, put down as
inferior ( ھ s.th.) │ سفه نفسه to make a fool
of o.s.; سفه وجھه (wajhahū) to expose s.o.,
show s.o. up, make a fool of s.o., bring
s.o. in discredit, disgrace s.o., dishonor
s.o. VI to pretend to be stupid or foolish
سفه safah foolishness, stupidity,
silliness; impudence, shamelessness,
insolence
سفيه safīh pl. سفھاء sufahā’ سفاه , 2 sifāh
foolish, stupid, silly; fool; an incompetent
(Isl. Law); impudent, shameless, insolent;
insolent fellow
سفاھة safāha foolishness, stupidity,
silliness; impudence, shamelessness,
insolence
سفى safā i (safy) to raise and scatter ( ھ the
dust; said of the wind) IV do.
سافياء sāfiyā’2 dust
مسفى masfan s.th. whirled up; plaything,
sport (fig.)
سفين safīn wedge
سقارة sigāra = سجارة cigarette
سقالة (It. scala) saqāla scaffold
سقر saqar2 f. hell
سقراط suqrāṭ2 Socrates
سقسقة saqsaqa chirping, cheeping, peeping
(e.g., of sparrows)
سقط saqaṭa u ( سقوط suqūṭ, مسقط masqaṭ) to fall
(also = to be killed in action); to fall
down, drop; to tumble, trip, slip; to fall
out (hair); to sink down ( على on, to); to hit,
stumble ( على upon), come across s.th. (
على ); to find ( على s.th.); to get, come ( الى to
s.o.), reach ( الى s.o.); to decline, sink, drop
(standard); to become null and void, be
abolished, be canceled; to be dropped, be
omitted, drop out; to be missing; to escape
من) s.o.), slip ( من s.o.’s memory) │ ليسقط
فليسقط ) ) li-yasquṭ (fal-yasquṭ) down with
سقط به !… to drop s.o. or s.th.; سقط اليھم عنه
انه they had had word from him that he ...;
سقط رأسه في (ra’suh) he was born in ..., his
birthplace was …; سقط من العضوية
(‘uḍwīya) to be dropped from
membership; سقط من عينيه (‘ainaihī) to drop
in s.o.’s estimation; سقط في الامتحان to fail
an examination, flunk; سقط في يده suqiṭa fī
yadihī to stand aghast, be at a loss, be
bewildered IV to let fall, drop ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to make ( ه s.o.) tumble, cause s.o. (
ه) to slip; to overthrow, bring down,
topple, fell ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to fail, flunk ( ه
s.o. in an examination); to shoot down ( ھ
an aircraft); to deduct, subtract ( ھ a
number); to eliminate ( ھ ٤١٤ s.th. من
from); to have a miscarriage, miscarry; to
bring about a miscarriage (woman); to
slink ( ھ its young one; animal) │ اسقطه من
الجنسية (jinsīya) to deprive s.o. of his
citizenship; اسقط حقه في (ḥaqqahū) to
forfeit one’s right in s.th., waive one’s
claim to s.th.; اسقط دعوى (da‘wā) to quash
a complaint, nonsuit a case; to withdraw
or drop a complaint; اسقط الشعر (ša‘ra) to
cause loss of hair; اسقط في يده usqiṭa fī
yadihī = سقط في يده saqaṭa fī yadihī V to
learn gradually, pick up information ( من ھ
about s.th. from); to hunt for scraps │ تسقط
الأخبار to gather information VI to fall
down, come down, collapse; to fall
successively or gradually; to fall out
(hair); to come gradually ( الى to), arrive
one by one ( الى at); to roll, drip ( من off); to
dribble │ تساقط على نفسه to break down,
collapse; تساقط حطاما (ḥuṭāman) to go to
ruin, disintegrate
سقط saqṭ dew
سقط siqṭ miscarried fetus
سقط saqṭ, siqṭ, suqṭ sparks flying from a
flint
سقط saqaṭ pl. اسقاط asqāṭ any worthless
thing; offal, refuse, rubbish, trash; junk │
سقط المتاع s. al-matā‘ waste, scrap(s)
سقطى saqaṭī junk dealer, ragman
سقطة saqṭa pl. saqaṭāt fall, tumble,
plunge; oversight, slip, error, mistake │
سقطات الطباعة misprints, errata
سقوط suqūṭ fall, tumble; crash (of an
airplane); collapse, breakdown, ruin;
decline, downfall, fall; devolution (of a
right); slip, lapse │ سقوط الشعر s. aš-ša‘r
loss of hair; سقوط الأمطار rainfall
سقيط saqīṭ hail
سقاطة saqqāṭa, (eg.) suqqāṭa door latch
مسقط masqaṭ, masqiṭ pl. مساقط masāqiṭ2
place where a falling object lands;
waterfall │ مسقط افقي (ufqī) ground plan,
horizontal section; مسقط رأسي (ra’sī) front
elevation, vertical section (arch.); مسقط
الرأس m. ar-ra’s birthplace, home
سقط masqaṭ2 Muscat (seaport and
capital of Oman)
اسقاط isqāṭ overthrow; shooting down
(of an aircraft); miscarriage, abortion;
deduction, subtraction; rebate │ الاسقاط من
الجنسية (jinsīya) abrogation of citizenship;
gation of citizenship; اسقاط قيمة الفرنك
(qīmat al-f.) devaluation of the franc
تساقط tasāqut loss (of hair) │ تساقط الثلوج
snowfall
ساقط sāqiṭ pl. سقاط saqāṭ fallen; base,
mean, vile; disreputable, notorious
(district); omitted, missing; forgotten
ساقطة sāqiṭa scrap; (pl. -āt) fallen
woman, harlot
سقطراء suqṭrā’2 Socotra (island, S of Arabia)
سقع saqa‘a a (saq‘) to slap, clap ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.)
مسقعة musaqqa‘a (eg.) dish of eggplant
and meat
سقف 1 II to provide with a roof or ceiling, roof
over ( ه s.th.)
سقف saqf pl. سقوف suqūf, سقف suquf,
اسقف asquf roof; ceiling │ سقف الحلق s. al-
ḥalq palate
سقيفة saqīfa pl. سقائف saqā’if roofed
passage; roofed gallery; roofing, shelter
تسقيف tasqīf roofing
مسقوف masqūf roofed, covered ( ب with)
اسقف 2 asquf pl. اساقفة asāqifa look up
alphabetically
سقالة look up alphabetically
سقلب saqlaba to throw down ( ه s.o.)
سقلبي saqlabī pl. سقالبة saqāliba Slav;
Slavic 415
سقم saqima a (saqam) and saquma u (suqm,
سقام saqām) to be or become sick, ill,
ailing; to become thin, lean, skinny; to be
poor, meager, measly II to make sick ( ه
s.o.) IV = II
سقم suqm pl. اسقام asqām illness,
sickness; leanness, thinness, skinniness
سقم saqam pl. اسقام asqām illness;
sickness; leanness, thinness, skinniness
سقام saqām illness, sickness; leanness,
thinness, skinniness
سقيم saqīm pl. سقام siqām, سقماء suqamā’2
sick, ill, ailing; skinny, lean, emaciated;
meager, measly; poor, faulty (language)
مسقام masqām seriously suffering;
constantly ailing, sickly
سقاوة siqāwa glanders
سقى saqā i (saqy) to give ( ه ھ s.o. s.th.) to
drink, make s.o. ( ه) drink ( ھ s.th.); to
water ( ھ cattle, plants); to irrigate ( ھ
s.th.); to dip, scoop, draw (water) │ سقى
الفولاذ (fūlāda) to temper steel III to give ( ه
ھ s.o. s.th.) to drink; to conclude a lease
contract ( ه with s.o.; cf. مساقاة ) IV to give ( ه
ھ s.o. s.th.) to drink, make s.o. ( ه) drink ( ھ
s.th.); to water ( ھ cattle, plants); to irrigate
ھ) s.th.) VIII to ask ( من s.o.) for a drink; to
draw water ( من from); to draw ( من s.th.,
e.g., information, knowledge, etc., from),
take, borrow, obtain ( من ھ s.th. from) X to
ask ( من s.o.) for a drink (also ھ for s.th.);
to pray for rain
سقى saqy watering; irrigation
سقاء siqā’ pl. اسقية asqiya, اسقيات asqiyāt,
اساق asāqin waterskin, milkskin
سقاء saqqā’ pl. -ūn water carrier; --
pelican (zool.)
سقاية siqāya irrigation, watering; office
of water supplier (spec. the traditional
office of one in charge of providing water
for Mecca pilgrims); watering place;
drinking vessel
مسقى misqā pl. مساق masāqin (eg.)
irrigation canal
مساقاة musāqāh sharecropping contract
over the lease of a plantation, limited to
one crop period (Isl. Law)
استسقاء istisqā’ dropsy │ صلاة الاستسقاء
ṣalāt al-ist. prayer for rain
استسقائي istisqā’ī dropsical, hydropic
ساق sāqin pl. سقاة suqāh cupbearer,
Ganymede, saki
ساقية sāqiya barmaid; -- (pl. سواق
sawāqin) rivulet; irrigation ditch,
irrigation canal; water scoop; sakieh,
water wheel
سك sakka u (sakk) to look, bolt ( ھ the door); to
mint, coin ( ھ money); -- sakka (1st pers.
perf. sakiktu) a ( سكك sakak) and VIII to be
or become deaf
سكة sikka pl. سكك sikak (minting) die;
coin; road; (eg.) sidestreet, lane (narrower
than شارع šāri‘) │ سكة الحديد and السكة
الحديدية railroad; سكة زراعية (zirā‘īya) field
path, dirt road; دار السكة mint
سكان sukkān pl. -āt rudder
اسك asakk f. سكاء sakkā’2, pl. سك sukk
deaf
مسكوك maskūka pl. -āt coin; drain hole
(tun.) │ علم المسكوكات ‘ilm al-m.
numismatics
سكارة sigāra pl. سكائر sagā’ir2 (Syrian spelling)
cigarette
سكارين sakārīn saccharin
سكب sakaba u (sakb) to pour out, shed, spill ( ھ
s.th.) VII to pour forth, be poured out; be
shed, be spilled
سكيب sakīb shed, spilled 416
مسكب maskab pl. مساكب masākib2
melting pot, crucible
مسكوبية maskūbīya melting pot, crucible
سكباج sakbāj meat cooked in vinegar
سكت sakata u (sakt, سكوت sukūt, سكات sukāt to
be silent, say nothing; to become silent,
lapse into silence; to be or become quiet,
calm down, subside; to pass over s.th. (IT)
in silence; not to answer ( عن s.o.); pass.
sukita to have a stroke (med.) │ سكت عنه
الغضب (gaḍab) his anger abated II to
silence, calm, soothe, pacify ( ھ، ه s.o.
s.th.); to order to be silent, hush up ( ه s.o.)
IV do.; to conceal, refuse to tell ( ھ s.th.)
سكت sakt silence; taciturnity, reticence
│ على السكت silently, in silence, quietly
سكتة sakta silence, quiet; stroke,
apoplexy (med.) │ سكتة (qalbīya) heart
failure
سكات sukāt silence; taciturnity,
reticence
سكوت sukūt silence; taciturnity,
reticence; see also alphabetically
سكوتي sukūtī taciturn, reticent
سكوت sakūt taciturn, reticent
سكيت sikkīt habitually silent
ساكت sākit silent, mum; taciturn,
reticent; still, quiet, calm, tranquil;
quiescent (letter)
سكر 1 sakara u (sakr) to shut, close, lock, bolt (
ھ s.th.) II do.
سكر 2 sakara a (sakar, sukr) to be drunk; to get
drunk, become intoxicated IV to make
drunk, intoxicate, inebriate ( ه s.o.) VI to
pretend to be drunk
سكر sukr intoxication, inebriety,
drunkenness
سكر sakar an intoxicant; wine
سكرة sakra pl. sakarāt inebriety,
intoxication, drunkenness │ سكرة الموت s.
al-maut agony of death
سكران sakrān2, f. سكرى sakrā, pl. سكارى
sukārā, sakārā drunk, intoxicated; a drunk
│ سكران طينة (ṭīna) (colloq.) dead drunk
سكير sikīr drunkard, heavy drinker
مسكر muskir pl. -āt alcoholic beverage,
intoxicating liquor
سكر 3 II to sugar, sprinkle with sugar ( ھ s.th.);
to candy, preserve with sugar ( ھ s.th.)
سكر sukkar sugar; pl. سكاكر sakākir2
sweetmeats, confectionery, candies │ سكر
الثمار fructose, levulose, fruit sugar; سكر
الشعير maltose, malt sugar; سكر العنب s.
al-‘inab dextro-glucose, dextrose, grape
sugar; سكر القصب s. al-qaṣab saccharose,
sucrose, cane sugar; سكر اللبن s. al-laban
lactose, milk sugar; سكر النبات s. an-nabāt
sugar candy, rook candy; قصب السكر qaṣab
as-s. sugar cane; مرض السكر maraḍ as-s.
diabetes
سكري sukkarī sugar (adj.), sugary, like
sugar, saccharine; سكرات confectionery;
sweetmeats, candy │ مرض البول السكري
(maraḍ al-baul) diabetes
سكرية sukkarīya sugar bowl
مسكرات musakkarāt confectionery,
sweetmeats, candy
سكارة 4 pl. سكائر look up alphabetically
سيكران 5 look up alphabetically
سكرتاة (It. sicurtà) sikurtāh insurance
سكرتارية (Fr. secrétariat) sekretārīya
secretariat; secretaryship
سكرتو (It scarto) sikartō cotton waste
سكرتير (Fr secrétaiea) sekretēr secretary │
سكرتير عام (‘āmm) secretary-general
سكرتيرية sekretērīya secretariat 417
سكرجة sukurruja, sukruja pl. سكاريج sakārīj2
bowl; platter, plate
سكروز sukrōz saccharose, sucrose
سكرين sukkarīn saccharin
سكسك II tasaksaka to behave in a servile
manner
سكسكة suksuka wren (?)
تسكسك tasaksuk servility
سكسوني saksūnī Saxonian; Saxon
سكسونيا saksōniyā Saxonia
سكع V to grope about ( الظلمة aẓ-ẓulmata in the
dark); to loiter, loaf, hang around; to
proceed aimlessly, dawdle, potter │ طرده
الى حيث التسكع (ḥait t-tasakku‘u) to drive
s.o. out into the dark, leave s.o. to an
uncertain fate
سكاف sakkāf shoemaker
سكافة sikāfa shoemaker’s trade,
shoemaking
اسكاف iskāf and اسكافي iskāfī pl. اساكفة
asākifa shoemaker
اسكفة askafa threshold, doorstep; lintel
ساكف sākif lintel
اسكلة pl. اساكل look up alphabetically
سكن 1 sakana u ( سكون sukūn) to be or become
still, tranquil, peaceful; to calm down,
repose, rest; (gram.) to be vowelless
(consonant, i.e., have no vowel
immediately fallowing); to abate, subside,
remit, cease (anger, pain, and the like); to
pass, go away ( عن from s.o. pain), leave (
عن s.o., pain); to remain calm, unruffled (
الى at, in the face of); to be reassured (، ل
الى by); to rely ( ل، الى on), trust, have faith
ل، الى) in); to feel at home ( الى in, at); --
sakana u (sakan, سكنى suknā) to live,
dwell ( ب or في، ھ in), inhabit ( ب or في، ھ
s.th.) II to calm ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), reassure,
appease, placate ( ه s.o.), soothe, allay,
alleviate ( ھ pain, and the like); (gram.) to
make vowelless ( ھ a consonant, i.e.,
pronounce it without a following vowel)
III to live together, share quarters ( في ه
with s.o. in) IV to give or allocate living
quarters ( ه to s.o.); to settle, lodge, put up (
ھ ه s.o. in) VI to live together, share
quarters
سكن sakan means or time for rest;
dwelling, abode, habitation; inhabited
area, human habitations; ashes
سكني sakanī ashen, ash-gray
في حركاته وسكناته fī ḥarakātihī wa
sakanātihī in all his doings; in every
situation
سكنة sakina pl. -āt residence, home
سكون sukūn calm, tranquility, peace;
silence, quiet; (gram.) vowellessness of a
medial consonant; the graphic symbol of
this vowellessness │ سكون الطائر
seriousness, sedateness, gravity
سكان sakkān cutler
سكان sukkān pl. -āt rudder
سكين sikkīn m. and f. pl. سكاكين sakākīn2
knife
سكينة sakīna pl. سكائن sakā’in2
immanence of God, presence of God;
devout, God-inspired peace of mind;
calm, tranquility, peace
سكينة sikkīna knife
سكنى suknā living, dwelling; stay,
sojourn │ محل السكنى maḥall as-s. place of
residence
سكاكيني sakākīnī cutler
مسكن maskan, maskin pl. مساكن
masākin2 dwelling, abode, habitation;
house; home, residence, domicile
تسكين taskīn pacification,
tranquilization, placation 418
اسكان settling, settlement; allocation of
living quarters
ساكن sākin pl. -ūn, سكنة sakana, f. سواكن
sawākin2 calm, motionless, still;
--vowelless (medial consonant); stagnant,
standing (water); O statio (electricity); (pl.
سكان sukkān, سكنة sakana) dweller,
inhabitant, resident, occupant; السكان the
population │ ساكن الجنان inhabitant of
Paradise, deceased person, one of blessed
memory; كثير السكان populous; لا يحرك ساكنا
(yuḥarriku) he doesn’t budge, he doesn’t
bend his little linger, he remains
immobile, apathetic; حرك ساكنه (sākinahū)
to rouse, agitate s.o.
مسكون maskūn populated, inhabited;
haunted (place); possessed (person) │ الدار
مسكونة the house is haunted
المسكونة al-maskūna the inhabited
world, the world
مسكوني maskūnī ecumenical (Chr.)
مسكن musakkin pl. -ūn pacifier, soother;
(pl. -āt) sedative, tranquilizer
مساكن musākin pl. -ūn fellow citizen,
neighbor
مسكنة 3 and مسكين pl. مساكين look up
alphabetically
سكنجبين sakanjabīn oxymel (pharm.)
سكندينافيا skandināfiyā and سكندناوة sikandināwa
Scandinavia
سكندنافي sikandināfī Scandinavian
سكوت (Hebr. sukkōṭ): عيد السكوت ‘īd as-s.
Sukkoth, Feast of Tabernacles (Jud.)
سكي skī ski
سل 1 sal imperative of سأل sa’ala
سل 2 salla u (sall) to pull out, withdraw, or
remove gently ( ھ s.th.); pass. sulla to have
pulmonary tuberculosis, be consumptive
V to steal away, slink away, slip away,
escape; to spread, extend, get ( الى to),
reach ( الى s.th.); to slip, slink, sneak, steal
الى) into); to betake o.s., go ( الى to, with
secret designs); to invade, infiltrate, enter
الى) s.th.); to penetrate ( في to, as far as) VII
to steal away, slink away, slip away,
escape; to slip, slink, sneak, steal ( الى
into); to infiltrate ( الى s.th., also pol.); to
advance singly or in small groups (troops
in the field; mil.); to have pulmonary
tuberculosis, be consumptive VIII to pull
out or remove gently ( ھ s.th.); to
withdraw gently ( ھ s.th., e.g., كفه kaffahū
one’s hand, عن from); to unsheathe, draw (
ھ the sword); to wrest, snatch ( من ھ from
s.o. s.th.)
سل sall basket
سل sill, sull consumption, phthisis,
tuberculosis │ السل التدرني (tadarrunī)
tuberculosis; السل الرئوي (ri’awī)
pulmonary tuberculosis
سلة salla pl. سلال silāl basket │ سلة
المھملات s. al-muhmalāt wastepaper basket;
كرة السلة kurat as-s. basketball
سليل salīl drawn (sword); descendant,
scion, son
سليلة salīla pl. سلائل salā’il2 (female)
descendant
سلال sallāl basketmaker, basket weaver
سلالة sulāla pl. -āt descendant, scion;
progeny, offspring; family; race; strain,
stock, provenience (of economic plants)
سلالى sulālī family (adj.)
مسلة masalla pl. -āt, مسال masāll2 large
needle, pack needle; obelisk
تسلل tasallul infiltration (pol.); offside
position (in football, hockey, etc.)
انسلال insilāl infiltration (pol.)
مسلول maslūl consumptive, affected
with pulmonary tuberculosis
مستلة mustalla pl. -āt offprint (ir.) 419
سلأ sala’a a (sal’) to clarify ( ھ butter)
سلاء silā’ pl. اسلئة asli’a clarified butter
سلاطة salāṭa salad
سلافي sulāfī Slavic; (pl. -ūn) Slav
سلاقون salāqūn red lead, minium
سلاقى see سلق
سلانيك salānīk2 Salonica (seaport in NE
Greece)
سلب salaba a (salb) to take away, steal, wrest,
snatch ( ه من or ه ھ from s.o. s.th.), rob,
strip, dispossess, deprive ( ه من or ه ھ s.o.
of s.th.); to plunder, rifle, loot ( ه s.o., ھ
s.th.); to strip of arms and clothing ( ه a
fallen enemy); to withhold ( ه ھ from s.o.
s.th.), deny ( ه ھ to s.o. s.th.); -- saliba a
(salab) to put on or wear mourning, be in
mourning V to be in mourning VIII =
salaba
سلب salb spoliation, plundering,
looting, pillage, robbing; negation │ علامة
السلب ‘alāmat as-s. minus sign (math.)
سلبي salbī negative (also el.); passive │
الدفاع السلبي or المقاومة السلبية (muqāwama)
passive resistance
سلبية salbīya negativism, negative
attitude
سلب salab pl. اسلاب aslāb loot, booty,
plunder, spoils; hide, shanks and belly of a
slaughtered animal; -- ropes, hawsers (eg.)
سلاب sillāb pl. سلب sulub black clothing,
mourning (worn by women)
سلاب sallāb robber, plunderer, looter
سليب salīb stolen, taken, wrested away
اسلوب uslūb pl. اساليب asālīb2 method,
way, procedure; course; manner, mode,
fashion; style (esp. literary); stylistic
peculiarity (of an author) │ اسلوب كتابي
(kitābī) literary style
استلاب istilāb spoliation, plundering,
looting, pillage, robbing
سالب sālib negative (adj.); (pl. سوالب
sawālib2) O negative (phot.)
مسلوب maslūb unsuccessful
سلبند salaband martingale (of the harness)
سلت salata i u to extract, pull out ( ھ s.th.); to
chop off ( ھ s.th., esp. a part of the body)
VII to steal away, slip away
سلج salg (eg.) = سلق
السلاجقة as-salājiqa the Seljuk
سلجم saljam turnip (Brassica rapa; bot.); (eg.)
rape (Brassica napus; bot.)
سلح salaḥa a (salḥ) to void excrement; to drop
dung (bird) II to arm ( ه ھ s.o. with) V to
arm o.s. VI to engage in battle, fight, cross
swords
سلح salḥ and سلاح sulāḥ excrements,
dung, droppings
سلاح silāh pl. اسلحة asliḥa arm, weapon;
arms, weapons; service (as a branch of the
armed forces); armor; steel gripper, steel
claw; plowshare سلاح الطيران s. aṭ-ṭayarān
air force; سلاح الفرسان s. al-fursān cavalry;
شاك السلاح šākk as-s. bristling with arms,
armed to the teeth; سلم سلاحه sallama
silāḥahū to lay down one’s arms,
surrender
سلاحدار silāḥdār sword-bearer, shieldbearer,
squire
سليح salīḥ pl. -ūn apostle (Chr.)
تسليح taslīḥ pl. -āt arming, equipping;
armament, rearmament; armoring,
reinforcement (in ferroconcrete
construction)
تسلح tasalluḥ armament, rearmament │
سباق التسلح sibāq at-t. arms race
مسلح musalliḥ armorer
سلح musallaḥ armed; armored,
reinforced (with steel); = Fr. armé │ القوات
المسلحة ٤٢٠ (qūwāt) the armed forces;
اسمنت مسلح (ismant) ferroconcrete,
reinforced concrete; خرسانة مسلحة (karsāna)
do.; زجاج مسلح (zujāj) wired glass
سلحفاء sulaḥfāh, silaḥfāh pl. سلاحف salāḥif2
turtle, tortoise
سلحفائية sulḥafā’īya dawdling,
dilatoriness
سلخ salaka a u (salk) to pull off, strip off ( ھ
s.th.); to skin, flay ( ھ an animal); to
detach ( ھ عن s.th. from); to end, terminate,
conclude, bring to a close ( ھ a period of
time); to spend ( ھ a period of time, في
doing s.th.) V to peel (skin, from sunburn)
VII to be stripped off, be shed (skin,
slough); to shed, cast off ( عن، من the
slough, the skin), strip off, take off ( عن، من
clothing); to abandon, give up, cut off ( ھ a
trait, a quality); to get detached ( عن، من
from), come off ( عن، من ); to withdraw,
retire ( من from); to pass, end (month)
سلخ salk detaching; skinning, flaying;
snakeskin, slough; end of the month
سلخ salk: خشب سلخ (kašab) (barkless)
soft wood, alburnum, sapwood
سلاخ sallāk pl. ة, -ūn butcher
سلخ salik skinned, flayed; tasteless,
insipid (food)
سليخة salīka Chinese cinnamon tree
(Cinnamomum cassia; bot.); cinnamon
bark, cassia bark
سخانة salkāna pl. -āt slaughterhouse,
abattoir
مسلخ maslak pl. مسالخ masālik2
slaughterhouse, abattoir
مسلاخ mislāk snakeskin, slough
منسلخ munsalak end of the month
سلس salisa a (salas, سلاسة salāsa) to be
tractable, docile, compliant, obedient; to
be smooth, flowing, fluent (style) IV to
make tractable, render obedient, subdue (
ھ, ه s.o., s.th.); to make easy, smooth,
fluent ( ھ s.th.)
سلس salas incontinence of urine
سلس salis tractable, pliable, docile,
compliant, obedient; flexible, smooth,
fluent (style) │ سلس القياد s. al-qiyād
tractable, pliable, docile, compliant,
obedient
سلاسة salāsa tractability, pliability,
docility, compliance, obedience (also
سلاسة القيادة s. al-qiyāda); smoothness,
fluency (of style)
اسلس aslas2 more tractable, more
pliable, more obedient; more flexible,
smoother, more fluent
سلسبيل salsabīl name of a spring in Paradise;
spring, well
سلسل salsala to link together, concatenate,
interlink, interlock, connect, unite ( ھ s.th.
ب with); to chain up, enchain, fetter,
shackle ( ه s.o.); to pour ( الماء في water into)
│ سلسله الى to trace s.o.’s lineage back to
s.o. II tasalsala to flow down, trickle (in a
continuous stream); to drip, dribble, fall in
drops (water); to form a chain or series, be
continuous; to be interlinked, interlocked,
linked together, concatenate
سلسل salsal cool fresh water
سلسلة silsila pl. سلاسل salāsil2 iron chain;
chain (also fig.); series (of essays, articles,
etc.) │ سلسلة الجبال mountain chain; سلسلة
الظھر s. aẓ-ẓahr, backbone, vertebral
column; السلسلة الفقرية (faqrīya) do.; سلسلة
الأكاذب fabric of lies; سلسلة النسب s. annasab
lineage, line of ancestors
تسلسل tasalsul sequence, succession │
بالتسلسل without interruption, successively,
consecutively, continuously; نشره بتسلسل to
serialize s.th., publish s.th. in serial form
421
مسلسل musalaal chained; continuous
(numbering) │ رد فعل مسلسل (raddu fi‘lin)
chain reaction (phys.); المرأة المسلسلة
(mar’a) Andromeda (astron.)
متسلسل mutasalsil continuous
(numbering)
سلط 1 II to give ( ه s.o.) power or mastery ( على
over), set up as overlord, establish as ruler
على ه) s.o. over); to impose, inflict ( على ه a
penalty on s.o.); to bring to bear, exert ( ھ
force, pressure, and the like, على on); to
load, charge ( على ھ s.th. with electric
current) │ سلطوا عليه ايديھم (aidiyahum) they
laid violent hands on …, dealt highhandedly
with ...; سلط عليه الكلاب to set the
dogs on s.o. V to overcome, surmount (
على s.th.); to overpower, overwhelm ( على
s.o.); to prevail, gain the upperhand ( على
over), get the better of ( على ); to be
absolute master ( على of), rule, reign, hold
sway ( على over); to control, supervise,
command ( على s.th.)
سلط sulṭa pl. -āt, سلط sulaṭ power,
might, strength; authority; sway,
dominion, influence, sovereign power,
jurisdiction; (pl. -āt) official agency,
authority │ السلطة الأبوية (abawīya) paternal
authority; patriarchy; السلطة الروحية (rūḥīya)
spiritual power; السلطة التشريعية (tašrī‘īya)
legislative power; سلطة عسكرية (‘askarīya)
military authority; السلطة القضائية (qaḍā’īya)
judicial power; السلطة التنفيذية (tanfīdīya)
executive power
سلطة salṭa jacket
سليط salīṭ strong, solid, firm; glib;
impudent, sharp, loose, vicious (tongue)
سلاطة salāṭa glibness; impudence, lack
of restraint (in one’s language); see also
alphabetically
تسلط tasalluṭ mastery, sway, dominion;
rule, influence, authority, supremacy ( على
over); supervision, control
سلط 2 salaṭa and سلاطة salāṭa salad
سلطح III اسلنطح islanṭaḥa to be broad, be wide
سلاطح sulāṭiḥ wide
سلطن salṭana to proclaim sultan, establish as
ruler ( ه s.o.) II تسلطن tasalṭana to become
sultan or ruler
سلطنة salṭana sultanate
سلطان sulṭān m. and f. power, might,
strength; rule, reign, dominion, sway;
authority; mandate, authorization;
legitimation ( ب for); -- (pl. سلاطين salāṭīn2)
sultan; (absolute) ruler │ سلطان ابراھيم s.
ibrāhīm red mullet (Mullus barbatus;
zool.); ما انزل لله به من سلطان (anzala llāhu)
(lit.; God has revealed no legitimation for
it; with preceding indeterminate noun)
vain, unfounded, baseless, arbitrary
سلطانة sulṭāna sultana, sultaness
سلطاني sulṭānī of the sultan; sovereign,
imperial, royal │ طريق سلطاني imperial
highway
سلطانية suṭānīya soup bowl, tureen;
large metal bowl
سلع Sali‘a a (sala‘) to crack, become cracked
VII to split, break open, burst
سلع sal‘ pl. سلوع sulū‘ crack, fissure, rift
سلعة sil‘a pl. سلع sila‘ commodity,
commercial article; sebaceous cyst, wen
سلف salafa u (salaf) to be over, be past, be
bygone; to precede, antecede II to lend,
loan, advance ( ھ ه to s.o. money) IV to
make ( ھ s.th.) precede; to lend, loan,
advance ( ه ھ to s.o. money) │ (اسلفنا ( القول
(qaul) we have already said, we have
previously stated; كما اسلفنا as we have
already said V to borrow ( ھ من s.th. from);
to contract a loan VIII = V
سلف silf pl. اسلاف aslāf brother-in-law
سلفة silfa sister-in-law 422
سلف salaf and pl. اسلاف aslāf
predecessors; forebears, ancestors,
forefathers; سلف advance payment,
prepayment; free loan, noninterest-bearing
loan; سلفا salafan in advance, beforehand,
before │ السلف الصالح the worthy ancestors,
the venerable forefathers
سلفية salafīya pl. -āt free loan; (cash)
advance
السلفية as-salafīya an Islamic reform
movement in Egypt, founded by
Mohammed ‘Abduh (1849-1906)
سلفة sulfa pl. سلف sulaf loan; (cash)
advance; inner lining of shoes, inner sole
سلاف sulāf choicest wine (made of the
juice flowing from unpressed grapes)
سلافة sulāfa = سلاف sulāf
سلفاء sulafā’2 predecessors
مسلفة mislafa harrow
تسليف taslīf credit, advance │ سعر التسليف
si‘r at-t. rate of interest; بنك التسليف credit
bank
تسليفة talīfa credit, loan │ تسليفة عقارية
(‘aqārīya) land credit
سالف sālif pl. سلف salaf, سلاف sullāf,
سوالف sawālif, preceding, foregoing,
former, previous, bygone, past;
predecessor; سالفا sālifan formerly,
previously; above (as a reference in
books, etc.) │ سوالف الأحداث former, or
past, events; سالف الذكر s. ad-dikr
aforementioned; سالف العروس s. al-‘arūs
amaranth (bot.); في سالف الزمان fī s. izzamān
in former times, in the old days
سلفات 1 sulfāt sulfate │ سلفات النشادر s. annušādir
ammonium sulfate
2O سلفت salfata to asphalt ( ھ s.th.)
O مسلفت musalfat asphalted
سلفيد sulfīd sulfide
سلق salaqa u (salq) to lacerate the skin ( ه of
s.o.; with a whip); to remove with boiling
water ( ھ s.th.); to boil, cook in boiling
water ( ھ s.th.); to scald ( ھ plants; said of
excessive heat); to hurt ( ه s.o., بلسانه bilisānihī
with one’s tongue, i.e., give s.o. a
tongue-lashing) V to ascend, mount,
climb, scale ( ھ s.th.); to climb up (plant)
سلق salq (eg.), silq a variety of chard,
the leaves of which are prepared as a salad
or vegetable dish
السلاق as-sullāq Ascension of Christ
سلاقة salāqa vicious tongue, violent
language
سليقة salīqa pl. سلائق salā’iq2 dish made
of grain cooked with sugar, cinnamon and
fennel (syr.); inborn disposition, instinct
سلقون salaqūn and سلاقون salāqūn red
lead, minium
سلاقي salāqī saluki, greyhound, hunting
dog
سلوقي salūqī saluki, greyhound, hunting
dog
تسلق tasalluq climbing; ascent
مسلوق maslūq cooked, boiled (meat,
egg, vegetable)
مسلوقة maslūqa pl. مساليق masālīq2
bouillon, broth
النباتات المتسلقة an-nabātāt al-mutasalliqa
climbing plants, creepers
سلك salaka u (salk, سلوك sulūk) to follow ( ھ a
road), travel ( ھ along a road); to take ( ھ a
road), enter upon a course or road ( ;ھ
fig.); to behave, comport o.s. ( نحو toward
s.o.); to proceed, act; to set foot ( ھ on),
enter ( ھ a place); -- salaka (salk) to insert
ھ في) s.th. in), stick ( ھ في s.th. into); to
pass ( ھ thread, في الإبرة through the eye of
a needle), thread a 423 needle │ سلكه في
السلسلة (silsila) to chain s.o. up II to clean,
clear ( ھ s.th., esp. pipelines, canals, etc.);
to unreel, unwind ( ھ yarn); to clarify,
unravel, disentangle ( امرا معقدا amran
mu‘aqqadan a complicated affair) IV to
insert ( ھ في s.th. in), stick ( ھ في s.th. into);
to pass ( ھ thread, في للإبرة through the eye
of a needle), thread a needle
سلك silk pl. اسلاك aslāk thread; string
(also, of a musical instrument); line; wire;
rail (Mor.); -- organization, body;
profession (as a group or career); corps;
cadre │ سلك الأرض s. al-arḍ or السلك الأرضي
(arḍī) ground wire; اسلاك بحرية (baḥrīya)
underwater cable; O السلك الحراري
(h>arārī) filament (of a radio tube); O
السلك المتحكم (mutaḥakkim) grid (of a radio
tube); ( رجال) السلك السياسي (siyāsī)
diplomatic corps; سلك الشرطة s. aš-šurṭa the
police; السلك الشائك barbed wire; O سلك
الانصھار الواقى fuse (el.); السلك التعليمي
(ta‘līmī) the teaching profession, the
teachers; سلك القضاء s. al-qaḍā’ the
judiciary, the judicature; O السلك المقاوم
(muqāwim) resistor (el.); O السلك الھوائي
(hawā’ī) antenna, aerial; انتظو في (الى) السلك
البحري to be a member of an organization
and the like; to join an organization and
the like, e.g., الانتظام الى السلك البحري (baḥrī)
entrance into the navy (as also انخراط في
(سلك
سلكي silkī by wire, wire (adj.)
لاسلكي lā-silkī wireless; radio,
broadcasting (adj. and n.); radiogram;
radio specialist │ اشارة لاسلكية (išāra) radio
message; عامل لاسلكي radio operator
سلكة silka pl. سلك silak wire; thread;
string (also, of a musical instrument)
سلوك sulūk behavior, comportment,
demeanor, manners; conduct, deportment,
attitude │ حسن السلوك ḥusn as-s. good
behavior, good manners; قواعد السلوك or
آداب السلوك etiquette
مسلك maslak pl. مسالك masālik2 way,
road, path; course of action, policy;
procedure, method │ المسالك البولية
(baulīya) the urinary passages (anat.);
مسالك الھواء m. al-hawā’ the respiratory
passages (anat.); سلك مسلكا to enter upon a
course (fig.)
مسلكي maslakī professional, vocational,
industrial, trade (adj.)
سالك sālik cleaning, clearing
سالك sālik passable, practicable (road);
entered upon (course); clear, open, not
blocked, not obstructed (also anat.); (pl.
-āt) one who follows the spiritual path
(esp. myst.)
مسلوك maslūk passable, practicable
(road); entered upon (course)
سلم salima a ( سلامة salāma, سلام salām)
to be safe and sound, unharmed,
unimpaired, intact, safe, secure; to be
unobjectionable, blameless faultless; to be
certain, established, clearly proven (fact);
to be free ( من from); to escape ( من ه
danger) II to preserve, keep from injury,
protect from harm ( ه s.o.), save ( ه من s.o.
from); to hand over intact ( ھ s.th., ل or الى
to s.o.); to hand over, turn over, surrender
ھ, ه) s.o., s.th., ل or الى to s.o.); to deliver (
ھ ل or الى to s.o. s.th.); to lay down ( ھ
arms); to surrender, give o.s. up ( ل or الى
to); to submit, resign o.s. ( ل or الى to); to
greet. Salute ( على s.o.); to grant salvation
(God to the Prophet); to admit, concede,
grant ( ب s.th.); to consent ( ب to s.th.),
approve ( ب of s.th.), accept, sanction,
condone ( ب s.th.) │ سلم امره الى لله
(amrahū) to commit one’s cause to God,
resign o.s. to the will of God; سلم روحه
(rūḥahū) to give up the ghost; سلم نفسه
الأخير (nafasahū) to breathe one’s last, be
in the throes of death; سلم نفسه للبوليس
(nafsahū) to give o.s. up to the police; سلم
اليه على الحسنى والإساءة (ḥusnā, isā’a) 424 to
put o.s. at s.o.’s mercy; سلم لي عليه (salim)
give him my best regards! remember me
to him! صلى لله عليه وسلم (sallā) God bless
him and grant him salvation (eulogy after
the name of the Prophet Mohammed) III
to keep the peace, make one’s peace,
make up ( ه with s.o.) IV to forsake, leave,
desert, give up, betray ( ه s.o.); to let sink,
drop ( رأسه الى ركبتيه ra’sahū i. rukbataihī
one’s head, to one’s knees); to hand over,
turn over ( الى to s.o., ھ or ه s.o. or s.th.); to
leave, abandon ( الى ھ s.th. to s.o.); to
deliver up, surrender, expose ( ه الى s.o. to);
to commit o.s. resign o.s. (􀍿 to the will of
God, with ellipsis of نفسه or امره )؛ (اسلم
alone:) to declare o.s. committed to the
will of God, become a Muslim, embrace
Islam │ اسلم امره الى لله (amrahū) to commit
one’s cause to God, resign o.s. to the will
of God; اسلم روحه ( الروح ) (rūḥahū) to give
up the ghost V to get, obtain ( ھ s.th.); to
receive ( ھ s.th.); to have ( ھ s.th.) handed
over or delivered; to take over, assume ( ھ
the management of s.th.) │ تسلم مقاليد الحكم
(m. al-ḥukm) to take (the reins of) power
VI to become reconciled with one another,
make peace with one another VIII to
touch, graze ( ھ s.th.); to receive, get,
obtain ( ھ s.th.); to take over ( ھ s.th.), take
possession ( ھ of) X to surrender,
capitulate; to give way, submit, yield,
abandon o.s. ( ل or الى to s.th.); to give o.s.
over ( ل or الى to s.th.; to a man, said of a
woman); to lend o.s., be a party ( ل or الى to
s.th.); to succumb ( ل to)
سلم salm peace
سلم silm m. and f. peace; the religion of
Islam │ حب السلم ḥubb as-s. pacifism
سلمي silmī peaceful; pacifist
سلم salam forward buying (Isl. Law); a
variety of acacia
سلم sullam pl. سلالم salālim سلاليم , 2
salālīm2 ladder; (flight of) stairs, staircase;
stair, step, running board; (mus.)
scale; means, instrument, tool (fig.) │ سلم
متحرك (mutaḥarrik) escalator
سلمة sullama step, stair
سلام salām soundness, unimpairedness,
intactness, well-being; peace,
peacefulness; safety, security; -- (pl. -āt)
greeting, salutation; salute; military salute;
national anthem │ السلام العام (‘āmm)
general welfare, commonweal; دار السلام
Paradise; an epithet of Baghdad; Dar es
Salaam (seaport and capital of
Tanganyika); مدينة السلام (the City of Peace
=) Baghdad; نھر السلام nahr as-s. the
Tigris; السلام عليكم (salāmu), سلام عليكم peace
be with you! (a Muslim salutation); عليه
السلام upon him be peace (used
parenthetically after the names of angels
and of pre-Mohammedan prophets); يا سلام
exclamation of dismay, esp. after s.th.
calamitous has happened: good Lord!
good heavens! oh dear! يا سلام على
exclamation of amazement or grief about
s.th.: there goes (go) ...! what a pity for ...!
how nice is (are) ...! بلغ سلامي اليه (ballig)
give him my kind regards! remember me
to him! والسلام (and) that’s all, and let it be
done with that; على ... سلام it’s all over with
...
سلاملك (Turk. selamlιk) selāmlιk
selamlik, reception room, sitting room,
parlor
سلامة salāma blamelessness
flawlessness; unimpaired state, soundness,
integrity, intactness; well-being, welfare;
safety, security; smooth progress; success
│ السلامة الاجماعية (ijmā‘īya) collective
security; سلامة الذوق s. ad-dauq good taste;
سلامة (املاك) البلاد the integrity of the
country; سلامة النية s. an-nīya sincerity,
guilelessness; بسلامة النية in good faith,
bona fide; سلامتك a speedy recovery! مع
السلامة (a greeting of 425 farewell, said by
the person remaining behind) approx.:
good-by! farewell! على السلامة 􀍿 الحمد
(ḥamdu) praised be God for your wellbeing!
(said to the traveler returning from
a journey)
سليم salīm pl. سلماء sulamā’2 safe,
secure; free ( من from); unimpaired,
undamaged, unhurt, sound, intact,
complete, perfect, whole, integral;
faultless, flawless; well; safe and sound;
safe; healthy; sane; (euphemistically)
seriously injured or damaged, on the verge
of ruin │ سليم البنية s. al-bunya healthy,
sound in body; سليم العاقبة benign (disease);
سليم العقل s. al-‘aql sane; سليم النية s. an-nīya,
سليم القلب s. al-qalb guileless, sincere, goodnatured;
ذوق سليم (dauq) good taste
سلامى sulāmā pl. سلاميات sulāmayāt
phalanx, digital bone (of the hand or foot)
سلامية sulāmīya pl. -āt phalanx, digital
bone (of the hand or foot)
اسلم aslam2 safer; freer; sounder;
healthier
سليماني sulaimānī Solomon │ حوت سليمان
ḥūt s. salmon
سليماني sulaimānī corrosive sublimate,
mercury chloride
تسليم taslīm handing over, turning over;
presentation; extradition; surrender (of
s.th.); delivery (com.; of mail);
submission, surrender, capitulation;
salutation; greeting; concession,
admission; assent, consent ( ب to),
acceptance, approval, condonation,
unquestioning recognition ( ب of)
مسالمة musālama conciliation,
pacification
اسلام islām submission, resignation,
reconciliation (to the will of God); --
الاسلام the religion of Islam; the era of
Islam; the Muslims
اسلامي islāmī Islamic
اسلامية islāmīya the idea of Islam,
Islamism; status or capacity of a Muslim
اسلامبولي look up alphabetically
تسلم tasallum receipt; taking over,
assumption; reception
استلام istilām receipt; acceptance; taking
over, assumption │ افادة الاستلام
acknowledgment of receipt
استسلام istislām surrender, capitulation;
submission, resignation, self-surrender
سالم sālim safe, secure; free ( من from);
unimpaired, unblemished, faultless,
flawless, undamaged, unhurt, intact, safe
and sound, safe; sound, healthy; whole,
perfect, complete, integral; regular (verb)
│ الجمع السالم (jam‘) sound (= external)
plural (gram.)
مسلم musallam unimpaired, intact,
unblemished, flawless; (also (مسلم به
accepted, uncontested, incontestable,
indisputable, incontrovertible
مسالم musālim peaceable, peaceful,
peace-loving; mild-tempered, lenient,
gentle
مسلم muslim pl. -ūn Muslim
مستلم mustalim recipient; consignee
سلندر (Fr. cylindre) silender pl. -āt cylinder (of
an automobile, and the like)
سلا (سلو ) salā u ( سلو sulūw, سلوان sulwān) and
سلي saliya a ( سلي sulīy) to get rid of the
memory of ( ھ، ه or عن ), forget ( ھ، ه or عن
s.o., s.th.), think no more ( ھ، ه or عن of) II
to make ( ه s.o.) forget ( عن s.o., s.th.); to
comfort, console, solace ( ه s.o., عن for the
loss of); to cheer up ( ه s.o.); to distract.
divert ( عن ه s.o.’s mind from); to amuse,
entertain ( ه s.o.); to alleviate, dispel ( ھ
worries and the like) IV = II V to delight,
take pleaure ( ب in), have a good time,
have fun, amuse o.s. ( ب with); to console
o.s. ( عن ب for s.th. 426 with), find comfort
عن ب) for s.th. in); to seek distraction or
diversion ( عن ب from s.th. in)
سلوى salwā, sulwā solace, consolation,
comfort; fun, amusement, entertainment,
distraction, diversion; pastime │ ھو في سلوة
من العيش (‘aiš) he leads a comfortable life
سلوى salwā consolation, solace, comfort
سلوى salwā (n. un. سلواة ) pl. سلاوى
salāwā quail (zool.)
سلوان sulwān forgetting, oblivion;
consolation, solace, comfort
مسلاة maslāh pl. مسال masālin object of
amusement; amusement, entertainment,
fun, distraction, diversion; solace,
consolation, comfort
تسلية tasliya consolation, amusement,
distraction, diversion, fun; pastime,
entertainment
مسل musallin amusing, entertaining;
comforting, consoling; comforter,
consoler
سلوفينيا slovēniyā Slovenia
□ مسلي maslī (eg.) = سمن samn: cooking butter
│ مسلي نباتي (nabātī) vegetable butter
سلينيوم silīniyūm selenium
اسم 1 ism pl. اسماء asmā’, اسام asāmin name;
appellation; reputation, standing, prestige;
(gram.) noun; اسما isman nominally │ اسم
التأليف pen name, nom de plume; اسم الكتابة
do.; اسم تجاري (tijārī) firm name (com.);
اسم علم ism ‘alam proper name; اسم جامد
(gram.) primary noun (not derived from a
verb form); اسم الجمع ism al-jam‘ (gram.)
collective noun (which, though forming
no nomen unitatis, has a broken plural);
اسم الجنس الجمعي ism al-jins al-jam‘ī (gram.)
generic collective noun (which can form a
nomen unitatis; e.g., rv. /lamam pigoons);
اسم الإشارة ism al-išāra (gram.)
demonstrative pronoun; اسم التصغير (gram.)
diminutive; اسم العدد ism al-‘adad (gram.)
numeral; اسم المعنى ism al-ma‘nā (gram.)
abstract noun; اسم العين ism al-‘ain (gram.)
concrete noun; اسم التفضيل (gram.) elative;
اسم الفعل ism al-fi‘l (gram.) verbal noun,
nomen verbi; اسم الفاعل (gram.) nomen
agentis, active participle; اسم المفعول
(gram.) nomen patientis, passive
participle; اسم المرة ism al-marra (gram.)
nomen vicis; الأسماء الحسنى (ḥusnā) the 99
names of God (Isl.); باسم فلان in s.o.’s
name, on behalf of s.o.; بسم لله in the name
of God; تقدم الطلبات باسم رئيس الجمعية
(tuqaddamu ṭ-ṭalabāt) applications will be
addressed to the chairman of the society
اسمي ismī in name only, nominal,
titular; nominal (gram.) │ مبلغ اسمي
(mablag) nominal par; جملة اسمية (jumla)
nominal clause (gram.); قيمة اسمية (qīma)
nominal value, face value
سم 2 samma u (samm) to put poison ( ھ into
s.th.); to poison ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.) II to poison
ھ) s.th.) V to be poisoned, poison o.s.
سم samm pl. سموم sumūm, سمام simām
poison, toxin; venom; opening, hole; eye
(of a needle) │ السموم البيضاء (baiḍā’) the
white narcotics (such as cocaine, Heroin,
etc.)
سموم samūm f., pl. سمائم samā’im2 hot
wind, hot sandstorm, simoom
مسام masāmm مسامات , 2 masāmmāt (pl.)
pores (of the skin)
مسامي masāmmī porous
مسامية masāmmīya porousness, porosity
تسمم tasammum poisoning, toxication;
sepsis │ التسمم البولي (baulī) uremia; التسمم
الدموي (damawī) blood poisoning, toxemia
سام sāmm poisonous; toxic, toxicant;
venomous 427
مسموم masmūm poisoned; poisonous
مسم musimm poisonous; venomous;
toxic, toxicant
سمانجوني samānjūnī sky-blue, azure, cerulean
سمباتوي simbātawī sympathetic (physiol.)
سمت 1 III to be on the other side of ( ھ ), be
opposite s.th. ( ھ ), face s.th. ( (ھ
سمت samt pl. سموت sumūt way, road;
manner, mode; السمت azimuth (astron.) │
سمت الرأس s. ar-ra’s zenith, vertex
(astron.); سمت الشمس s. aš-šams ecliptic
(astron.); سمت الاعتدال equinoctial colure
(astron.); سمت القدم s. al-qadam nadir
(astron.); سمت الانقلاب solstitial colure
(astron.); نظير السمت nadir (astron.); اخذ
سمته الى to take the road to ...
سمات 2 pl. of سمة , see وسم
سمج samuja to be ugly, disgusting, revolting II
to make ( ھ s.th.) ugly or loath-some
سمج samj pl. سماج simāj and samij pl.
سماجى samājā ugly, disgusting, loathsome,
revolting
سميج samīj pl. سماج simāj, سماجى samājā,
سمجاء samajā’2 ugly, disgusting,
loathsome, revolting
سماجة samāja ugliness, abominableness,
odiousness
سمح samuḥa u (samḥ, سماح samāḥ, سماحة
samāḥa) to be generous, magnanimous,
kind, liberal, openhanded; -- samaḥa a (
سماح samāḥ) to grant from a generous
heart ( ب ل s.o. s.th.); to allow, permit ( ان
or ب ل s.o. s.th. or to do s.th.); to
authorize, empower ( ب ل s.o. to do s.th.) │
لا سمح لله God forbid! II to act with
kindness III to show o.s. tolerant ( ه with
s.o., في or ب in), treat kindly, with
indulgence ( في or ب ه s.o. in the matter of),
forgive ( في or ب ه s.o. s.th.) VI to be
indulgent, forbearing, tolerant ( مع في
toward s.o. in), show good will ( في in); to
be not overparticular ( في in); to practice
mutual tolerance X to ask s.o.’s ( (ه
permission; to ask forgiveness, apologize
سمح samḥ magnanimity, generosity;
kindness; liberality, munificence
سمح samḥ pl. سماح simāḥ magnanimous,
generous; kind; liberal, openhanded
سماح samāḥ magnanimity, generosity;
kindness; liberality, munificence;
indulgence, forbearance, tolerance,
forgiveness, pardon; permission ( ب for, to
do s.th.)
سماحة samāḥa magnanimity; generosity;
kindness; liberality, munificence;
indulgence, forbearance, tolerance; سماحته
His Eminence, سماحة المفتي His Eminence
the Mufti (title of a mufti)
سميح samīḥ pl. سمحاء sumahā’2
generous, magnanimous; kind, forgiving;
liberal, openhanded
الحنيفة السمحاء al-ḥanīfa as-samḥā’ the
true and tolerant (religion. i.e., Islam)
مسامحة musāmaḥa pardon, forgiveness;
(pl. -āt) vacation, holidays
تسامح tasāmuḥ indulgence, forbearance,
leniency, tolerance
مسموح به masmūḥ bihī allowed,
permitted, permissible, admissible │
مسموحات licenses, privileges, prerogatives
متسامح mutasāmiḥ indulgent, forbearing
مع) toward), tolerant
سمحاق simḥāq pl. سماحق samāḥiq2 periosteum
(anat.)
سمد 1 samada u ( سمود sumūd) to raise one’s
head proudly, bear one’s head proudly
erect (also with الرأس ) II to dung, manure,
fertilize ( الأرض the soil)
سماد samād pl. اسمدة asmida dung,
manure, fertilizer │ سماد صناعي (ṣinā‘ī)
428 chemical fertilizer; سماد عضوي organic
fertilizer
تسميد tasmīd manuring, fertilizing
سامد sāmid: سامد الرأس s. ar-ra’s with
head erect
مسمدات musammidāt fertilizers
2□ سميد samīd (= سميذ ) semolina (syr.); a kind
of biscuit or rusk, sometimes ring-shaped
and sprinkled with sesame seed (eg.)
سمدور sumdūr pl. سمادير samādīr2 dizziness,
vertigo
سميذ samīd semolina
سمر 1 samura u ( سمرة sumra) to be or turn
brown; -- samara u (samr, سمور sumūr) to
chat in the evening or at night; to chat,
talk (generally) II to nail, fasten with nails
ھ الى) s.th. to or on); to drive in ( المسمار almismār
the nail) III to spend the night or
evening in pleasant conversation, chat at
night or in the evening ( ه with s.o.); to
converse, talk, chat( ه with s.o.) V to be or
get nailed down, be fastened with nails: to
stand as if pinned to the ground VI to
spend the night or evening in pleasant
conversation, chat with one another at
night or in the evening; to converse, talk,
chat IX = I samura
سمر saar pl. اسمار asmār nightly, or
evening, chat; conversation, talk, chat;
night, darkness
سمرة sumra brownness, brown color
سمار samār (eg.) a variety of rush used
for plaiting mats (Juncus spinocus F., bot.)
│ سمار ھندي صلب (hindī ṣulb) a variety of
bamboo
سمير samīr companion in nightly
entertainment, conversation partner;
entertainer in general, with stories, songs,
music, amusing improvisations)
سميرة samīra woman partner in nightly
or evening conversation; woman
entertainer; woman companion (who
entertains with lively conversation)
اسمر asmar2, f. سمراء samrā’2, pl. سمر
sumr brown; tawny; pl. سمراوات samrāwāt
brown-skinned women
مسامر masāmir2 (pl.) evening or nightly
entertainments (conversations, also
games, vocal recitals, storytelling, etc.)
مسمار mismār pl. مسامير masāmīr2 nail;
peg; pin, tack, rivet; corn (on the toes)
الخط المسماري al-kaṭṭ al-mismārī
cuneiform writing
مسامرة musāmara nightly or evening
chat; conversation, talk, chat
سامر sāmir pl. سمار summār companion
in nightly entertainment; causeur,
conversationalist; entertainer
سوامر sawāmir2 (pl.) evenings of
entertainment, social evenings; evening or
nightly entertainments (conversations,
also games, vocal recitals, storytelling,
etc.)
مسمر musammar fastened with nails,
nailed on, nailed down; provided, or
studded, with nails; hobnailed
مسامر musāmir companion in nightly
entertainment, conversation partner
السامرة 2 as-sāmira the Samaritans
سامري sāmirī Samaritan; (pl. -ūn, سمرة
samara) a Samaritan
سمور 3 pl. سمامير look up alphabetically
سمرقند samarqand2 Samarkand (city in Uzbek
S.S.R.)
سمسر samsara to act as broker or middleman
سمسرة samsara brokerage; caravansary
سمسار simsār pl. سماسرة samāsira, سماسر
samāsir سماسير , 2 samāsīr2 broker, jobber,
429 middleman, agent │ سمسار الأسھم s. alashum
stockbroker
سمسيرة samsīra (ir.) go-between, matchmaker
سمط samaṭa u (samṭ) to scold ( ھ s.th.); to
prepare ( ھ s.th.)
سمط simṭ pl. سموط sumūṭ string, thread
(of a pearl necklace)
سماط simāṭ pl. -āt, سمط sumuṭ, اسمطة
asmiṭa cloth on which food is served;
meal, repast
مسمط masmaṭ pl. مسامط masāmiṭ2
scalding house (where the carcasses of
slaughtered animals are scalded)
O مسمط mismaṭ pl. مسامط masāmiṭ2 vine
prop
سمع sami‘a a (sam‘, سماع samā‘, سماعة samā‘a,
مسمع masma‘) to hear ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.; ب of
or about s.th.; ھ من s.th. from s.o.); to
learn, be told ( ھ من of or about s.th. from
s.o.); to listen, pay attention ( الى or ل to
s.th.; من to s.o.), hear s.o. ( من ) out; to learn
by hearsay ( ب about s.th.); to overhear ( ب
s.th.); to give ear, lend one’s ear ( الى or ل
to s.o., to s.th.) │ لم يسمع به (yusma‘)
unheard-of II to make or let ( ه s.o.) hear (
ھ s.th.), give ( ه ھ s.o. s.th.) to hear; to
recite ( ھ s.th.); to say ( ھ one’s lesson); to
dishonor, discredit ( ب s.o.) IV to make or
let ( ه s.o.) hear ( ه s.th.), give ( ه ھ s.o. s.th.)
to hear; to let ( ه s.o.) know ( ھ s.th. or
about s.th.), tell ( ه ھ s.o. about s.th.) V to
give ear, listen, lend one’s ear ( الى، ل to
s.o., to s.th.); to eavesdrop, listen
(secretly) VI تسامع به الناس people heard
about him from one another, word about
him got around, he became known among
people VIII to hear, overhear ( ھ s.th.); to
listen, listen closely, give ear, lend one’s
ear ( الى or ل or ھ، ه to s.o. or s.th.); to
eavesdrop; to auscultate ( على s.o.)
سمع sam‘ hearing, sense of hearing,
audition; ears; (pl. اسماع asmā‘) ear │ شاھد
السمع earwitness; السمع والطاعة as-sam‘u
wa-ṭ-ṭā‘a and سمعا وطاعة sam‘an wa
ṯā‘atan I hear and obey! at your service!
very well! تحت سمعھم in their hearing, for
them to hear; استرق السمع istaraqa s-sam‘a
to eavesdrop; to monitor, intercept; القى
بسمعه اليه (alqā) to listen to s.o.; مد سمعه
madda sam‘ahū to prick up one’s ears
سمعي sam‘ī auditory, auditive, hearing
(used attributively); acoustic; acoustical;
traditional │ علم السمعيات ‘ilm as-sam‘īyāt
acoustics
سمعة sum‘a reputation (specif., good
reputation), credit, standing, name │ حميد
حسن) السمعة ) hamīd (ḥasan) reputable,
respectable; رديء (سيء) السمعة radī’
(sayyi’) ill-reputed, disreputable
سماع samā‘ hearing, listening, listening
in; auditioning, audition; hearing,
receiving (e.g., of a verdict); (gram. and
lex.) generally accepted usage
سماعي samā‘ī acoustic; acoustical;
audible; (gram. and lex.) sanctioned by
common usage; derived from tradition,
traditional, unwritten (Isl. Law)
سماعيات samā‘īyāt acoustics (phys.)
سميع samī‘ pl. سمعاء suma‘ā’2 hearing,
listening; hearer, listener; السميع the Allhearing
(one of the 99 attributes of God)
سماعة sammā‘a pl. -āt earphone;
earpiece; (telephone) receiver;
stethoscope; ear trumpet; knocker, rapper
(of a door)
مسمع masma‘ earshot, hearing distance
│ على مسمع من in the hearing of, within
earshot of; على مسمع منه for him to hear, so
that he could hear it
مسمع misma‘ pl. مسامع masāmi‘2 ear; O
stethoscope; (telephone) receiver │ 430
على مسامعھم in their hearing, for them to
hear
مسمعة misma‘a earpiece; (telephone)
receiver
سامع sāmi‘ pl. -ūn hearer, listener
مسموع masmū‘ audible, perceptible │
مسموع الكلمة m. al-kalima one whose word
carries weight, is paid attention to
مستمع mustami‘ pl. -ūn hearer, listener;
pl. المستمعون the audience
سمق 1 samaqa u ( سموق sumūq) to be high, tall,
lofty, tower up
سموق samūq very high, towering; tall
and lanky
سامق sāmiq very high, lofty, towering
سماق 2 summāq sumac (Rhus; bot.); its highly
acid seeds which, after being dried and
ground, serve, together with thyme, as a
condiment
حجر سماقي ḥajar summāqī porphyry
سمك II to make thick, thicken ( ھ s.th.)
سمك samk roof, ceiling
سمك sumk thickness
سمك samak (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. سماك
simāk, اسماك asmāk fish │ سمك موسى s.
mūsā plaice (zool.)
سمكة samaka (n. un.) a fish; السمكة the
Fish, Pisces (astron.)
سمكي samakī fish-like, fishy, piscine,
fish (adj.)
سماك simāk: السماكان as-simākān
Arcturus and Spica Virginis (astron.) │
السماك الرامح Arcturus (astron.); السماك
الأعزل (a‘zal) Spice Virginis (astron.); حلق
الى السماكين (ḥallaqa) to have high-flown
aspirations
سماك sammāk fishmonger; fisherman,
fisher
سميك samīk thick
سماكة samāka thickness
مسامك masāmik2 fish stores, sea-food
stores
سمكرة samkara tinsmith’s trade, tinsmithing
سمكري samkarī tinsmith, tinner, whitesmith
سمكرية samkarīya trade or work of a
tinsmith, tinsmithing
سمل samala u (saml) to gouge, scoop
out, tear out ( عينه ‘ainahū s.o.’s eye); --
samala u ( سمول sumūl, سمولة sumūla) to be
worn, tattered, in rags (garment) IV to be
worn, tattered, in rags (garment) VIII to
gouge, scoop out, tear out ( عينه ‘ainahū
s.o.’s eye)
سمل samal pl. اسمال asmāl worn
garment; tatters, rags; last remainder of a
liquid in a vessel │ شرب الكأس حتى السمل to
drain the cup to the dregs
سمن samina a (siman, سمانة samāna) to be or
become fat, corpulent, obese, stout,
plump, fleshy, put on weight II and IV to
make fat or plump, fatten ( ه s.o.)
سمن samn pl. سمون sumūn clarified
butter, cooking butter
سمن siman fatness, plumpness,
fleshiness, stoutness, corpulence; obesity
سمنة simna fatness, plumpness,
fleshiness, stoutness, corpulence; obesity
سمون summūn (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. سمامن
samāmin2 quail (zool.)
سمين samīn pl. سمان simān fat;
corpulent, plump, fleshy, stout, obese
سمان summān (coll.; n. un. ة) quail
(zool.)
سمان sammān butter merchant
سمانة samāna: سمانة الرجل s. ar-rijl calf
of the leg
سمانى sumānā (coll.; n. un. سماناة
sumānāh) pl. سمانيات sumānayāt quail
(zool.)
مسمن musamman fat 431
سمنتو (Sp. cemento) cement
سمنجوني samanjūnī and سمانجوني samānjūnī
sky-blue, azure, cerulean
سمندر samandar salamander
سمندل samandal salamander
سمھوري samhūrī tall and husky, extremely tall,
of giant stature ( القامة السمھورية ); spear
(originally epithet of a strong, tough
spear)
سمة sima see وسم
سما (سمو ) samā u ( سمو sumūw) to be high,
elevated, raised, erect, lofty, tall, eminent,
prominent; to rise high, tower up; to be
above or beyond s.th. or s.o. ( عن ), rise
above, tower above ( عن ); to be too proud
(or for); to be too high or difficult ( عن for
s.o.), be or go beyond the understanding
of s.o. ( عن ), exceed s.o.’s ( (عن
understanding; to rise ( الى to, على above or
beyond); to be higher ( على than); to strive
الى) for), aspire ( الى to, after) │ سما به to
lift, raise, elevate, elevate load up, bring
up s.o. or s.th. ( الى to); to buoy s.o. up,
boost, encourage s.o. III to seek to surpass
or excel ( ه s.o.): to vie for superiority or
glory ( ه with s.o.) IV to lift, raise, elevate,
erect, load up, bring up ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) VI
to vie with one another for glory; to be
high, elevated, raised, erect, lofty, tall,
eminent, prominent; to rise high, tower
up; to be above or beyond s.th. or s.o. (
عن ), rise above, tower above ( عن ); to claim
to be higher in rank ( على than s.o. else),
claim to be above s.o. ( على ); to deem o.s.
highly superior
سمو sumūw height, altitude;
exaltedness, loftiness, eminence, highness
│ سمو الدوق His Grace the Duke; صاحب
السمو الملكى (malakī) His Royal Highness;
صاحبة السمو الملكي Her Royal Highness; سمو
الأخلاق nobility of character
سماء samā’ m. and f., pl. ( سموات) سماوات
samāwāt heaven, sky; firmament │ سماء
السماوات the highest heaven
سمائي samā’ī heavenly, celestial; sky,
blue, azure, cerulean
سماوي samāwī heavenly, celestial; sky,
blue, azure, cerulean; descended from
heaven; open-air, outdoor, (being) under
the open sky; divine, pertaining to God
and religion
سمي samīy high, elevated; exalted,
lofty, sublime, august
اسمى asmā higher, farther up, above;
more exalted, higher (in rank), more
eminent, loftier, more sublime
سام sāmin pl. سماة sumāh high, elevated;
exalted, lofty, eminent, sublime, august │
امر سام (amr) royal decree; المندوب السامي the
High Commissioner
سمور sammūr pl. سمامير samāmīr2 sable
(Martes zibellina; zool.)
سمى II to name, call, designate, denominate (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th., ب or ھ by or with a name),
give a name ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.); to title,
entitle ( ھ or ھ ب s.th. as or with); to
nominate, appoint ( ه ل s.o. to s.th.); to
pronounce the name of God by saying بسم
سمى لله عليه │ لله (sammā llāha) or سمى عليه
to invoke God over s.th. by saying بسم لله
IV to name, call, designate, denominate (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th., ب or ھ by or with a name),
give a name ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.); to title,
entitle ( ھ s.th., ھ or ب as or with) V to be
called, be named │ تسمى بزيد he was
named Zaid, he called himself Zaid
اسم ism see سم 1
سمى samīy namesake
تسمية tasmiya pl. -āt naming,
appellation, designation, name,
denomination; nomenclature; = بسمل
basmala (use of the formula بسم لله) ٤٣٢
مسمى musamman named, called, by
name of; -- (pl. مسميات musammayāt)
designation, appellation, name; sense,
meaning (of a word) │ الى أجل مسمى
(ajalin) for a limited period, الى أجل غير
مسمى for an indefinite time, sine die, until
further notice
سنة 2 sana pl. سنون sinūn, سنوات sanawāt year │
سنة محمدية (muḥammadīya) Mohammedan
year; سنة كبيسة leap year; سنة مسيحية
(masīḥīya) year of the Christian era, A.D.;
سنة ھجرية (hijrīya) year of the Muslim era
(after the hegira), A.H.; سنة ميلادية
(mīlādīya) year of the Christian era, A.D.
سنوي sanawī annual, yearly; سنويا
sanawīyan annually, yearly, in one year,
per year, per annum
مسانھة musānahatan annually, yearly
سنة 2 sina see وسن
سن 3 sanna u (sann) to sharpen, whet, hone,
grind ( ھ s.th.); to mold, shape, form ( ھ
s.th.); to prescribe, introduce, enact,
establish ( ھ a law, a custom) │ سن قانونا to
enact, or pass, a law II to sharpen, whet,
hone, grind ( ھ s.th.); to indent, jag, notch
ھ) s.th.) IV to grow teeth, cut one’s teeth,
teethe; to grow old, to age; to be advanced
in years VIII to clean and polish one’s
teeth with the سواك ; to take, follow ( ھ a
course or way); to prescribe, introduce,
enact, establish ( ھ a law, a custom) │ استن
سنة محمد (sunnata m.) to follow the Sunna
of Mohammed
سن sann prescription, introduction,
enactment, issuance (of laws)
سن sinn f., pl. اسنان asnān, اسنة asinna,
اسن asunn tooth (also, e.g., of a comb; of a
saw blade); jag; cog, sprocket, prong; tusk
(of an elephant, of a boar, etc.); fang (of a
snake, etc.); point, tip (of a nail), nib (of a
pen); (pl. اسنان asnān) age (of a person); --
(eg.) coarse flour, seconds │ سن الرشد s.
ar-rušd legal age, majority; سن الفيل s. alfīl
ivory; صغير السن young; كبير السن old;
طعن في السن to be advanced in years, be
aged; تقدمت به السن (taqaddamat) to grow
older, to age; to be advanced in years
سنة sunna pl. سنن sunan habitual
practice, customary procedure or action,
norm, usage sanctioned by tradition; السنة
or سنة النبي s. an-nabīy the Sunna of the
Prophet, i.e., his sayings and doings, later
established as legally binding precedents
(in addition to the Law established by the
Koran) │ اھل السنة ahl as-s. the Sunnites,
the orthodox Muslims; سنة الطبيعة law of
nature
سني sunnī Sunnitic; (pl. -ūn) Sunnite,
Sunni
سنن sanan customary practice, usage,
habit, rule
سنان sinān pl. اسنة asinna spearhead
سنون sanūn tooth powder
اسن asann2 older, farther advanced in
years
مسن misann pl. -āt, مسان masann
whetstone, grindstone; razor strop
مسنون masnūn prescribed (as Sunna),
sanctioned by law and custom; sharpened,
whetted, honed; tapered; pointed (e.g.,
mustache, features); stinking, fetid (mire)
مسنن musannan toothed, serrated,
dentate, denticulate, indented, jagged;
pointed, sharp; sharp-featured
(countenance)
مسننة musannana pl. -āt cogwheel
مسن musinn pl. مسان masānn2 old, aged,
advanced in years; of legal age, legally
major
سنا see سنو ٤٣٣
سنارة sinnāra pl. سنانير sanānīr2 fishing tackle;
fishhook
سنباذج sanbādaj grindstone, whetstone; emery
سنبوق sunbūq pl. سنابيق sanābiq2 barge, skiff,
boat
سنبك 1 sunbuk pl. سنابك sanābik2 toe of the hoof;
hoof; awl, punch, borer
سنبك 2 sunbuk pl. سنابك sanābik and سنبوك
sunbūk pl. سنابيك sanābīk2 barge, skiff,
boat
سنبل sunbul (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt, سنابل
sanābil2 ear, spike (of grain); السنبلة Virgo
(astron.) │ السنبل الرومي (rūmī) Celtic
spikenard (Nardus celtica; bot.); السنبل
الھندي (hindī) Indian spikenard
(Nardotachys jatamansi; bot.)
سنبلي sunbulī spiciform, spicat, shaped
like a spike or ear (bot.)
سنبوسك sanbūsik, sanbūsak (syr., ir.) triangular
meat pie with a wavy bread crust
سنت cent
سنتمتر satimitr pl. -āt centimeter
سنجة 1 sanja pl. سنج sinaj, سنج sanajāt weight
(placed as a counterpoise on the scales of
a balance)
سنجة 2 singa (from Turk. süngü) pl. سنج sinag
bayonet (eg.)
سناج 3 sināj soot, smut
سنجاب sinjāb gray squirrel; fur of the gray
squirrel
سنجابي sinjābī ash-colored, ashen, gray
سنجق sanjaq pl. سناجق sanājiq2 standard, flag,
banner; sanjak, administrative district and
subdivision of a vilayet (in the Ottoman
Empire)
سنح sanaḥa a (sunḥ, sunūḥ, سنوح sunūḥ) to
occur ( ل to s.o.), come to s.o,’s mind ( ,ل
idea, thought); to present itself, offer itself
ل) to s.o., esp. an opportunity); to afford (
ب ل s.o s.th.); -- to dissuade ( عن ه s.o. from
his opinion), argue or reason ( عن ه s.o. out
of his opinion)
سانح sāniḥ pl. سوانح sawāniḥ2 turning its
right side toward the viewer (game or
bird); auspicious, propitious; favorable,
good (opportunity); pl. سوانح auspices,
good omens, auspicious signs; ideas,
thoughts
سانحة sāniḥa opportunity
سنخ sink pl. اسناخ asnāk, سنوخ sunūk root,
origin; alveolus, gingival margin of a
tooth (anat.)
سنخ sanak rankness (of oil). fustiness
سنخ sanik rank, rancid (oil), fusty
سناخة sanāka rankness (of oil), fustiness
سند 1 sanada u ( سنود sunūd) to support o.s., prop
o.s. rest ( الى on, upon), lean, recline ( الى
upon, against) II to support, stay, prop,
lean ( ھ s.th.) III to support, back, assist,
help, aid ( ه s.o.) IV to make ( ه s.o.) rest (
الى on); to make ( ه s.o.) lean or recline ( الى
against, on); to lean ( الى ھ s.th. against); to
rest, support, prop ( الى ھ s.th. on); to base,
found ( الى ھ s.th. on); (science of Islamic
traditions:) to base a tradition ( ھ ) on s.o. (
الى ) as its first authority, i.e., to trace back
the ascription of a tradition. in ascending
order of the traditionaries, to its first
authority so as to corroborate its
credibility; (gram.) to lean a term ( (ھ
upon another ( الى ) being the subject of the
sentence, i.e., to predicate it, make it its
predicate; to entrust ( ل or الى ھ s.th. to
s.o.). vest ( ل or الى ھ s.th. in s.o.); to
attribute, ascribe ( ھ ل or الى to s.o. s.th.);
to incriminate, charge ( ھ الى s.o. with); to
lean ( الى against, to, on), rest ( الى on); to be
based, he founded ( الى on) │ اسند التھمة الى
(tuhma) to direct one’s suspicion on 434
or toward ...; اسند التھمة الى (usnidat)
suspicion fell on ... VI to support one
another, give mutual support; to support
o.s. lean, rest; to trust, rely VIII to lean,
recline, be recumbent ( على، الى against,
on); to rest one’s arms, one’s weight (، على
الى on), support one’s weight ( على، الى by);
to be based, be founded ( على، الى on); to
rely ( على، الى on), trust, have confidence (
على، الى in); to use as (documentary) basis
على) , s.th.), rest one’s case on ( على) سند
sanad pl. -āt, اسناد asnād support, prop,
stay, rest, back; backing; (pl. (اسناد
ascription (of an Islamic tradition), the
(uninterrupted) chain of authorities on
which a tradition is based │ سندات خشبية
(kašabīya) wooden struts, wood bracing;
-- (pl. -āt) document, deed, paper, legal
instrument; voucher, record; commercial,
or negotiable, paper, security, bond;
debenture, promissory note, note of hand,
debenture bond │ سند شحن البضائع s. saḥn
al-b. bill of lading; رجال السند informants,
authorities, sources
سندان sandān, sindān pl. سنادين sanādīn2
anvil
مسند musnad, masnad pl. مساند masānid2
support, prop, stay; rest, back (of an
armchair); cushion, pillow
اسناد isnād pl. اسانيد asānīd2 ascription
(of an Islamic tradition), the
(uninterrupted) chain of authorities on
which a tradition is based; اسانيد
(documentary) proof, vouchers, records,
documents
استناد istinād leaning ( الى against or
upon); dependence ( الى on) │ استنادا الى
based on, on the basis of, on the strength
of
مسند musnad pl. مساند masānid2 (science
of Islamic traditions:) a tradition the
ascription of which is traceable, in
(uninterrupted) ascending order of the
traditionaries, to its first authority; mesh;
المسند predicate (gram.); المسند اليه subject
(gram.)
مستند mustanid relying, in reliance (، الى
على on), trusting ( الى، على to)
مستند mustanad reason, cause; motive;
-- (pl. -āt) document, paper, deed, legal
instrument; voucher, record; receipt; pl.
(documentary) proof, records, data; legal
evidence (jur.) │ دار المستندات archives,
office of public records; مستندات الشحن m.
aš-šaḥn bills of lading
السند 2 as-sind region extending along the lower
course and delta of the Indus river; the
province of Sind, of West Pakistan, with
the capital city Karachi; the inhabitants of
this region
سندروس sandarūs sandarac (a resin obtained
from the sandarac tree, Callitris
quadrivalvis)
سندس sundus silk brocade, sarcenet
سندسي sundusī (made) of silk brocade or
sarcenet
سندال = سندان (see above)
سنديان sindiyān (coll.; n. un. ة) evergreen oak,
holm oak (Quercus ilex; bot.)
سندياني sindiyānī oaken; like oak. oaky
سنديك (Fr. syndic) sandīk syndic, agent of a
corporation
سنور 1 sinnaur, pl. سنانير sanānīr2 cat
سنارة 2 sinnāra pl. سنانير sanānīr2 fishing tackle,
fishhook
السنسكريتية as-sanskrītīya Sanskrit
سنط 1 sanṭ a variety of sant tree (Acacia
nilotica; bot.)
سنطة 2 sanṭa (eg.) wart
سنطور sanṭūr dulcimer (= (سنطير
سنطير sinṭīr, sanṭīr psalter; dulcimer
سنغافومرة singāfūra Singapore
سنغال sinigāl
سنف sinf (coll.; n. un. m) pod, capsule, hull
(bot.)
سنفرة sanfara emery
سنكرى sankarī pl. سناكرة sanākira tinsmith,
tinsman, tinner, whitesmith
سنكسار sinaksār synaxarion, martyrologium
(Chr.)
سنكة (Turk. süngü) sənge bayonet (syr.)
سنكونا sinkūnā cinchona (bot.)
سنم V to ascend, mount, scale ( ھ s.th.) │ تسنم
ذروة المعالي (darwat l-ma‘ālī) to attain to
greatest honors
سنمة sanama height, summit, peak
سنام sanām pl. اسنمة asnima hump (of
the camel)
ماء التسنيم mā’ at-tasnīm the beverage of
the blessed in Paradise
تسنم tasannum accession to the throne
مسنم musannam convex, vaulted, arched
سنمار 1 sinimmār جزاه جزاء سنمار : 2 jazāhu jazā’ s.
he repaid him as they had repaid S., i.e.,
he requited evil with good
سنمورة 2 sanamūra anchovy; salted and smoked
fish
سنه 1 V to become stale, spoil (food)
مسانھة 2 musānahatan annually, yearly
سنا 1 sanā, سنا مكى s. makkī, سنا مكة s. maka (bot.)
senna (tree), senna leaflets (pharm.)
سنو 2 ) and سني) سنا sanā u ( سناء sanā’) to gleam,
shine, glisten, be resplendent, radiate; to
flash (lightning) II to facilitate, ease, make
easy ( ھ s.th.) V to be easy, be possible, be
feasible ( ل for or to s.o.), be rendered
possible or feasible ( ل for s.o.), be put in
s.o.’s ( ل) power; to rise, be elevated, be
exalted
سنى and سنا sanan brilliance,
resplendence, splendor, flare, flash,
sparkle
سناء sanā’ brilliance, resplendence,
splendor, radiance, flash, flare (of
lightning); exaltedness, sublimity,
majesty, high rank
سني sanīy high, sublime, exalted,
splendid more shining, more radiant, more
brilliant
سانية sāniya pl. سوان sawānin water
scoop
مسناة musannāh pl. مسنيات musannayāt
jetty, dam
سنودس (Gr. σύνοδος) sinōdos synod
سنونو sanūnū swallow (zool.)
سنوي sanawī annual, yearly; سنويا sanawīyan
annually. yearly, per year, per annum
سھب IV to speak at great length, talk in detail (
عن about, of), enlarge, elaborate,
expatiate, dilate ( عن on)
سھب suhb pl. سھوب suhūb level country;
steppe region
اسھاب ishāb elaboration, elaborateness,
expatiation, long-windedness, prolixity │
باسھاب elaborately, in detail, at length,
lengthily
مسھب mushib, mushab prolix, longwinded,
lengthy, detailed, elaborate
سھد sahida a (sahad) to be sleepless, find no
sleep n to make sleepless, keep awake,
deprive of sleep ( ه s.o.) V = I
سھد suhd sleeplessness, insomnia
سھد suhud insomniac
سھاد suhād sleeplessness, insomnia
ساھد sāhid sleepless, awake 436
سھر sahara a (sahar) to be sleepless, find no
sleep, pass the night awake (also with
الليل ); to stay up at night, spend the night (
على in or with some activity); to watch (
على over), guard ( على s.o.’s interests, etc.),
look after ( على ), attend to ( على s.o.’s
interests, etc.) │ سھر في حفلة to attend a
gathering in the evening or at night IV to
make sleepless, keep awake ( ه s.o.)
سھر sahar sleeplessness, insomnia;
wakefulness, vigil; watchfulness,
vigilance ( على over) │ طال عنده سھري I
spent a long evening with him
سھرة sahra pl. saharāt evening; evening
party, evening gathering, evening show or
performance, soiree │ سھرة ليلية (lailīya)
do.; ثياب (لباس) السھرة evening dress, formal
dress
سھران sahrān sleepless, awake,
wakeful; watchful, vigilant
سھار suhār sleeplessness, insomnia;
wakefulness, vigil
سھار sahhār one who is habitually up
and abroad at night, a nighthawk
O اسھر ashar spermatic duct (anat.)
مسھر mashar pl. مساھر masāhir2
nightclub
ساھر sāhir sleepless, awake, wakeful;
watchful, vigilant; evening, night,
nocturnal, nightly, taking place by night │
حفلة ساھرة (ḥafla) evening party, evening
gathering, evening show or performance,
soirée
سھف sahifa a (sahaf) to be very thirsty
سھف suhāf violent thirst
سھل sahula u ( سھولة suhūla) to be smooth,
level, even (ground); to be or become
easy, facile, convenient ( على for) │ لا يسھل
ان hardly ... II to smooth, level, even ( ھ
the ground); to facilitate, make easy, ease
ھ ل) or على for s.o. s.th.); to provide,
furnish, supply ( ھ ل or على s.o. with
facilities); (gram.) to read without hamzah
ھ) a word) ill to be indulgent, mild,
forbearing, obliging ( ه toward s.o.), show (
ه s.o.) one’s good will │ ساھل نفسه
(nafsahū) to take liberties IV to purge
(med.); to relieve ( ھ the constipated
bowels, said of a medicine); pass. ushila
to be relieved (said of constipated
bowels), have a bowel movement, have
diarrhea V to be or become easy ( ل for) VI
to be indulgent, mild, forbearing, obliging,
tolerant ( مع toward s.o., also ل); to be
negligent, careless ( ل in s.th.) X to deem
easy, think to be easy ( ھ s.th.)
سھل sahl and sāhil smooth, level, even,
soft (ground); easy, facile, convenient ( على
for s.o.); simple, plain; fluent, flowing,
facile (style); -- (pl. سھول suhūl) level, soft
ground; plain │ سھل الاستعمال handy, easy
to handle or to use, convenient for use;
سھل الھضم s. al-haḍm easily digestible,
light; عملة سھل (‘umla) soft currency; كان
من السھل عليه to be easy for s.o., come easy
to s.o.; اھلا وسھلا see اھل
O سھلة sahla (proof) planer (typ.)
سھيل suhail Canopus (astron.)
سھل sahūl purgative, laxative, aperient
(adj. and n.)
سھولة suhūla easiness, ease, facility,
convenience │ بسھولة easily, conveniently
اسھل ashal smoother, evener, leveler;
easier; more convenient
تسھيل tashīl pl. -āt facilitation
اسھال ishāl diarrhea
تساھل tasāhul indulgence, mildness,
leniency, forbearance, tolerance;
carelessness, negligence
مسھل musahhil purgative, laxative,
aperient; (pl. -āt) a purgative, a laxative
437
مسھل mushal suffering from diarrhea
متساھل mutasāhil indulgent, mild,
lenient, forbearing, tolerant
مستسھل mustashal easy, facile
سھم sahama u ( سھوم suhūm) to look grave, have
a grave expression III to cast, or draw, lots
ه) with s.o.); to participate, take part ( في
in), partake ( في of s.th.), share ( في s.th.) IV
to give a share ( في ل to s.o. in), make s.o. (
ل) share s.th. ( (في
سھم sahm pl. سھام sihām, اسھم ashum,
سھوم suhūm arrow; dart; -- (pl. اسھم ashum)
portion, share, lot; share (of stock);
sahme, a square measure of 7.293 m2 (Eg.)
│ سھم ناري rocket; اسھم التأسيس founders'
shares, original shares; اسھم القرض a. alqarḍ
bonds, government bonds; حملة الأسھم
ḥ al-a. shareholders, stockholders; نفذ السھم
the die is cast; ضرب بسھم مصيب في
(muṣībin) to take an active part in,
participate actively in ...; ضرب بسھم ونصيب
في (wa-naṣībin) do.
سھوم suhūm graveness; sadness,
mourning
اسھمي ashumī share-, stock- (in
compounds)
مساھمة musāhama participation, taking
part ( في in), sharing ( في of) │ شركة المساھمة
širkat al-m. joint-stock company,
corporation
ساھم sāhim with earnest mien,
gravefaced
مسمھم musāhim shareholder,
stockholder
سھا (سھو ) sahā u (sahw, suhūw) to be
inattentive, absent-minded, distracted; to
neglect, omit, forget, overlook ( عن s.th.) │
سھى عليه suhiya ‘alaihi to be lost in
thought
سھو sahw inattentiveness, inattention,
inadvertence, absent-mindedness
distractedness; negligence, neglectfulness,
forgetfulness │ سھوا sahwan inattentively,
distractedly, absent-mindedly, heedlessly,
negligently; inadvertently, by mistake
سھوة sahwa a kind of alcove
سھوان sahwān2 inattentive, heedless,
distracted, absent-minded, forgetful
ساه sāhin inattentive, absent-minded,
negligent, forgetful │ ساھيا لاھيا sāhiyan
lāhiyan amusing o.s. in a carefree manner,
completely at ease ساء (سوء 2 ) sā’a u ( سوء
sau’) to be or become bad, evil, foul,
wicked; to become worse, deteriorate
(condition); to grieve, sadden, afflict, hurt,
vex, torment, trouble, offend, pain, make
sorry, displease ( ه s.o.) │ ساء سبيلا
(sabīlan) what an evil way (= what an evil
practice) this is! ساء به ظنا (ẓannan) to
think badly of s.o., have a poor opinion of
s.o.; ساء طالعه (ṭāli‘uhū) he was under an
evil star, was ill-starred, he was unlucky
or unfortunate; يسوءني yasū’unī I am sorry
II to do badly, spoil, harm ( ھ s.th.); to
blame, censure ( ھ على s.o. for s.th.); to
disapprove ( ھ of s.th. على in s.o.), dislike (
على ھ s.th. in s.o.) IV to do badly, spoil,
harm ( ھ s.th.); to deal badly ( الى with s.o.),
act meanly or evilly ( الى toward s.o.); to do
evil ( الى to s.o.), wrong ( الى s.o.); to harm ( ا
لى s.o.), do harm ( الى to); to hurt, offend,
insult ( الى s.o.); to inflict pain ( الى on s.o.)
│ اساء التصرف (taṣarrufa) to misbehave,
comport o.s. badly; اساء التصرف في to go
about ... in an evil manner; اساء الظن به
(ẓanna) to think badly of s.o., have a poor
opinion of s.o.; اساء التعبير to choose a poor
expression, express o.s. poorly; اساء استعماله
to misuse, abuse s.th.; اساء معاملته
(mu‘āmalatahū) to mistreat s.o., treat s.o.
badly; اساء الفھم (fahma) to misunderstand
VIII to go through rugged times, fall on
evil days; to be unpleasantly affected; to
be offended, 438 hurt, annoyed, indignant,
upset, angered, displeased ( من about, at,
by); to be dissatisfied, discontent ( من
with); to take amiss ( من s.th.)
سوء sū’ pl. اسواء aswā’ evil, ill; iniquity,
injury, offense; calamity, misfortune │
سوء البخت s. al-bakt misfortune, bed luck;
سوء الحظ s. al-ḥaẓẓ do.; لسوء الحظ
unfortunately; سوء الخلق s. al-kuluq ill
nature, ill-temperedness; سوء الحال bad
conditions; سوء الحالة bad situation,
predicament; سوء الادارة s. al-idāra maladministration,
mismanagement; سوء
السلوك bed behavior, misbehavior,
misconduct; سوء الظن s. aẓ-ẓann poor
opinion; سوء العلاقات bad relations; سوء
المعاملة s. al-mu‘āmala mistreatment; سوء
الاستعمال abuse, misuse; سوء الفھم s. al-fahm
misunderstanding; سوء التفاھم s. at-tafāhum
mutual misunderstanding, disharmony,
discord; سوء القصد s. al-qaṣd evil intent;
سوء النية s. an-nīya do.; سوء الھضم s. alhaḍm
indigestion
سوأة، سوءة sau’a pl. -āt shame, disgrace;
disgraceful act, atrocity; private part,
pudendum; pudenda │ سوءة لك (sau’atan)
shame on you!
سيئ، سيء sayyi’ bad, evil, ill, foul │
سيء الحظ s. al-ḥaẓẓ unfortunate; unlucky
person; سيء الخلق s. al-kuluq ill-natured;
سيء التربية s. at-tarbiya bad-mannered,
badly brought up; سيء السمعة s. as-sum‘a
ill-reputed, disreputable; سيء الطبع s. aṭ-
ṭab‘ ill-natured, ill-tempered; سيء الطالع
unlucky, unfortunate; unlucky person; من
سيء الى اسوأ (aswa’a) from bed to worse
سيئة sayyi’a pl. -āt sin, offense,
misdeed; bed side, disadvantage (of s.th.)
مساءة masā’a pl. مساوئ masāwi’ 2 evil
deed, vile action; pl. disadvantages, bad
sides, drawbacks, shortcomings
اساءة isā’a misdeed; offense, affront,
insult; sin, offeence │ اساءة الظن i. ẓann
poor opinion ( ب of); اساءة المعاملة i. almu’āmala
mistreatment, etc., see IV
above
استياء istiyā’ dissatisfaction, discontent,
indignation, displeasure, annoyance,
vexation
مسيء musī’ displeasing, unpleasant,
offensive; harmful, disadvantageous,
pernicious; insulting
مستاء mustā’ offended, displeased,
annoyed, vexed, indignant ( من about, at,
by); dissatisfied, discontent ( من with)
سواء 2 see سوى
سوارى sawārī horseman, cavalryman, sowar;
horsemen, cavalry
سوتيان (Fr. soutien) sūtiyān pl. -āt brassiere
سوتيه (Fr. sauté) sōtēh sautéed
ساج 1 look up alphabetically
اسوجة 2 see سياج
سوح) ساح) sāḥa u to travel, rove, roam about
ساحة sāḥa pl. -āt, ساح courtyard, open
square; (open) space; arena; field (fig.) │
ساحة الحرب s. al-ḥarb theater of war; ساحات
المحاكم courts, tribunals; ساحة القتال battle
field, war zone; ساحة القضاء s. al-qaḍā’
tribunal, forum; ساحة الألعاب athletic field,
sports field; برأ ساحته barra’a sāḥatahū to
acquit s.o.
سواح sawwāḥ pl. -ūn, traveler, tourist
سائح sā’iḥ pl. -ūn, سياح suyyāḥ, سواح
suwwāḥ traveler, tourist; itinerant dervish;
anchorite (Chr.)
ساخ (سوخ ) sāka u ( سوخ sauk) to be or become
doughy, soft, slippery (esp. ground), yield
like mud; to sink ( في الأرض in the ground,
of the foot) │ ساخت روحه (rūḥuhū) to
become faint, swoon 439
سود 1 II to make black, blacken ( ھ s.th.); to
draft ( ھ a letter, etc.), make a rough draft (
ھ of s.th.); to cover with writing ( ھ
sheets), scribble ( ھ on sheets) │ سود وجھه
(wajhahū) to expose s.o., show s.o. up,
make a fool of s.o., bring s.o. into
disrepute, discredit, disgrace, dishonor s.o.
IX to be or become black
سواد sawād black color, black,
blackness; (pl. اسودة aswida) black
clothing, mourning; arable land, tilth;
shape, form; inner part, core; majority;
multitude │ السواد or سواد العراق the rural
areas of Iraq; السواد الأعظم the great mass,
the great majority, the largest part; سواد
الناس the common people, the masses; سواد
العين s. al-‘ain eyeball; سواد المدينة suburb,
outskirts of the city; سواد الليل s. al-lail the
long, dark night
اسود aswad2, f. سوداء saudā’2, pl. سود sūd
black; dark-colored; -- اسود aswad2 pl.
سودان sūdān a black, Negro │ ( بلاد) السودان
the Sudan; شتائم سوداء severest reproaches;
اسود فاحم coal-black, jet-black
سود saudā’2 black bile (one of the four
humors of ancient medicine); melancholy,
sadness, gloom
سويداء suwaidā’2 black bile (one of the
four humors of ancient medicine);
melancholy, sadness, gloom; السويداء
Suweida (capital of the Jebel ed Druz) │
سويداء القلب s. al-qalb the deepest folds of
the heart, the inmost
سوداوي saudāwī melancholic,
depressed, dejected
بلاد) السودان) (bilād) as-sūdān the Sudan
سوداني sūdānī Sudanese; (pl. -ūn) a
Sudanese
تسويد taswīd rough draft
مسودة musawwada, muswadda draft,
rough copy, rough sketch, notes; day-book
│ مسودة الطبع m. aṭ-ṭab‘ proof sheet, galley
proof
ساد (سود 2 ) sāda u ( سيادة siyāda, سؤدد su’dud,
su’dad) to be or become master, head,
chief, chieftain, sovereign, lord, overlord (
ھ، ه of or over people, of or over s.th.),
rule, govern ( ھ , s.o., s.th.), reign ( ھ، ه
over); to prevail (e.g., view), reign (e.g.,
calm); to be predominant, predominate,
have the upperhand ( على over) II to make (
ه s.o.) master, head, chief, chieftain,
sovereign, lord, overlord
سيد sayyid pl. اسياد asyād, سادة sāda,
سادات sādāt master; gentleman; Mister;
Sir; lord, overlord; chief, chieftain; title of
Mohammed’s direct descendants │ سيدي
(sayyidī, colloq. sīdī) honorific before the
names of Muslim Saints (esp. magr.); السيد
فلان Mr. So-and-So; سيدي فلان (magr.) do.;
سيد البحار الأعظم Supreme Commander of
the Navy (Eg. 1939)
سيدة sayyida pl. -āt mistress; lady; Mrs.
│ السيدة عقيلته (‘aqīlatuhū) his wife; السيدة
فلانة Mrs. So-and-So
سيادة siyāda command, mastery;
domination, rule, dominion; supremacy;
sovereignty; title and form of address of
bishops (Chr.); siyādāt ... (with foll.
genit.) nowadays, in Egypt, general title of
respect preceding the name, سيادتكم = you,
a respectful address introduced after the
abolition of titles of rank and social class
in Egypt │ سيادة المطران s. al-muṭrān His
Eminence the Metropolitan; سيادة الرئيس
approx.: His Excellency the President
(Eg.); دولة ذات سيادة (daula) sovereign state
سؤدد su’dud, su’dad dominion,
domination, rule, reign, power,
sovereignty
سائد sā’id prevailing (opinion, feeling,
mood, calm, etc.)
السويد، سويدي 3 look up alphabetically 440
سادة 4 look up alphabetically and under سود 2
سودن saudana to Sudanize (Eg.)
سودنة saudana Sudanization (Eg.)
سور 1 II to enclose, fence in, wall in, surround
with a railing or wall ( ھ s.th.) III to leap ( ه
at s.o.), beset, assail, attack, assault ( ه
s.o.); to befall, overcome, grip ( ه s.o.,
emotion) V to scale ( ھ a wall, a cliff, etc.)
سور sūr pl. اسوار aswār wall; enclosure,
fence, railing
سورة sūra pl. سور suwar chapter of the
Koran, sura
سورة saura vehemence, force, violence;
severity (of cold)
سوار 2 siwār, suwār pl. سور sūr, اسورة aswira,
اساور asāwir اساورة , 2 asāwira bracelet,
armlet, bangle; armband; cuff, wristband
سواري 3 look up alphabetically
اسوار 4 look up alphabetically
سوري 5 sūrī Syrian; (pl. -ūn) a Syrian
سوريا 6 sūriyā Syria │ سوريا الجنوبية (janūbīya)
Palestine; سوريا الصغرى (ṣugrā) do.; سوريا
الكبرى (kubrā) (Greater) Syria
سورية 7 sūrīya سوريا = 2
( ساس (سوس 1 sāsa u ( سياسة siyāsa) to dominate,
govern, rule ( ه s.o.): to lead, guide,
conduct, direct ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
administer, manage, regulate ( ھ s.th.); --
sawisa yaswasu to be or become wormeaten;
to become carious (tooth); to rot,
decay (bones) II and V = sawisa
سوس sūs (coll.: n. un. ة) pl. سيسان sīsān
woodworm, borer; mothworm
سوس sūs licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra;
bot.) │ عرق سوس ‘irq s. licorice root; رب
سوس rubb as-s. licorice rob, thickened
licorice juice
سياسة siyāsa pl. -āt administration,
management: p;olicy; سياسة siyāsatan for
reasons of expediency (Isl. Law) │ السياسة
الدولية (duwalīya) diplomacy; السياسة العملية
(‘amalīya) practical policy, Real-politik;
O سياسة التوسع s. at-tawassu‘ policy of
expansion
سياسي siyāsī political; diplomatic; -- (pl.
-ūn, ساسة sāsa) politician; diplomat,
statesman │ الدوائر السياسية political circles;
السلك السياسي (silk) diplomatic corps; علم
الاقتصاد السياسي (‘ilm al-iqtiṣād) political
science, political economy
تسوس tasawwus (dental) caries
سائس sā’is pl. ساسة sāsa, سواس suwwās,
سياس suyyās stableman, groom; driver
(primarily of animals); manager, leader
السويس 2 as-suwēs Suez (seaport in NE Egypt)
│ قنال السويس qanāl as-s. Suez Canal
سواسية 3 see سوى
سوسته susta zipper (eg.)
سوسن sausan, sūsan lily of the valley (bot.)
ساط (سوط ) sāṭa u (sauṭ) to whip, flog, lash,
scourge ( ه s.o.)
سوط sauṭ pl. اسواط aswāṭ, سياط siyāṭ
whip, lash, scourge
مسوط miswaṭ stick or similar implement
used for stirring
ساعة sā‘a pl. -āt, ساع sā‘ (short) time,
while; hour; timepiece, clock, watch;
الساعة the Hour of Resurrection; as-sā‘ata
now, at present, by this time, at this
moment, in this instant; at once, instantly,
immediately, just │ بين ساعة واخرى (waukrā)
from hour to hour; حتى الساعة until
now; من الساعة from now on, henceforth;
من ساعته immediately, presently, instantly,
at once; منذ الساعة from now on,
henceforth; مات لساعته he died instantly;
ساعة الجيب s. al-jaib pocket watch; ساعة
رملية ٤٤١ (ramlīya) hourglass; ساعة شمسية
(šamsīya) sundial; ابن ساعته ibn sā‘atihī
transitory, ephemeral
ساعتئذ sā‘ata’idin in that hour
ساعاتي sā‘ātī pl. -ya watchmaker
سويعة suwai‘a pl. -āt little hour, little
while
ساغ (سوغ ) sāga u (saug, مساغ masāg) to
be easy to swallow, go down pleasantly
(drink, food); to be permissible, be
permitted, allowed ( ل to s.o.); to swallow (
ھ s.th.); to permit, allow, accept, tolerate (
ھ s.th.), put up ( ھ with s.th.), swallow,
stomach s.th. ( ھ , fig.) II to make
permissible, permit, allow ( ھ ل to s.o.
s.th.), admit ( ھ s.th.); to justify, warrant (
ب ھ s.th. with); to lease, let ( ھ s.th.) IV to
wash down, swallow easily ( ھ s.th.);
(fig.:) to take, swallow, stomach ( ھ s.th.),
stand for s.th. ( ھ ), put up with s.th. ( ھ ) V
to lease ( ھ s.th.), take a lease ( ھ of s.th.)
X to regard as easy to swallow, find
pleasant ( ھ s.th.); to taste, enjoy, relish ( ھ
s.th.); to approve ( ھ of s.th.), admit, grant
ھ) s.th.), deem ( ھ s.th.) proper
مساغ masāg easy access; possibility;
permission │ لم يستطع مساغا ل (yastaṭi‘) he
couldn’t put up with ..., couldn’t reconcile
himself to ..., couldn’t swallow ...; لا مساغ
للشك (masāga, šakk) one cannot possibly
doubt it
تسويغ taswīg hiring out on lease, leasing
│ قانون القرض والتسويغ (qarḍ) Lease Act
(pol., Tun.)
سائغ sā’ig easy to swallow; tasty,
palatable; permissible, permitted, allowed
مسوغ musawwig pl. -āt justifying factor,
justification, good reason
مستساغ mustasāg easy to swallow; tasty,
palatable
سوف II to put off ( ه s.o.); to postpone, draw
out, delay, procrastinate ( ھ s.th.)
سوف saufa (abbreviated form س sa)
particle of future tense, e.g., سوف ترى
(tarā) you will see
مسافة masāfa pl. -āt, مساوف masāwif2
distance, interval, stretch; (mus.) interval
│ على مسافة at some distance
تسويف taswīf pl. -āt procrastination,
postponement, delay, deferment
تسويفي taswīfī dilatory, delaying,
procrastinating
سوفسطائي sūfisṭā’ī sophistic
سوفيات suyāt, سوفييت sovyēt Soviet
سوفياتي sufyātī, سوفيتي، سوفييتي sovyētī
soviet (adj.) │ الاتحاد السوفياتي (ittiḥād) the
Soviet Union
ساق (سوق ) sāqa u (sauq, سياقة siyāqa, مساق
masāq) to drive, urge on, herd ( ھ، ه
prisoners, cattle); to draft, conscript ( للجندية
li-l-jundīya for military service); to drive (
ھ an automobile); to pilot ( ھ an airplane);
to carry along, convey, transport ( ھ s.th.);
to send, dispatch, forward, convey, hand
over ( الى ھ s.th. to s.o.); to utter ( ھ s.th.);
to cite, quote, propound, put forth ( ھ s.th.)
│ ساق مساقه (masāqahū) to follow the
example or path of s.o.; ساق الحديث to carry
on the conversation; ساق الحديث اليه to
address s.o.; اليك يساق الحديث (yusāqu) you
are the one that is meant II to market, sell
ھ) merchandise) III to accompany ( ه s.o.);
to go along, agree ( ه with s.o.) V to trade
in the market, sell and buy in the market
VI to draw out; to form a sequence, be
successive, be continuous, be coherent; to
harmonize VII to drift; to be driven; to be
carried away, be given over │ انساق به الى
to carry s.o. away to ..., drive or urge s.o.
to ... VIII to drive, urge on, herd ( ھ cattle)
442
سوق sauq driving (of a car); draft,
conscription ( للجندية li-l-jundīya for
military service); mobilization (of troops,
also of forces, energies, etc.) │ اجازة السوق
ijāzat as-s. driving license
O سوقية sauqīya strategy
ساق sāqa f., pl. سوق sūq, سيقان sīqān
shank; thigh; leg (also geom.); side
(geom.); trunk (of a tree); stem, stalk (of
plants) │ ساق الحمام s. al-ḥamām bugloss
(Anchusa officinalis; bot.); ربطة الساق
rabṭat as-s. garter; وسام ربطة الساق Order of
the Garter; عظم الساق ‘aẓm as-s. shinbone,
tibia; متساوي الساقين mutasāwī s-sāqain
isosceles (geom.); قامت الحرب على ساق
(ḥarbu) the war was or became violent,
flared up; war broke out; كشفت الحرب عن
ساقھا (kašafat) do.; كشف الأمر عن ساقه the
matter became difficult; وقف على ساق الجد ل
(s. il-jidd) to turn one’s zeal to, apply o.s.
to, exert o.s., make efforts in order to ... ;
على قدم وساق (qadam) in full swing, carried
on most energetically (undertaking,
preparations, etc.); ارسل ساقه للريح arsala
sāqahū li-r-rīḥ to speed along like the
wind
ساقة sāqa rear guard, arrière-garde
سوق sūq mostly f., pl. اسواق aswāq
bazaar street; market; O fair │ سوق البر
والاحسان s. al-birr wa-l-iḥsān charity
bazaar; السوق الحرة (ḥurra) the free market;
سوق الاحسان charity bazaar; سوق خيرية
(kairīya) do.; السوق الأسود ((aswad) the
black market; السوق المشترك (muštarak) the
Common Market; سوق النقد s. an-naqd
money market (stook exchange); اسواق
المحصولات produce markets; سوق عقود القطن
s. ‘uqūd al-quṯn cotton exchange
سوقة sūqa subjects; rabble, mob
سوقي sūqī plebeian, common, vulgar
سويق sawīq a kind of mush made of
wheat or barley (also with sugar and
dates)
سويق suwaiq and سويقة suwaiqa stem,
stalk (of plants)
سويقة suwaiqa small market
سياق siyāq succession, sequence,
course, thread (of conversation); context
سواق siwāq pl. -ūn driver (of animals);
driver, chauffeur; (railroad) engineer
مساق masāq trend of things, course,
development, or progress, of s.th.; مساقة الى
it amounts to ..., comes to …, winds up in
…, is ultimately aimed at …; also see ساق
sāqa above │ مساق من الدراسات course of
studies; افضى بنا المساق الى we have come to
the point where ...
تسويق taswīq marketing, sale (of
merchandise)
تسويقة taswīqa (eg.) bargain,
advantageous purchase
تساوق tasāwuq coherence, interrelation,
connection, context; harmony
سائق sa’iq driving; driving force; -- pl.
-ūn sāqa) driver (of animals); chauffeur,
driver; (aircraft) pilot
مسوقر musauqar (tun.) = مسوكر musaukar
ساك (سوك ) sāka u (sauk) to rub, scrub, scour ( ھ
s.th.) II to clean and polish, brush, clean (
الاسنان the teeth)
سواك siwāk pl. سوك sūk a small stick
(the tip of which is softened by chewing
or beating) used for cleaning and
polishing the teeth
مسواك miswāk pl. مساويك masāwīk2 =
سواك
سوكر saukara to insure ( ھ goods, etc.); to
register ( ھ a letter)
سوكر musaukar insured; registered
(letter) 443
سول 1 II to talk or argue s.o. ( ل) into s.th. evil or
fateful ( ھ ); to entice, seduce ( ل s.o., said
of the Devil) │ سولب له نفسه (nafsuhū) he
let himself be seduced ( ھ to)
تسول 2 tasawwala (for تساءل tasā’ala) to beg
تسول tasawwul begging, beggary
متسول mutasawwil pl. -ūn beggar
سام (سوم 1 ) sāma u (saum) to offer for sale ( ھ a
commodity); to impose ( ھ ه upon s.o. a
punishment or task), force ( ھ ه upon s.o. a
difficult task); to demand of s.o. ( ه) s.th. (
ھ ) beyond his power │ سامه خسفا (kasfan)
to treat s.o. unjustly, wrong s.o.; to
humiliate s.o.; -- ( سيامة siyāma) to ordain,
consecrate (a priest, a bishop, etc.; Chr.) II
to impose, force ( ه ھ upon s.o. a difficult
task), coerce ( ه ھ s.o. to s.th. difficult); to
demand of s.o. ( ه) s.th. ( ھ ) beyond his
power; to assess estimate ( ھ the value of
an object); to mark, provide with a mark (
ھ s.th.) ill to bargain, haggle, chaffer over
a price ( ه with s.o.); to bargain, haggle ( في
or على، ب with s.o. over) IV to let ( ھ
cattle) graze freely; to let ( ھ the eye)
wander VI to bargain, haggle ( في over,
for) VID to bargain, haggle, chaffer ( or
في، على over, for)
مساومة musāwama pl. -āt bargaining,
haggling
سائمة sā’ima pl. سوائم sawā’im2 freely
grazing livestock
سام، سامي 2 look up alphabetically
مسام، مسامات 3 see سم 2
سومر sūmir Sumer
سومطرة sūmaṭra Sumatra
اسوان look up alphabetically
سوھج sōhag Sohag (city in central Egypt, on
the Nile)
سوي sawiya a to be equivalent, be equal ( ھ to
s.th.), equal ( ھ s.th.) II to even, level,
nivellate, flatten, straighten ( ھ s.th.); to
smooth ( ھ s.th.); to smooth down ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., folds, wrinkles; من ثيابه one’s clothes);
to equalize, make equal ( ب ھ s.th. to s.th.
else), put ( ھ s.th.) on the same level ( ب
with s.th.); سوى بينھما to put two persons on
an equal footing, treat two persons as
equals, reconcile two persons; to make
regular, make good ( ھ s.th.); to cook
properly ( ھ s.th.); to regulate, arrange,
make up, smooth over, settle, put in order
ھ) a dispute, a controversy, etc.) │ سوى
اخدعه to crush s.o.’s pride III to be
equivalent, be equal ( ھ to s.th.), equal ( ھ
s.th.); to be worth ( ھ s.th.); to equalize,
make equal ( ب ھ s.th. to s.th. else), put ( ھ
s.th.) on the same level ( ب with); to
establish equality ( بين -- وبين between --
and); ساوى بينھم to make them equals,
equalize them, put them on the same
footing; to regulate, arrange, make up,
smooth over, settle, put in order ( ھ a
dispute, a controversy, etc.); = ساوى بينھما
سوى بينھما (sawwā) VI to be equal or
similar; to be balanced, keep the balance
VIII to be even, regular, equal; to be
equivalent ( ھ to); to be on the same level;
to be or become straight, even, level; to
stand upright, erect, straight; to straighten
up; to sit down ( على on), mount ( على s.th.);
to sit firmly ( على on an animal); to be
properly cooked, be well done; to ripen,
mature, be or become ripe
سوى siwan, suwan equality, sameness;
(with foll. genit. or suffix) other than,
except │ على حد سوي (ḥaddin) equal(ly),
indiscriminate(ly), alike, the same; فضله
على سواه faḍḍalahū ‘alā siwāhu he
preferred him to everybody else; ، لا -- سوى
ليس -- سوى only, nothing but
سواء sawā’ equal; equality, sameness;
sawā’a except │ سواء لديه كل شيء (ladaihi)
444 it is all the same to him, he is
indifferent to everything; سواء بسواء
(sawā’an) equally, indiscriminately,
without distinction; together; على السواء
likewise, in like manner, equally, evenly,
indiscriminately, without distinction; all
the same, making no difference; سواء على it
doesn’t make any difference for ...; – سواء
ام (او ) (sawā’an) regardless whether --
or ..., no matter whether -- or ..., be it
that ... - or ..., سواء -- ام do.; تلاميذ سقراط سواء
منھم الأثينيون وغير الأثينيين the disciples of
Socrates, both Athenians and non-
Athenians; (سواء السبيل (المحجة
(Muhammaḍajja) the straight, right path
سوي sawīy pl. اسوياء aswiyā’ straight;
right, correct, proper; unimpaired, intact,
sound; straight-bodied, straight-shaped, of
regular build or growth; even, regular,
well-proportioned, shapely, harmonious;
سويا sawīyan in common, jointly, together
سوية sawīya pl. سوايا sawāyā equality;
sawīyatan together, jointly
سي siyy (for m. and f.) pl. اسواء aswā’
equal, similar, (a)like │ ھما سيان they are
alike, are the same; ھما سيان عندي they are
both the same to me
لا سيما lā sīyamā especially, in
particular, mainly
سواسية sawāsiya (pl.) equal, alike │ ھم
ھن) سواسية ) they are equals
تسوية taswiya leveling, nivellation;
settlement, arrangement, adjustment (of
controversies, etc.); equalization;
settlement (of a bill) │ تحت التسوية
outstanding, unsettled, āunpaid (com.)
مساواة musāwāh equality, equivalence;
equal rights, equality before the law;
settlement, composition (com.)
تساو tasāwin equality, equivalence,
sameness; equal rights, equality before the
law │ على التساوي or بالتساوي likewise, in
like manner, equally, evenly, regularly
استواء istiwā’ straightness; evenness,
levelness; equality, regularity, steadiness
│ خط الاستواء kaṭṭ al-ist. equator
استوائي istiwā’ī equatorial, tropical │
المنطقة الاستوائية (minṭaqa) or المناطق الاستوائية
the tropics
مساو musāwin equal, equivalent, similar
متساو mutasāwin equal, similar, (a)like;
even, equable, equally strong; of equal
weight, equipoised, equiponderant │
متساوى الأبعاد equidistant; متساوى الزوايا m. zzawāyā
equiangular (geom.); متساوى الساقين
m. s-sāqain isosceles (geom.); متساوى
الاضلاع equilateral (geom.)
مستو mustawin straight, upright, erect;
even, smooth, regular; well done
(cooking); ripe, mature
مستوى mustawan level, niveau, standard
│ مستوى الماء water level; المستوى العلمي
(‘ilmī) scientific level; مستوى الحياة m. l-
ḥayāh standard of living; في مستوى (with
foll. genit.) on an equal level or footing
with ...
السويد (Fr. la Suède) as-suwīd Sweden
سويدي suwīdī Swede; Swedish
السويس as-suwēs Suez (seaport in NE Egypt) │
قناة (قنال) السويس (qanāt, qanāl) Suez Canal
سويسرا (It. Svizzera) swiserā Switzerland
سويسري swiserī Swiss
سية 1 siya pl. -āt curved part of a bow
2□ سي sī short form of سيد sayyid, سيدي Mr., Sir
(esp. magr.)
سي 3 siyy, سيان see سوي
سيام siyām Siam, Thailand
سيان siyān cyanogen 445
ساب (سيب ) sāba i (saib) to flow, stream, run
(water); to run along, speed along, glide
along, creep along, crawl along; to walk
fast, hurry; (eg.) to leave, give up,
relinquish ( ھ s.th.); (eg.) to neglect ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); (eg.) to release, let go, free (، ھ
ه s.o., s.th.) II to leave, give up, relinquish
ھ) s.th.); to neglect ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
release, let go, free ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) VII to
flow, stream, run (water); to pour, flow (
الى into), enter ( الى s.th.); to peter out, seep
away, exhaust itself; to speed along, glide
along, run along, crawl or creep (along);
to glide, slip ( بين between); to walk fast,
hurry; with foll. imperf.: to begin at once
to do s.th.
انسيابي insiyābī, انسيابي الشكل ins. Š-šakl
stream-lined
سائب sā’ib forlorn, lost, (a)stray; free,
loose, lax, unrestrained
سيبيريا sībīriyā Siberia
سيج 1 II to fence in, hedge in, surround with a
hedge ( ھ s.th.) V pass. of II
سياج siyāj pl. -āt, اسوجة aswija, اسياج
asyāj; hedge; fencing, fence; enclosure;
(fig.) bulwark, shield (of a country, of a
nation)
ساج 2 look up alphabetically
سيجار sīgār cigar (eg.)
سيجارة sīgāra pl. -āt, سجاير sagāyir, سجائر
sagā’ir2 cigarette (eg.)
ساح (سيح ) sāḥa i (saiḥ, سيحان sayaḥān) to flow,
run (water); to melt, thaw, dissolve,
become liquid (snow, metal); --(saiḥ, سياحة
siyāḥa) to travel, journey; to rove, roam
about II to make flow, cause to flow ( ھ a
river, etc.); to melt, dissolve, liquefy,
smelt, fuse ( ھ metal, and the like); to
melt, clarify ( ھ butter) IV to make flow,
cause to flow ( ھ s.th.) VII to spread, pour
forth
سياحة siyāḥa pl. -āt travel; tourism
سياح sayyāḥ pl. -ūn traveler; tourist
سائح sā’iḥ pl. -ūn, سياح suyyāḥ, suwwāḥ)
traveler; tourist; itinerant dervish;
anchorite (Chr.)
مسيخ musayyak fluid, liquid; striped
(garment)
ساخ (سيخ 1 ) sāka i ( سيخ saik, سيخان sayakān) to
sink into the ground or mud
سيخ 2 sīk pl. اسياخ asyāk spit, skewer; foil,
rapier; iron prong or bolt
سيد، سيادة see سود 2
سيدارة sīdāra pl. -āt (see سدارة ) an Iraqi
headgear, commonly of black velvet;
overseas cap
سار (سير ) sāra i ( سير sair, سيرورة
sairūra, مسير masīr, مسيرة masīra, تساير
tasāyara) to move (on), set out, strike out,
start, get going; to move along; to march;
to travel, journey; to ride (in a vehicle); to
go, go away, leave, depart; to run, operate
بين -- و) between -- and, of a train); to flow
(electric current); to run, be in operation,
function, work, go (machine); to progress
(e.g., work); to make ( الى for s.th.), be
headed ( الى for s.th.), approach ( الى s.th.),
be directed, be oriented ( الى toward s.th.);
to circulate, make the rounds, be or
become current (proverb); to follow,
maintain ( سيرا sairan a behavior, على
s.th.); to behave, conduct o.s.; to proceed,
act ( على or بمقتضى bi-muqtaḍā according
to) │ سار به to lead s.o., lead s.o. away; سار
وراءه to (allow, pursue s.o.; سار جيئة وذھابا
(jī’atan wa-dihāban) to walk up and
down, go back and forth; سار في سبيل التحسن
(s. it-taḥassun) to be on the road to
recovery; الخطة التى سار فيھا (kiṭṭa) the
course he followed; سار سيرة حسنة ٤٤٦
(sīratan ḥasanatan) to behave well; سار
على قدميه (qadamaihi) not to be dead and
forgotten, be still much alive, be a
tangible reality II to set in motion, drive (
ھ s.th.); to make ( ھ s.th., e.g., an
automobile) go; to start, start up, let run (
ھ a machine); to go in ( ھ for a task), run,
carry on, ply, practice ( ھ a trade); to drive
ھ) a car), pilot, steer ( ھ s.th.); to send,
dispatch, send out ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
circulate, put in circulation ( ھ s.th.); to
stripe ( ھ a garment, etc.) III to keep up, go
along ( ه with s.o.); to walk at s.o.’s ( (ه
side; to pursue ( ھ s.th.); to show o.s.
willing to please ( ه s.o.), comply ( ه with
s.o.’s wish); to be in agreement, be
consistent ( ھ with s.th.); to be familiar,
intimate, be hand in glove, get along ( ه
with s.o.); to adapt o.s. ( ھ to
circumstances, events, etc.) IV to set in
motion, drive ( ھ s.th.); to send, dispatch (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
سير sair trip, tour, travel, journey, walk,
errand, march, procession; movement,
motion; departure; course, progress (of an
undertaking); procedure, practice,
conduct, behavior; (way of) life;
observance, pursuance ( على of s.th.) │ حسن
السير والسلوك (husk as-s.) blameless life; في
السير وراء غرضه (garaḍihī) in pursuance of
his intention
سير sair pl. سيور suyūr (leather) belt;
girth; drive belt, transmission belt │ سير
متحرك (mutaḥarrik) conveyor belt,
assembly line
سيرة saira gait; course
سيرة sīra pl. سير siyar conduct,
comportment, demeanor, behavior, way of
life; attitude, position, reaction, way of
acting; (in sg. or pl.) biography, history;
pl. campaigns; السيرة the biography of
Mohammed
سيار sayyār traveling frequently, always
on the move, continually moving;
itinerant, roving, roaming about;
circulating; planet │ صحف سيارة (suḥuf) or
جرائد سيارة daily newspapers, dailies
سيارة sayyāra pl. -āt automobile, car │
سيارة الأجرة s. al-ujra taxi cab; سيارة مدرعة
(mudarra‘a) armored car; سيارة دورية
(daurīya) patrol car; سيارة الإسعاف s. alis‘
āf ambulance; سيارة مصفحة (muṣaffaḥa)
armored car; سيارة النقل s. an-naql truck,
lorry; سائق السيارة (automobile) driver,
chauffeur
مسار masār pl. -āt path (of rays, etc.)
مسير masīr travel, journey, tour; march
(mil.); departure; distance
مسيرة masīra travel, journey, tour;
departure; distance
تسيير tasyīr dispatch, sending out;
propulsion, drive (techn.) │ التسيير النفاثي
(naffātī) jet propulsion
مسايرة musāyara adaptation, adjustment
سائر sā’ir going, walking, running;
walker, wayfarer, wanderer; generally
known, current (proverb); see also سئر
خدمة سائرة │ (kidma) transient laborers,
seasonal laborers (eg.)
مسير musayyar directed, controlled ( ب
by); guided, remote-controlled; not
endowed with free will (philos., as
opposed to مخير mukayyar)
سيراس sīrās (syr.) glue made of the yellow
powder of a pulverized root, used esp. for
pasting leather
سيرافيم sīrāfīm seraphim
سيرج sīraj sesame oil
سيرك (Fr. cirque) sirk circus
سيسبان saisabān sesban (an indigenous
Egyptian shrub whose leaves have a
purgative 447 effect, Sesbania aegyptiaca
Pers.; bot.)
سيسى sīsī pl. سيسيات sīsīyāt, سياسي sayāsī (eg.)
pony; young rat
سيطر saiṭara to command, dominate, control (
على s.th.); to be master or lord ( على over
s.th.), reign, gain power ( على over s.th.); to
seize ( على s.th.), take hold ( على of s.th.) II
tasaiṭara = سيطر
سيطرة saiṭara rule, dominion,
domination, command, supremacy, power,
authority ( على over); decisive influence (
على on); control ( على over)
مسيطر musaiṭir ruler, sovereign,
overlord
سيف saif pl. سيوف suyūf, اسياف asyāf, اسيف asyuf
sword; sabre, foil, rapier │ سيف الإسلام s.
al-islām title of princes of the royal house
of Yemen
سيف sīf pl. اسياف asyāf shore, coast
سياف sayyāf executioner
مسايفة musāyafa fencing (with saber or
foil)
سيقارة = سيكارة
سيكارة sigāra pl. سكائر sagā’ir 2 cigarette (syr.)
سيكران saikurān, saikarān henbane
(Hyoscyamus niger; bot.)
سيكورتاه (It. sicurtà) sikurtāh insurance │
سيكورتاه الحريق (الحياة ) (ḥayā) fire (life)
insurance
سيكولوجى sīkolōžī, saikolōjī psychologic(al)
سال (سيل 1 ) sāla i (sail, سيلان sayalān) to flow,
stream; to be or become liquid; to melt │
سال لعابه على (lu’ābuhū) his mouth watered
for ... II to make flow, cause to stream,
liquefy, melt, dissolve ( ھ s.th.) IV = II
سيل sail pl. سيول suyūl flood,
inundation; torrent, torrential stream │ سيل
عرام (‘urām) huge mass, flood, stream; بلغ
السيل الزبى (zubā) the matter has reached its
climax, has come to a head
سيلة saila stream
سيولة suyūla liquid state, liquidity,
flow(ing)
سيال sayyāl streaming, pouring,
torrential; fluid, liquid; a liquid; stream; a
fluid │ قلم سيال (qalam) facile pen, fluent
style
سيالة sayyāla rivulet; pocket
سيلان sayalān flowing, ftow; running;
deliquescence, liquefaction; gonorrhea
(med.); see also below
مسيل masīl pl. مسايل masāyil2 river bed,
rivulet
سائل sā’il ftuid, liquid; (pl. سوائل
sawā’il2) a liquid, a fluid │O علم السوائل
‘ilm as-s. hydraulics
سائلية sā’ilīya fluidity, liquid state of
aggregation (phys.)
سيلان 2 sayalān2 Ceylon;
سيلان 3 sīlān garnet (precious stone)
سيم 1 sīmā (pass.) and VII to be consecrated, be
ordained (Chr.)
ولا سيما 2 wa-lā siyyamā see سوى
سيماء 3 see next entry
سيمى 4 sīmā ( سيما sīmā), سيماء sīmā’ سيمة , 2 sīma
pl. سيم siyam mark, sign, characteristic;
mien, expression
سيميا 5 sīmiyā, سيمياء sīmiyā’ natural magic
سين sīn name of the letter س
الاشعة السينية al-aši‘‘a as-sīnīya S rays
سينا sīnā and سيناء sīnā’ Sinai 448
سينما (Fr. cinéma) cinema, motion-picture
theater │ دور السينما dūr as.s. motionpicture
theaters, movies; سينما صامتة (صامت ) silent
film; سينما ناطقة (ناطق ) or (سينما صائتة (صائت
sound film, talkie
سينمائي sīnēmā’ī cinematographic,
cinematic, cinema-, movie- (in
compounds); motion-picture actor, film
star │ رواية سينمائية motion picture, film,
movie
سينماتوغراف (Fr. cinématographe) sīnimatugrāf
cinematograph
سينماسكوب (Fr. cinémascope) sīnimaskūb
cinemascope
سينودس (Gr. σύυδος) sinōdos synod
ش
ش abbreviation of شارع šāri‘ street (St.)
شاء šā’ (coll.; n. un. شاة šāh) pl. شواة šiwāh, شياه
šiyāh sheep; ewe
شؤبوب šu’būb pl. شآبيب ša’ābīb2 downpour,
shower
شادر šādir, tent; storehouse, warehouse,
magazine
شاذرون šādarūn fountain; a small water-driven
gadget adorned with hells, and the like,
resembling a mobile
شاروبيم šārūbīm cherubim
شاسي šāsī chassis
شأفة ša’fa root │ استأصل شأفته ista’ṣala ša’fatahū
to extirpate, root out, eradicate s.th.,
remove s.th. drastically
شاكوش šākūš and شكوش šakūš pl. شواكيش
šawākīš hammer │ ابو شاكوش hammerhead
(shark)
شال šāl pl. شيلان šīlān shawl
شاليه (Fr. chalet) šālēh pl. -āt hunting cabin,
.hooting lodge; beach cabin, cabana
شام VI to perceive an evil omen ( من or ب in),
regard as an evil portent ( من or ب ب s.th.);
to foretell calamity ( من or ب from); to be
superstitious; to he pessimistic X to
perceive an evil omen ( ب in), regard as an
evil portent ( ب s.th.); to foretell calamity (
ب from)
الشام aš-ša’m, aš-šām the northern
region, the North; Syria; Damascus │ شاما
ويمنا (yamanan) northward and southward
شامي šāmī Syrian; (pl. -ūn, شوام (šuwām)
a Syrian
شآمي ša’āmī Syrian (adj. and n.)
شؤم šu’m calamity, bad luck,
misfortune; evil omen, portent │ لا تملأ الدنيا
شؤما (tamla’, dunyā) (don’t fill the world
with evil omen!) approx.: talk of the devil
and he will appear!
اشأم aā’am2, f. شؤمى šu’mā inauspicious,
ill-omened, ominous, portentous, sinister;
calamitous, disastrous; unfortunate, fatal,
accursed
تشائم tašā’um pessimism
مشؤوم maš’ūm and مشوم mašūm pl. مشائيم
mašā’īm2 inauspicious, ill-omened,
ominous, sinister; unfortunate, unlucky
│ عدد مشؤوم (‘adad) unlucky number
متشائم mutašā’im pessimist
شأن ša’n pl. شؤون šu’ūn matter, affair, concern,
business; circumstances, state of affaire,
case; nature, character, quality, 449 kind;
situation, condition, state; significance;
importance, consequence; standing,
prestige, rank; cranial future; pl. شؤون
tears; ša’na like, as │ بشأن bi-ša’ni
regarding, with regard or respect to,
relating to, pertaining to, concerning, as
to, about; جل شأنه (jalla) the Sublime (of
God); وزارة الشؤون الاجتماعية Ministry of
Social Affairs; الشؤون الخارجية
(kārijīya)foreign affairs; ذو الشأن , f. ذات
الشأن the responsible man, the man in
charge, the man directly concerned with
the matter; اولو الشأن ulū š-š. and ذوو الشأن
dawū š-š. the influential people, the
competent people; the concerned with the
matter; شؤون الحياة š. al-ḥayāh worldly
affairs; خطير الشأن of great importance; ذو
شأن significant, important; رفيع الشأن highranking;
(formerly, Tun.) title of members
of the Bey’s family; صاحب الشأن the one
concorned; اصحاب الشأن those concerned;
the important, influential people; O مكلف
بالشؤون (mukallaf) chargé d’affaires (dipl.);
شأنه في ذلك شأن ال ... (ša’nuhū … ša’nu l-...)
in this matter he fares just as the …, he is,
in this respect, in the same situation as
the ...; رجل ھذا شأنه (ša’nuhū) a man whose
situation is this, a man who can be
described as ..., a man in this situation;
شأنك ša’naka or انت وشأن anta wa-ša’naka
please your-self! do as you like! شأنك وما
تريد (ša’naka) do as you please! just as you
wish! دعني وشأني (da‘nī) let me alone! تركه
وشأنه tarakahū wa-ša’nahū to let s.o.
alone; to let s.o. go; not to pay any
attention to s.o.; ھو في شأن he is concerned
with a matter; ھذا شأنه that’s his affair; ما
شأنك what’s the matter with you? what do
you want? ما شأنك وھذا what have you got
to do with this? what business of yours is
this? ما شأنه والأمر (amra) what has he got
to do with the matter? ما شأني في ذلك what
have I got to do with that? what business
of mine is that? اي شأن لك في ھذا (ayyu
ša’nin) what business of yours is this?
what’s that to you? له شأن في ذلك he has
s.th. to do with this, he has a hand in this;
لا شأن له في ذلك (ša’na) he hasn’t anything
to do with this, he has no part in this; ليس
لي شأن في ذلك I shall have nothing to do
with that, that is none of my business, I
shan’t meddle in that; لا شأن لي في ذلك
(ša’na) I haven’t anything to do with it,
it's none of my business; لي معه شأن آخر
(ākar) I still have a bone to pick with him;
ذھب لبعض شأنه (li-ba‘ḍi ša’nihī) he attended
to a task; he went to do s.th.; انصرف الى
شأنه (inṣarafa) he left to do his work;
اصلحت من شأنھا (aṣlaḥat) she made herself
up; اھمل شأنه ahmala ša’nahū he neglected
him; ذلك شأنه that is his habit; ھذا شأنه دائما
he is always that way; شأنه في (ša’nahū) as
he used to do in ...; شأنه مع من ... (ša’nahū)
as he used to deal with people who ...; كان
من شأنه it was his wont, he used to ...; من
شأنه ان it is in his (its) nature that ..., he (it)
tends to ...; it is his business to ...; ليس من
شأنه ان it is not his affair or business to ...;
it is inappropriate for him to ...; it does not
tend to …; is not conducive to ...; ان لھذا
الرجل شأنا (rajuli) there is a man to keep an
eye on, this is an important man; there is
s.th. about this
man! في خلقه شؤون 􀍿 (kalqihī) God has
created all kinds of things (meaning:
strange things can happen in this world!)
شانتاج (Fr. chantage) šantāž blackmail
شاه šāh shah; king (chess) │ شاه بلوط (ballūṭ)
chestnut tree (bot.); شاه مات checkmate
(chess)
شاھاني šāhānī the shah’s, pertaining to
the shah; imperial │ ارادة شاھانية decree of
the Sultan (in Ottoman times)
شاھين šāhīn pl. شواھين šawāhīn2 shahin, an
Indian falcon (zool.) شآ (شأو 450 ) šā’a u (
شأو ša’w) to overtake in running, outrace ( ه
s.o.)
شأو ša’w highest point, summit, peak;
goal, object │ بعيد الشأو far-aiming, faraspiring;
very ambitious; بلغ في شأوه
(ša’wihī) to get as far in s.th. as s.o. else,
match s.o. in s.th.; بلغ شأوا بعيدا في الرقي
(ruqīy) to undergo tremendous progress;
بلغ الشأو البعيد to carry off the prize, hit the
bull’s eye
شاورمة šāwarma, šāwirma (also (شورمة
charcoal-broiled mutton, out in thin slices
and arranged conically on a vertical
skewer (syr.)
شاوش šāwuš (tun.) pl. شواش šuwwāš sergeant;
office boy, handy man; doorman, gatekeeper
شاويش šāwīš a military rank, approx.: staff
sergeant (Eg.) │ وكيل شاويش a military
rank, approx.: sergeant (Eg.)
شاي šāy tea
شب šabba i ( شباب šabāb, شبيبة šabība) to
become a youth or young man, to
adolesce, grow up; -- i u ( شب šibāb, شبيب
šabīb) to raise the forelegs as if about to
jump; to rear; to prance (horse); -- i ( شبوب
šubūb) to burn, blaze (fire); to break out
(fire, war); -- u (šabb, šubūb) to light,
kindle ( ھ fire) │ شبت نيران الحرب (nīrān al-
ḥarb) war broke out; شب عن الطوق (ṭauq) to
be over the initial stages, with neg.: to be
still in its infancy II to rhaplodize about a
beloved woman ( بھا ) and one’s
relationship to her, celebrate her in verse;
to flirt ( بھا with a woman) V to rhaplodize
about a beloved woman ( بھا ) end one’s
relationship to her, celebrate her in verse;
to compose love sonnets; to take fire,
blaze up
شب šabb (= شاب šābb) youth, young
man
شب šabb alum
شبة šabba (= šābba) young woman, girl
شبة šabba alum
شبب šabab fully grown (steer)
شباب šabāb youth, youthfulness; youths,
young men, adolescents, juveniles │ تجديد
الشباب rejuvenation
شبابي šabābī youthful, juvenile
شبوب šubūb outbreak (of a war)
شبابة šabbāba reed flute
شبيبة šabība youth, youthfulness; الشبيبة
the youth (coll.)
شاب šābb pl. شبان šubbān, شباب šabāb,
شببة šababa youthful, juvenile, young;
youth, young man
شابة šābba pl. -āt, شواب šawābb شبائب , 2
šabā’ib2 young woman, girl
مشبوب mašbūb lighted, kindled, ignited,
flaming, burning; beautiful
شبت šibitt dill ( ھ nethum graveolens; bot.)
شبث 1 šabita a (šabat) and V to cling, cleave,
hold fast, hang on, attach o.s. adhere ( ب
to)
شبث šabat pl. شبثان šibtān spider
شبث tašabbut tenacity; attachment,
adherence, fidelity; stubbornness,
obstinacy
متشبث mutašabbit tenacious; attached,
adherent; stubborn, obstinate
شبث 2 šibitt ( ھ nethum graveolens; bot.)
شبح šabaḥ pl. شبوح šubūḥ, اشباح ašbāḥ blurred,
indistinct shape; apparition; phantom;
ghost, specter, spirit; nightmare; figure,
person
شبر 1 šabara u i (šibr) to measure ( ھ s.th.) with
the span of the hand II do.; to gesticulate,
make gestures, to gesture
شبر šibr pl. اشبار ašbār span of the hand
│ شبرا فشبرا (fa-šibran) inch by inch; 451
شبر من الأرض (arḍ) a foot of ground; قلده
شبرا بشبر وذراعا بذراع (qalladahū) to imitate
s.o. or s.th. religiously; to follow s.th.
literally
شبور 2 šabbūr pl. شبابير šabābīr2 trumpet
شبورة 3 šabbūra and شابورة šābūra (eg.) fog,
mist
شبرق šabraqa to tear to pieces, to shred ( ھ
s.th.)
شبرقة šabraqa pocket money
شبشب šibšib pl. شباشب šabāšib2 slipper
شبط 1 šabaṭa to cling, cleave, hold on ( في to)
شباط 2 šubāṭ(2) February (Syr., Ir., Leb., Jord.)
شبوط 3 šabbūṭ (syr.) large fish found in the
Euphrates and Tigris rivers
شبع šabi‘a a (šab‘, šiba‘) to satisfy one’s
appetite ( من or ھ with s.th.), eat one’s fill (
من or ھ of s.th.); to be or become sated,
satisfied in one’s appetite; to be full ( من or
ھ of); to be or become fed up, surfeited (
من with), be or become sick and tired ( من
of), have enough ( من of) II to sate, satiate,
fill ( ب، ھ، ه s.o., s.th. with); to satisfy,
gratify ( ھ the appetite, one’s desires, the
senses); to load, charge ( ھ s.th., ب with
electricity) IV to sate, satiate, fill ( ه ب s.o.
with); to satisfy, gratify ( ھ the appetite,
the senses); to saturate ( ھ s.th., e.g., with
a dye); to load, charge ( ھ s.th., ب with
electricity); to go in ( ھ for s.th.)
thoroughly; (gram.) to lengthen ( ھ a
vowel) by writing it plane; pass. ušbi‘a to
be replete, full ( ب with, of) │ اشبع الكلام فيه
(kalāma) to speak in great detail, at great
length about s.th., describe or explain s.th.
elaborately; اشبعه ضربا (ḍarban) to give
s.o. a sound beating V to be sated,
saturated ( ب with); to be filled ( ب with),
be full ( ب of); to be loaded or charged ( ب
with, el.)
شبع šab‘ sufficiency, satiety, satiation,
saturation, repletion, fullness
شبع šib‘, šiba‘ s.th. that fills or satisfies
the appetite, fill
شبع šaba‘ saturation (chem.)
شبعة šub‘a fill
شبعان šab‘ān f. شبعى šab‘ā, pl. شباعي
šabā‘ā, شباع šibā‘ sated, satisfied, full;
rich
اشباع išbā‘ satiation, saturation,
repletion, filling; satisfaction, gratification
مشبع mušabba‘, mušba‘ satiated,
saturated ( ب with); replete, filled ( ب with),
full ( ب of) │ مشبع بالكھرباء (kahrabā’)
electrically charged
شبق 2 šabiqa a (šabaq) to be lewd, lecherous,
lustful
شبق šabaq lewdness, lechery,
licentiousness, lust
شبق šabiq lewd, lecherous, lustful,
licentious
شبق 2 šubuq chibouk
شبك 1 šabaka i (šabk) to interjoin, intertwine,
interlace, interweav., entangle ( ھ s.th.); to
fasten, tighten, attach ( ھ s.th. or في to) II
to interjoin, intertwine, interlace,
interweave, entangle, complicate ( بين or ھ
s.th.); to crochet V to be interjoined,
intertwined, interlaced, interwoven,
entangled; to b. or become complicated,
involved, intricate, confused VI to be
intertwined, interlaced, interwoven,
entangled; to be intermeshed, be
interwoven like a net VIII to be or become
interjoined, interlaced, interwoven, netlike,
reticulate; to be intertwined
(branches), be interlocked (hands); to be
or become entangled, snarled; to get
entangled, involved, ensnared, embroiled,
implicated, mixed up ( في in); to com. to
blows or to gripe ب) 452 or مع with s.o.);
to be or become complicated, involved,
intricate, confused (matter); to join, unite,
combine, coalesce, merge, fuse ( ب with);
to meet (eyes, glances) │ اشتبك في حديث to
be drawn into a conversation, become
engrossed in a discussion; اشتبك في حرب
(ḥarb) to become involved in a war
شبكة šabaka pl. شبك šabak, شباك šibāk,
شبوكات šubūkāt net; netting, network;
snare; -- (pl. شباك šibāk) O grid (radio)
شبكة شائكة barbed-wire entanglement,
concertina; شبكة لاسلكية (lā-silkīya) radio
network
شبكي šabakī reticulate, reticular, netted,
net-like; retinal; of framework
شبكية šabakīya retina (anat.)
شباك šubbāk pl. شبابيك šabābīk2 netting,
network; plaitwork; grid, grill; window;
wicket (post office, box office, etc.) │
شباك العرض š. al-‘arḍ show window,
showcase, glass case
مشبك mišbak pl. مشابك mašābik2 hook;
clasp, pin; hairpin, bobby pin │ مشبك الورق
m. al-waraq paper clip
تشابك tašābuk confusion, intricacy,
obscurity, abstruseness
اشتباك ištibāk entanglement,
involvement ( في in); complication; handto-
hand fight, scuffle, melee ( مع with),
clash ( ب with) │ عدم الااشتباك في القتال
(‘adam al-išt.) nonintervention in battle
مشبك mušabbak plaited, resembling
plaitwork; (pl. -āt) window (or door)
adorned with plaited latticework
مشتبك muštabik entangled, involved,
complicated, intricate
مشتبك muštabak plaitwork; thicket (of
branches)
شبك 2 šubuk chibouk
شوبك 3 look up alphabetically
شبل IV to take care ( على of s.o.), look ( على after
s.o.), take s.o. ( على ) in hand
شبل šibl pl. اشبال ašbāl lion cub
شبين šabīn, šibin pl. شباين šabāyin2 godfather,
sponsor (Chr.); best man, groomsman
(Chr.)
شبينة šabīna, šibīna pl. -āt godmother,
sponsor (Chr.); bridesmaid (Chr.)
اشبين išbīn pl. اشابين ašābīn2 godfather,
sponsor (Chr.); best man, groomsman
(Chr.)
اشبينة išbīna godmother, sponsor (Chr.);
bridesmaid (Chr.)
شبه II to make equal or similar ( ب or ھ
ھ s.th. to s.th. else); to compare ( ب ھ s.th.
with), liken ( ب ھ s.th. to); pass. šubbiha to
be doubtful, dubious, uncertain, obscure (
على to s.o.) III to resemble ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.),
bear a resemblance, be similar ( ھ، ه to
s.o., to s.th.), be like s.o. or s.th. ( ,(ھ، ه
look (exactly) like s.o. ( وما شابه ذلك │ ( ه
and the like IV to resemble ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), bear a resemblance, be similar ( ھ، ه
to s.o., to s.th.), be like s.o. or s.th. ( ;(ھ، ه
to look (exactly) like s.o. ( وما اشبه ذلك │ ( ه
and the like V to compare o.s. ( ب with); to
imitate, copy ( ب s.o., s.th.) VI to resemble
one another, be similar to one another; to
be equal to one another, be identical; to be
ambiguous, unclear VIII to resemble one
another, be similar to one another; to be in
doubt ( في about), doubt ( في s.th.); to
suspect ( في امره or في s.o., s.th.); to be
doubtful, dubious, obscure ( على to s.o.) │
اشتبه في الأمر the matter appeared doubtful
to him
شبه šibh pl. اشباه ašbāh resemblance,
similarity, likeness; image, picture;
analogue; similar, (a)like; -like, quasi-,
semi- (with foll. genit.) │ شبه šibhu
jazīratin peninsula; شبه حربي š. ḥarbī semimilitary;
شبه المنحرف š. al-munḥarif 453
trapezoid (geom.); شبه رسمي š. rasmī semiofficial,
officious (dipl.); شبه الظل š. aẓ-ẓill
penumbra; شبه قارة subcontinent; شبه المعين
š. al-mu‘ayyan rhomboid (geom.); اشباھه
ašbāhuhū the likes of him, his kind; وشبھھم
and the likes of them, and their sort (of
people); في شبه عزلة تامة (‘uzlatin tāmma)
all but completely isolated, as good as
completely isolated
شبه šabah pl. اشباه ašbāh resemblance,
similarity, likeness; image, picture;
analogue; similar, (a)like; brass
شبھة subha pl. شبھات šubhāt, šubahāt,
šubuhāt obscurity, vagueness, uncertainty;
doubt; suspicion; specious argument,
sophism; judicial error (Isl. Law) │ ذوو
الشبھات dawū š-šubuhāt or اصحاب الشبھات
dubious persons, people of ill repute; تحت
الشبھة suspicious, suspect
شبھان šabahān brass
شبيه šabīh pl. شباه šibāh similar ( ب to),
like, resembling ( ب s.o., s.th.) │ شبيه
بالمنحرف (munḥarif) trapezoid (geom.); شبيه
بالرسمي (rasmī) semi-official, officious
(dipl.); شبيه بالمعين (mu‘ayyan) rhomboid
(geom.)
اشبه ašbah2 more similar, more
resembling, more like │ ھو اشبه ب he
resembles … more than anything else, he
is just like …
مشابه mašābih2 similarities, related traits
تشبيه tašbīh comparison; allegory,
simile, parable; ascription of human
characteristics to God,
anthropomorphization (of God, theol.)
مشابھة mušābaha pl. -āt resemblance,
similarity, likeness
تشبه tašabbuh imitation ( ب of)
تشابه tašābuh resemblance, similarity,
likeness; vagueness, haziness,
indistinctness, obscurity
اشتباه ištibāh resemblance, similarity,
likeness; dubiousness, doubtfulness,
obscurity, inscrutability; doubt, misgiving,
suspicion
مشبوه mašbūh suspicious, suspect;
dubious, doubtful; notorious; a suspect
مشابه mušābih similar
متشابھات mutašābihāt obscure, not
clearly intelligible passages in the Koran
مشتبه فيه (muštabah) or مشتبه في امره
(amrihī) suspicious, suspect; a suspect;
مشتبه فيه ب suspected of s.th. │ مشتبه في
صنعه (ṣan‘ihī) of doubtful make
شبا šaban tip, point │ فل من شباه (falla) to
weaken s.o.
شباة šabāh pl. شبوات šabawāt tip, point;
sting, prick
شت šatta i (šatt, شتات šatāt, شتيت šatīt)
to be scattered, be dispersed, be dissolved;
-- šatta i to scatter, disperse, break up ( ھم a
crowd, etc., ھ s.th.) │ شت شملھم
(šamlahum) to disperse or break up the
gathering of people, dissolve their unity II
to disperse, scatter, break up ( ھم a crowd,
etc., ھ s.th.) │ شتت شملھم (šamlahum) = شت
شملھم IV = II V to be scattered, be
dispersed, be dissolved, scatter, disperse,
breakup
شت šatt pl. اشتات aštāt dispersed,
separate(d), scattered, dissolved; pl. اشتات
manifold, variegated, diverse; scattered
fragments, single pieces, sections ( من of)
شتات šatāt dispersed, separate(d),
scattered, dissolved
شتيت šatīt pl. or شتى šattā dispersed,
separate(d), scattered, dissolved; pl. شتى
diverse, sundry, various, different,
manifold, miscellaneous, all kinds of │
شتى بينھما or what a difference between the
two of them! how different they are!
شتان šattāna: شتان بينھما, شتان ما بينھما, شتان
بين – و what a difference between …
and ...! how different they are! 454
تشتيت taštīt dispersion, scattering,
dissolution; disruption, splitting,
splintering
شتر 1 šatara i to cut off, tear off, rip off ( ھ
s.th.); to tear (up) ( ھ s.th.)
شترات 2 šitrāt citrate, salt of citric acid
شتل šatala i to plant, transplant ( ھ a plant)
شتلة šatla pl. شتول šutūl, شتائل šatā’il2
seedling, set, transplant
مشتل maštal pl. مشاتل mašātil2 (plant)
nursery, arboretum
شتم šatama i u (šatm) and III to abuse, revile,
vilify, scold ( ه s.o.) VI to vilify one
another, abuse one another, heap curses
upon one another
شتم šatm abuse, vilification
شتام šattām one who indulges in
frequent abuse or vilification; impudent,
insolent, impertinent, abusive
شتيم šatīm abused, reviled, vilified,
insulted
شتيمة šatīma pl. شتائم šatā’im2 abuse,
vilification, vituperation, insult
مشاتمة mušātama vilification,
vituperation
شتا (شتو ) šatā u (šatw) to pass the winter, to
winter ( ب at a place); to hibernate II = I; to
rain V to pass the winter, to winter,
hibernate ( ب at a place)
شتاء šitā’ pl. اشتية aštiya, شتى šutīy
winter; rains, rainy season
شتوي šatwī, šatawī wintery, hibernal,
winter (adj.)
مشتى maštan pl. مشات mašātin winter
residence, winter quarters; winter resort
شات šātin wintery, hibernal
مشتى mušattan winter residence, winter
quarters; winter resort
شتى šattā pl. of شتيت šatīt (see (شت
شج šajja i (šajj) to break, split, cleave, fracture,
bash in ( ھ s.th., esp. the skull)
شجة šajja pl. شجاج šijāj head wound
which lays open the skull; skull fracture
شجب šajaba u (šajb) and II to doom to
destruction, to min, destroy ( ه s.o.); to
condemn morally, criticize sharply ( ھ
s.th.) IV to afflict, grieve ( ه s.o.)
شجب šajb destruction, routing, crushing
شجب šajab sorrow, grief, worry;
distress, affliction
شجاب šijāb pl. شجب šujub clothes hook
(attached to the wall)
مشجب mišjab pl. مشاجب mašājib2 clothes
hook, clothes rack
شجر šajara u (šajr) to happen, occur; to break
out, develop (unrest) III to quarrel, argue,
dispute ( مع or ه with s.o.) VI to quarrel,
fight, dispute (with one another); to
quarrel, argue, fight ( مع with) VIII do.
الحروف الشجرية al-ḥurūf aš-šajrīya the
sounds j, š, ḍ (phon.)
شجر šajar (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اشجار ašjār
trees; shrubs, bushes
شجرة šajara pl. -āt tree; shrub, bush │
شجر النسب š. an-nasab genealogical tree
شجر šajir woody, wooded, abounding
in trees
شجير šajīr pl. شجراء šujarā’2 bad
companion, bad company
شجيرة šujaira pl. -āt shrub, bush
شجار šijār (wooden) bar, bolt
اشجر ašjar2, f. شجراء šajrā’2 woody,
wooded, abounding in trees
تشجير tašjīr afforestation
شجار šijār fight, quarrel; dispute,
argument; see also above 455
مشاجرة mušājara fight, quarrel; dispute,
argument
مشجر mušajjar figured with designs of
plants, branched (cloth)
مشجر musjir abounding in trees,
wooded
شجران 2 šajarān shagreen (leather)
شجع šaju‘a u ( شجاعة šajā‘a) to be courageous,
brave, valiant, hold II to encourage,
embolden, hearten ( على ه s.o. to); to favor,
support, hack, promote, further ( ھ ه s.o.,
s.th.) V to take heart, pluck up courage; to
show o.s. courageous; to be encouraged
شجاع šujā‘, šijā‘ pl. شجعة šaja‘a, شجعان
šuj‘ān courageous, brave, valiant, bold;
hero; الشجاع Hydra (astron.)
شجيع šajī‘ pl. m. شجعاء šuja‘ā’ شجعان , 2
šuj‘ān, pl. f. شجائع šajā’i‘ شجاع , 2 šijā‘
courageous, brave, valiant, bold,
audacious
شجاعة sajā‘a courage, bravery, valor,
valiance, boldness, audacity
اشجع ašja‘2, f. شجعاء šaj‘ā’2 courageous,
brave, valiant, bold, audacious
اشجع ašja‘, išjā‘ pl. اشاجع ašāji‘2
(proximal or lint) phalanx of the finger
تشجيع tašjī‘ encouragement, heartening,
animation ( على to); favoring, furtherance,
promotion, advancement
مشجع mušajji‘ encourager; promoter,
supporter, advocate, proponent
شجن šajina a to be sad, grieved, distressed,
worried; to coo (pigeon); -- šajana u
(šajn, شجون šujūn) to sadden, grieve,
distress, worry ( ه s.o.) II and IV = šajana
شجن šajan pl. شجون šujūn, اشجان ašjān
worry, anxiety, apprehension; sorrow,
grief, distress, sadness; (pl. šujun) twig,
branch │ الحديث شجون conversation drifts
from one topic to another
شجو) and شجى) شجا šajā u ( شجو šajw) to worry,
trouble, grieve, sadden, distress, fill with
anxiety ( ه s.o.); -- شجى šajiya a ( شجا šajan)
to be or become worried, troubled,
grieved, sad, distressed, anxious,
apprehensive II to move, touch, grip ( ه
s.o.) IV to grieve, worry, trouble, sadden,
fill with anxiety ( ه s.o.)
شج šajin, f. شجية šajiya worried,
troubled, grieved, sad, anxious,
apprehensive
شجو šajw grief, worry, distress, anxiety,
apprehension, sadness; fear; affectedness,
emotion; wailing, plaintive, moving strain
(of a tune, of a song, of an instrument)
شجوى šajawī worried, troubled, grieved,
distressed, sad
شجا and شجى šajān foreign body in the
throat which inhibits breathing; شجا
affectedness, emotion, being moved, a
touching, pathetic mood; also = شجو šajw
شجى šajīy worried, troubled, grieved,
distressed, sad; anxious, apprehensive,
fearful; gripping, heart-rending, touching,
moving (vocal part, music)
مشج mušajjin moving, touching,
gripping, pathetic
شح šaḥḥa (1st pers. perf. šaḥaḥtu) u i (šuḥḥ) to
be or become stingy, tight-fisted,
avaricious, miserly, niggardly; to stint,
economize ( على or ب with or in s.th., على
toward s.o.); to be covetous, greedy ( على
or ب for); to become short, run out,
decrease, dwindle III to stint, be
niggardly, be sparing; to withhold ( ب from
s.o. على s.th.)
شح šuḥḥ stinginess, avarice,
niggardliness; greed, covetousness;
scarcity, paucity, sparsity; ebb
شحيح šaḥīḥ pl. شحاح šiḥāḥ, اشحة ašiḥḥa,
اشحاء ašiḥḥā’2, pl. f. شحائح šaḥā’iḥ2 stingy,
tight-fisted, niggardly, miserly, avaricious
على) or ب with, على toward): 456 short,
scarce, meager, sparse; greedy, covetous (
على or) │ الأيام الشحائح (ayyām) the rainless
days, the dry season
مشاحة mušāḥḥa: .لا مشاحة في ذلك
(mušāḥḥata) that is incontestable; لا مشاحة
ان it is incontestable that ...,
indisputably ...; ولا مشاحة incontestably,
indisputably
شحب šaḥaba u a ( شحوب šuḥūb), šaḥūba
u ( شحوبة šuḥūba) and pass. šuḥiba to be or
become pale, wan, sallow, emaciated,
lean, haggard; to look ill, sickly
شحوب šuḥūb paleness, pallor, wanness,
sallowness, emaciation
شاحب šāḥib pl. شواحب šawāḥib2 pale,
wan, sallow; emaciated, lean, haggard;
dim, pale (e.g., light); dull, faded (color);
wan (smile)
□ شحت šaḥata (= شحذ ) to beg, ask for
alms
□ شحات šaḥḥāt pl. ة beggar │ □ شحات
العين š. al-‘ain sty (med.)
شحذ šaḥada a (šaḥd) to whet, sharpen,
practice, train, strengthen ( ھ s.th., also,
e.g., the intellect, one’s forces); to hone,
strop ( ھ a knife); to beg, ask for alms ( ه
s.o.)
شحاذ šaḥḥād (importunate) beggar │
شحاذ العين š. al-‘ain sty (med.)
شحاذة beggary
مشحذ mišḥad, مشحذة mišḥada whetstone,
hone
شحر II to soot, besmut, blacken with soot ( ھ
s.th.)
شحار šuḥḥār soot
مشحر mašḥar charcoal kiln, pile
مشحري mašḥarī charcoal burner
شحرور šuḥrūr pl. شحارير šaḥārīr2 thrush,
blackbird (zool.)
مشحر mušaḥḥar sooty
شحط šaḥṯa a (šaḥṯ) to be far away, distant,
remote; to strike ( ھ a match); to strand, be
stranded, run aground (ship); to ground on
a sandbank II to strand, be stranded, run
aground (ship); to ground on a sandbank;
to strand ( ھ a ship)
شحطة šaḥṭa pl. -āt stripe, braid (on a
uniform)
شحاطة šaḥḥāṭa pl. -āt (syr.) match,
lucifer
شحيطة šuḥḥaiṭa (syr.) match, lucifer
شاحط šāḥiṭ far (away), distant, remote,
outlying, out-of-the-way; stranded
شحم šaḥuma u ( شحامة šaḥāma) to be or become
fat II to grease, lubricate ( ھ s.th.)
شحم šaḥm pl. شحوم šuḥum, شحومات
šuḥūmāt fat, suet, grease; axle grease,
lubricant; tallow, sebum; lard; pulp (of
fruit)
شحمة šaḥma (n. un.) a piece of fat, etc.
(see شحمة الأذن │ ( شحم š. al-udun earlobe;
شحمة الأرض s. al-arḍ truffle; شحمة العين š.
al-‘ain eyeball
شحمي šaḥmī fatty, sebaceous, stearic
شحم šaḥim pulpy, mushy, pappy (fruit)
شحيم šaḥīm fat, fatty
O مشحمة mišḥama pl. مشاحم mašāḥim2
grease box (of a wheel)
تشحيم tašḥīm lubrication, greasing,
oiling (of a machine) │ زيوت التشحيم
lubricating oils, lubricants
تشحم tašaḥḥum fatness, obesity
مشحم mušaḥḥam fat, fatty, greasy
مشحم mušḥim pulpy, mushy, pappy
(fruit)
شحن šaḥana a (šaḥn) to fill up ( ھ ب s.th. with);
to load, freight ( ھ ب so ship with); to ship,
freight, consign ( ھ goods); to 457 load,
charge ( ب ھ s.th. with, el.); to drive away,
chase away, repel ( ه s.o.) III to hate ( ه
s.o.); to quarrel, argue, fight ( ه with s.o.)
IV to fill up ( ب ھ s.th. with); to load,
freight ( ب ھ s.th. with) VI to hate one
another; to quarrel, have a feud
شحن šaḥn loading, freighting; shipment,
freightage; cargo, lading, load, freight │
بوليسة الشحن būlīsat aš-š. sill of lading; سيارة
شحن sayyārat š. truck, lorry
شحنة šaḥna pl. šaḥanāt cargo, lading,
load, freight; charge (el.)
شحنة šiḥna police, police force
شحناء šaḥnā’2 grudge, rancor, hatred,
enmity
مشاحنة mušāḥana pl. -āt grudge, rancor,
hatred, enmity; quarrel, feud, controversy
شاحن šāḥin loaded, laden, freighted
(esp. ship) │ O شاحن المركم š. al-markam
battery charger
شاحنة šāḥina pl. -āt truck, lorry;
baggage car
مشحون mašḥūn loaded, laden, freighted
(esp. ship); charged (el.); pl. مشحونات
cargo, lading, load, freight
شحور šaḥwara to soot, besmut, blacken with
soot ( ھ s.th.)
شحور šaḥwar blackbird (zool.)
شحور šaḥwār soot, smut
شخ šakka u (šakk) to urinate, piss, make water
شخ šakk urine, piss
شخاخ šakāk urine, piss
مشخخة miškaka public lavatory
شخب šakaba u a (šakb) to flow, stream, run,
pour forth, gush forth
شخبط šakbaṭa to scribble, scrawl (in writing)
شختور šaktūr, شختورة pl. شخاتير šakātīr large,
flat-bottomed (wooden) barge; punt
شخر šakara i ( شخير šakīr) to snore; to snort; to
neigh, whinny; to bray (donkey)
شخشخ šakšaka to rattle, clatter, clank
شخشخية (eg.) šukšēka pl. شخاشخ šakāšik
rattle (toy); toy, plaything; skylight
شخص šakaṣa a ( شخوص šukūṣ) to rise, tower
up; to become high, lofty; to rise, ascend
(star); to appear ( ل to s.c.); to stare, gaze (
الى at, of the eye), be fixed ( الى on, of the
glance); to be glazed (eyes of a dying
person); to start out, leave, depart ( الى to
see s.o., for a place), travel, journey ( الى to
s.o., to a place); to pass ( من الى from one
state or condition into another) │ شخص
بصره (baṣarahū) or شخص ببصره to fix
one’s eyes, one’s glance ( الى on), look
fixedly ( الى at s.o.), stare, gaze ( الى at) II to
represent as a person or individual,
personify ( ھ s.th.); to specify ( ھ s.th.),
identify ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to act, play ( ھ a
part, of the actor); to perform (actor) │
شخص مرضا (maraḍan) to diagnose a
disease IV to send off, send out, dispatch (
ه s.o.) V to appear, be revealed, show o.s. (
ل to s.o.)
شخص šakṣ pl. اشخاص aškāṣ, شخوص
šukūṣ individual, person; figure; character
(of a play); someone, somebody
شخصي šakṣī personal, private, of one’s
own; شخصيا šakṣīyan personally │ قانون
نظام) الأحوال الشخصية ) personal statute
شخصية šakšīya pl. -āt individuality,
personality (also = personage); distinctive
way of life, peculiarity, distinctive
character, personal stamp; identity │
شخصية اعتبارية (i‘tibārīya) legal person
(jur.); تحقيق الشخصية identification of a
person; شھادة تحقيق الشخصية šahādat t. aš-š.
identity card; قلم تحقيق الشخصية qalam t. ašš.
bureau of identification 458
شخصاتي šakṣātī (comic) actor,
comedian
تشخيص taškīṣ personification; exact
designation, specification; identification;
diagnosis; acting, performance (on stage),
play(ing) (of an actor)
تشخيصي diagnostic │ طبيب تشخيصي
diagnostician
شاخص šākiṣ fixed, glazed (glance);
pole, stake (eg.)
مشخص mušakkiṣ actor, player;
representative
مشخصة mušakkaṣa pl. -āt actress,
player; personality
مشخصات mušakkiṣāt qualities or factors
lending s.th. its distinctive character,
peculiarities, characteristics
شخط šakaṭa (eg.) to shout, bark, bellow ( في at
s.o.)
شخلل šaklala (eg.) to jingle, tinkle; to clatter,
rattle ( ب with); to coquet, flirt
شخليلة šaklīla (eg.) jingle, jangle,
tinkling
شد šadda i ( شدة šidda) to be or become
firm, fast, solid, hard, strong, vigorous,
rosust, vehement, violent, intense; --
šadda u i (šadd) to make firm, hard,
strong, solidify, harden, srace ( ھ s.th.),
strengthen, fortify ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.); to
tighten, pull taut, draw tight ( ھ s.th., e.g.,
the sow); to fasten, tie, sind ( الى or على ھ
s.th. on, to), lash ( على ھ s.th. on); to saddle
على) an animal); to put emphasis ( على كلمة
‘alā kalimatin on word), emphasize, stress
على كلمة) a word); to pull, drag ( ه من s.o. sy
the coat); to charge, launch an attack ( على
against, on), assault, attack ( على s.o., s.th.);
to press ( على s.th. or upon s.th.), exert
pressure ( على on); to insist ( في on s.th.) │
شد ما šadda-mā and لشد ما (la-šadda) (with
foll. vers) how much ...! very often ...;
very much, exceedingly, vehemently,
violently; لشد ما كان سرورنا اذ tremendous
was our joy when …; شد ازره (azrahū) or
شد من ازره to help, support, encourage,
sack up s.o.; شد ازره (azruhū) to be
energetic, vigorous, courageous; شد الزمام
to tighten the reins, master the situation;
شد من عزائمه to strengthen s.o.’s
determination; شدعضده (‘aḍudahū) to
strengthen, support, solster, assist s.o.; شد
على راحلته (be saddled his female riding
camel =) he started out on the journey; شد
على راحلته to start out, depart, leave ( الى
for); شد وثاقه (watāqahū) to shackle, fetter
s.o.; شد يده على (yadahū) to adhere, cling to
s.th.; شد على يديه (yadaihi) to clasp s.o.’s
hands II to strengthen, intensify ( ھ s.th.),
make ( ھ s.th.) strong, hard, harsh, severe;
(gram.) to intensify, dousle, geminate ( ھ a
consonant); to exert pressure ( على on),
press ( على upon); to be hard, strict, stern (
على في toward s.o. in); to impress ( على ب
upon s.o. s.th.) │ شدد في طلبه (ṭalasihī) to
demand s.th. emphatically or inexorasly;
شدد من عزيمته (šuddida) he was
strengthened in his determination III to
argue, have an argument, an exchange of
words ( ه with s.o.) V to be hard, harsh,
strict, severe, stern ( على toward); to be or
become violent, vehement, intense,
strong; to show o.s. stem, harsh, hard,
inexorasle, be relentless, remain unmoved,
unrelenting VI to argue with one another
VIII to be or become hard, harsh,
rigorous, intense, forceful, severe, strong,
vehement, violent, passionate; to become
harder, harsher, more rigorous, more
intense, more forceful, severer, stronger,
more vehement, more violent, more
passionate; to intensify, increase, grow; to
become aggravated, more critical; to
become tormenting, excruciating,
distressing, unbearable على) 459 for s.o.),
take a turn for the worse (disease, على with
s.o.); to be advanced (time of the day); to
run, race, dash │ اشتد ساعده (sā‘iduhū) to
become strong, vigorous
شد šadd: شد الحبل š. al-ḥabl tug of war
شدة šadda (n. vic.) strengthening,
intensification; stress, emphasis; pulling,
dragging, tugging; tightness, tautness;
stress, strain; doubling sign over a
consonant (gram.) │ شدة ورق اللعب š.
waraq al-la‘b deck of cards
شدة šidda strength, forcefulness, power,
vehemence, violence, intensity, severity,
force, high degree, (pl. شدائد šadā’id2)
misfortune, calamity, misery, adversity,
distress, hardship, affliction, discomfort
شداد šadād pl. اشدة ašidda riding saddle
(of a camel)
شديد šadīd pl. اشداء ašiddā’ شداد , 2 šidād
strong, powerful, forceful, vigorous, stem,
severe, rigorous, hard, harsh, violent,
vehement, intense; bad, evil, ominous,
calamitous, difficult ( على for s.o.); with
foll. subst. frequently corresponding to
Engl. “very”, e.g., شديد الاعتناء very
attentive, very careful │ ارض شديدة (arḍ)
solid or firm ground; شديد البأس š. al-ba’s
courageous, stouthearted, bold, audacious,
brave, valiant; شديد الشكيمة stubborn,
obstinate, unbending, unyielding,
relentless; شديد اللھجة š. al-lahja strongly
worded, vehement in language, sharp in
tone; شديد الوطأة š. al-waṭ’a cruel
شديدة šadīda pl. شدائد šadā’id2
misfortune, calamity, misery, adversity,
distress, hardship, affliction, discomfort
اشد ašadd2 stronger, more intense,
severer, harder, worse │ used with foll.
indeterminate abstract substantives as
paraphrase of simple elatives, e.g., اشد سوادا
(sawādan) blacker, اشد غضبا (gaḍaban)
more wrathful, angrier; اشد ما يكون
extremely, exceedingly, very much, e.g.,
روحھم اشد ما يكون تعطشا الى العلم (rūḥuhum,
ta‘attušan, ‘ilm) they are extremely eager
for knowledge
اشد ašudd physical maturity, virility │
بلغ اشده to attain full maturity, come of
legal age; to reach its climax
مشد mišadd pl. -āt corset, stays
تشديد tašdīd intensification,
strengthening; (gram.) intensified
pronunciation, germination, doubling (of a
consonant); doubling sign over a
consonant; pressure ( على on)
مشادة mušādda exchange of words,
squabble, argument, quarrel, fight,
controversy, conflict
اشتداد ištidād aggravation,
intensification, increase; deterioration
مشدود mašdūd tense, tight, taut
مشدد mušaddid: ظروف مشددة aggravating
circumstances
مشدد mušaddad doubled (letter; gram.);
emphatic, intense; severe, stern
متشدد mutašaddid pl. -ūn stem zealot,
bigot, proponent of a stern viewpoint
شدح šadaka a (šadk) to break, shatter, smash,
crush ( ھ s.th.) II do.
شادر šādir pl. شوادر šawādir2 tent; storehouse,
warehouse, magazine
شادوف šādūf pl. شوادف šawādīr (eg.) shadoof,
counterpoised sweep for raising irrigation
water
شدق V to announce ( ب s.th.) in a boastful,
bragging, loud-mouthed manner, to vaunt
ب) s.th.); to chatter, prattle │ تشدق بالكلام
(kalām) to enunciate overcarefully, speak
affectedly; to be agape
شدق šidq pl. اشداق ašdāq corner of the
mouth; jawbone │ ضحك بملء (ملء) شدقيه
٤٦٠ ḍaḥika bi-mil’i (mil’a) šidqaihi to
grin from ear to ear
اشدق ašdaq2, f. شدقاء šadqā’2 having a
large mouth, largemouthed
متشدق mutaš8addiq pl. -ūn braggart,
boaster, bigmouth
شدن šadana u to be weaned, be on its own feet
(young animal)
شادن šādin pl. شوادن šawādin2 gazelle
fawn
شده šadaha a to confuse, perplex, baffle ( ه s.o.)
مشدوه mašdūh perplexed, appalled,
baffled
شدا (شدو ) šadā u (šadw) to sing; to chant ( ھ
s.th.); to acquire or have education,
become or be educated ( في in a field) │ شدا
شيئا من العربية to know a little Arabic, have
a smattering of Arabic
شدو šadw song, chant
شاد šādin pl. شادون šādūn educated,
trained (e.g., في اللغة linguistically) │ ليلة
شادية laila šādiya soirée of vocal music
شادية šādiya songstress, singer
شدياق šidyāq pl. شدايقة šadāyiqa sub deacon
(Chr.)
شذ šadda i u (šadd, شذوذ šudūd) to segregate,
separate, isolate o.s. ( عن from), be
separated, isolated ( عن from), be outside
s.th. ( عن ), elude ( عن s.th.); to be alone; to
be irregular, deviate, stand out ( على or عن
from), be an exception ( على or عن to); to
be wanting, lacking; to decrease, dwindle
شذ šadd irregularity, deviation,
anomaly, exception ( عن to)
شذوذ irregularity, deviation, anomaly,
exception ( عن to); curiosity, eccentricity,
eccentric character
شاذ šādd pl. شذاذ šudād, شواذ šawādd2
isolated, separate(d), detached, alone;
irregular, abnormal, anomalous, unusual,
extraordinary, exceptional, singular,
curious, queer, odd, peculiar, strange,
eccentric; noncanonical (version); pl. شواذ
exceptions │ شاذ الأخلاق of deviant (=
inferior) character; شاذ الطبع š. aṭ-ṯab‘, شاذ
الطبع، شاذ الأطوار eccentric, extravagant,
crazy; شذاذ الآفاق the foreigners, the
strangers
شواذات šawāddāt peculiarities,
idiosyncrasies
شذب šadaba i u (šadb) to out off, sever ( ھ
s.th.); to trim, clip, prune, lop ( ھ hedges,
trees); to adept, doctor, modify ( ھ s.th.) II
do.
شذر V to be scattered, be dispersed; to scatter,
disperse
شذرة šadra pl. šadarāt, شذور šudūr
particle, bit, tiny piece; fragment, section
تفرقوا شذر مذر tafarraqū šadara madara,
šidara midara they scattered in all
directions
شذو šadw fragrance of musk
شذا šadan flagrance, scent, aroma
شذى šadīy fragrant, aromatic
شر šarra (1st pers. perf. šarirtu) a, (1st pers.
perf. šarurtu) u (šarr, شرة širra) to be bad,
evil, wicked, vicious, malicious,
malignant
شر šarr pl. شرور šurūr evil, ill,
mischief; calamity, disaster; iniquity,
injustice; harm, damage, injury;
wickedness, viciousness, malice; vice, sin;
-- (pl. اشرار ašrār) bad, evil, wicked,
vicious, malicious; evildoer, culprit; --
šarr (as elative) worse, more evil │ ھزمھم
شر ھزيمة (šarra hazīmatin) he brought utter
defeat upon them 461
شراني šarrānī evil, vicious, malicious
شرة širra evil, ill, mischief; calamity,
disaster; iniquity, injustice; harm, damage,
injury; wickedness, viciousness, malice;
vice, sin; vivacity enthusiasm, fire of
youth
شرير šarīr pl. اشراء aširrā’2 bad, evil,
wicked, vicious, malicious
شرير širrīr very bad, very evil, very
wicked, very vicious, very malicious;
scoundrel; الشرير the Evil One (= Satan)
شرر šarar (coll.; n. un. ة) sparks
شررى šararī spark (used attributively)
شرار šarār (coll.; n. un. ة) sparks
شرارة šarāra pl. -āt spark │ شمعة الشرارة
šam‘at aš-š. spark plug; مفتاح الشرارة miftāḥ
aš-š. ignition key (automobile)
شراري šarārī spark (used attributively)
شرار šarrār sparkling, scintillating,
emitting sparks
اشرأب išra’abba to stretch one’s neck in order
to see s.th. ( ل or الى ), crane one’s neck for
ل) or الى ); to carry one’s head high (out of
vanity); to leer ( الى at)
شراب šurrāb pl. -āt stocking, sock
شراس širās glue, paste
شرب 1 šariba a (šurb, مشرب mašrab) to drink (
ھ s.th.); to sip ( ھ s.th.) │ شرب في حبه
(ḥubbihī) to drink s.o.’s health, toast s.o.;
شرب الدخان (dukāna) to smoke; شرب نخبه
(nakbahū) to drink s.o.’s health, toast s.o.
II to give ( ه ھ s.o. s.th.) to drink, make or
let drink ( ه ھ s.o. s.th.); to drench, soak,
saturate, impregnate ( ب ھ s.th. with); to
inculcate, imbue ( ه ھ s.o. with s.th.) III to
drink in s.o.’s ( ه) company, have a drink ( ه
with s.o.) IV to give ( ه ھ s.o. s.th.) to
drink, make or let drink ( ه ھ s.o. s.th.); to
drench, soak, saturate, impregnate ( ب or ھ
ھ s.th. with); to inculcate, imbue ( ھ ه s.o.
with); pass. ušriba to be or become full ( ھ
of s.th.), be filled, imbued, infused ( ھ with
s.th.), be dominated, permeated ( ھ by
s.th.) │ اشربه ما لم يشرب (yašrab) to
attribute s.th. wrongly to s.o. V to soak up,
absorb, imbibe ( ھ s.th.); to be permeated,
imbued, infused ( ھ، ب with s.th.) ; to be
full
ب) of), be filled, replete ( ب with)
شرب šurb drinking, drink; absorption
شربة šarba drink; sip, draught, swallow;
dose, potion (of a medicine); laxative,
purgative, aperient
شربة šurba drink; sip, draught, swallow;
dose, potion (of a medicine)
شراب šarāb pl. اشربة ašriba beverage,
drink; wine; fruit juice, fruit syrup, sherbet
│ شراب التفاح š. at-tuffāḥ apple juice; cider;
شراب البرتقال š. al-burtuqāl orangeade
شراب šarrāb drunkard, heavy drinker
شريب šarīb drinkable, potable
شرابة šarrāba, šurraba pl. شراريب
šarārīb2 tassel, tuft, bob │ شرابة الراعي š.
ar-rā‘ī (European) holly (Ilex
aquifolium; bot.)
شريب širrīb drunkard, heavy drinker
مشرب mašrab drink (as opposed to
food); (pl. مشارب mašārib2) drinking place,
water hole, drinking trough, drinking
fountain; restaurant, bar; inclination, taste;
movement, school (e.g., in philosophy)
مشربة mašraba pl. مشارب mašārib2
drinking place, water hole, drinking
trough, drinking fountain
مشربية mašrabīya, mušrabīya and مشربة
mašraba moucharaby, projecting oriel
window with a wooden latticework
enclosure; wooden oriel; attic room; 462
mašrabīya a kind of drinking vessel; vase,
pot for flowers
تشرب tašarrub absorption, soaking up,
imbibing
شارب šārib pl. -ūn, شرب šarb, شروب
šurūb drinking; drinker; (pl. شوارب
šawārib2) mustache, frequently dual:
شاربان
مشروب mašrūb pl. -āt drink, beverage │
مشروبات روحية (rūḥīya) alcoholic beverage,
liquors
شربة 2 šorba soup
شوربة šorba (eg.), شوربا šōraba (syr.)
soup
شراب 3 šurrāb pl. -āt stocking, sock
شربك šarbaka to (en)tangle, snarl ( ھ s.th.), to
complicate ( ھ s.th.)
شربين šarbīn a variety of larch (bot.)
شرج 1 šaraj pl. اشراج ašrāj loop, ring, eyelet;
buttonhole; anus
شرجي šarajī anal
شيرج 2 look up alphabetically
شرح šaraḥa a (šarḥ) to cut in slices, slice, cut
up ( ھ s.th.); to cut open, rip open ( ھ s.th.);
to bare, expose, make clearly visible or
discernible ( ھ s.th.), to expound ( ھ s.th.);
to explain, elucidate, illustrate, make
plain, set forth, describe, depict ( ھ s.th.);
to comment ( ھ on), interpret ( ھ s.th.), to
open, lay open ( صدره s.o. ṣadrahū s.o.’s
heart, ل to or for the acceptance of) │ شرح
خاطره (kāṭirahū) to gladden, delight s.o. II
to cut in slices, slice, cut up ( ھ s.th.); to
dissect, dismember, anatomize ( ھ a
corpse) VII to be opened (heart); to be
relaxed; to be glad, happy │ انشرح صدره
(ṣadruhū) and انشرح خاطره (kāṭiruhū) to be
or become glad, happy or delighted,
rejoice
شرح šarḥ expounding, presentation,
explanation, illustration, elucidation,
exposition, setting forth; commentation;
(pl. ( شروح šurūḥ) commentary
شرحي šarḥī explanatory, explicatory,
illustrative
شرحة šarḥa long, thin slice, rasher
شريحة šarīḥa pl. شرائح šarā’iḥ long, thin
slice (e.g., of fruit, etc.), rasher; girth,
cinch; O (microscope) slide
O مشرحة mašraḥa operating room;
operating table; autopsy room
تشريح tašrīḥ dissection; anatomy;
autopsy, post-mortem examination │ علم
التشريح ‘ilm at-t. anatomy, O تشريح المقابلة t.
al.muqābala comparative anatomy
تشريحي tašrīhī dissecting, anatomizing,
dissective, dissectional, anatomic(al)
انشراح inširāḥ relaxedness, relaxation,
joy, delight, glee, gaiety
شارح šāriḥ pl. شراح šurrāḥ explainer,
expounder, interpreter, commentator,
expositor
مشرح mušarriḥ anatomist
شرخ 1 šaraka u ( شرخ šurūk) to become a youth.
grow from childhood to maturity
شرخ šark prime of youth, spring of life
شرح 2 šaraka a (eg.) to crack, splinter, become
cracked
شرخ šark pl. شروخ šurūk (eg.) crack,
break, fissure, fracture
شرد šarada u ( شراد šarrād, شرود šurūd) to bolt
(horse), to run away, flee, take to flight,
take to one’s heels, break loose, escape; to
roam, rove, wander, stray, go astray; to be
distracted (thoughts) │ شرد ذھنه (dihnahū)
to be absent-minded شرد به الفكر (fikru) he
became lost in thought II to frighten away,
chase away, drive away ( ه s.o.); to scare ( ه
s.o.), frighten ( ه s.o.) into a panic IV to
chase away, drive 463 away ( ه s.o.) V to
roam, tramp about, lead a vagabond life
شرود šarūd pl. شرد šurūd running away;
straying; astray, deviant, aberrant, strange,
peculiar
شرود šurūd roaming, straying,
wandering │ شرود الفكر š. al-fikr absentmindedness,
distractedness
شريد šarīd fugitive, expatriated,
displaced, expelled; loafer, tramp, vagrant,
vagabond
تشريد tašrīd expulsion, banishment,
eviction; vagrancy, vagabondage │ حياة
التشريد ḥayāt at-t. the unsettled life, life of
a vagabond
تشرد tašarrud vagrancy, vagabondage
شارد šārid pl. شرد šurud, šurrad, شوارد
šawārid2 fugitive, straying, astray;
intimidated, frightened, helpless at a loss;
a fugitive, runaway, deserter; defector;
vagrant, tramp, vagabond │ شارد الفكر š.
al-fikr absent-minded, distracted; شوارد
اللغة š. al-luga irregularities of the
language, linguistic anomalies; شارد النظر
النظرات )) š. an-naẓar (an-naẓarāt) with a
blank stare; gazing into the void
شاردة šārida pl. شوارد šawarid2
peculiarity, anomaly, exception │ لا تفوته
شاردة ولا واردة (tafūtuhū) nothing escapes
him, he doesn’t miss a thing
مشرد mušarrad fugitive, refugee,
displaced person; neglected, unkempt │
مشرد البال confused, disconcerted
متشرد mutašarrid pl. -ūn homeless
person, tramp, vagrant, vagabond;
adventurer
شردق II tašardaqa to swallow the wrong way;
to choke (to death)
شرذم II tašardama to be jagged, indented
شرذمة širdima pl. شراذم šarādim شراذيم , 2
šarādīm2 small group, gang, party, troop;
little band
شرس 1 šarisa a (šaras, شراسة šarāsa) to be
vicious, malicious, mischievous, illtempered,
unsociable, quarrelsome,
petulant, peevish VI to be cross, quarrel (
مع with)
شرس šaras = شراسة
شرس šaris vicious, malicious,
mischievous, ill-tempered, unsociable,
quarrelsome, petulant, peevish; wild,
ferocious, fierce
شريس šarīs = شرس šaris
شراسة šarāsa wickedness, malice,
viciousness, meanness, baseness, villainy;
ill-temperedness, unsociableness,
querulousness, petulance, peevishness
شراس 2 širās glue, paste, see سراس، سيراس
شرسوف šursūf pl. شراسيف šarāsīf2 rib cartilage
شراسيفي šarāsīfī epigastric, pertaining to
the anterior walls of the abdomen
شرش II to take root
شرش širš شرش pl. شروش šurūš root │
شرش اللبن š. al-laban whey
شرشور šuršur pl. شراشير šarāšīr chaffinch
(zool.)
شرشير šaršīr (eg.) wild duck (zool.)
شراشير šarāšīr2 soul, self, nature (of a
person)
شرشف šaršaf pl. شراشف šarāšif bedsheet
شرط šaraṭa i u (šarṭ) to tear ( ھ s.th.); to make
incicions ( ھ in), scratch, scarify ( ھ s.th.);
to slit open, rip open ( ھ s.th.); to impose
as a condition, as an obligation ( ھ على on
s.o. s.th.), make conditional ( ھ على for s.o.
s.th.); to stipulate ( ھ s.th.) II to tear to
shreds ( ھ s.th.); to scratch, scarify ( ھ
s.th.); to make incisions ( ھ in) III to fix
mutual conditions.; to make a contract,
conclude an agreement; to bet, wager ( ه
with s.o.) V to impose severe oonditiono
or terms │ تشرط في عمله (‘amalihī) to be
meticulous in one’s 464 work, do one’s
work painstakingly VIII to impose as a
condition, as an obligation ( على ھ on s.o.
s.th.); to make conditional ( على ھ for s.o.
s.th.); to stipulate ( ھ s.th.); pass, ušturiṭa
to be prerequisite, preconditional ( ل for)
شرط šarṭ pl. شروط šurūṭ incision (in the
skin); long cut, rip, clash, slit; condition,
precondition; provision, proviso, clause;
stipulation (of a contract) │ شرطا ان
(šarṯan), على شرط، بشرط on the condition
that ..., provided that ...; من دون (بدون) شرط
unconditional; بلا شرط او قيد (au qaidin)
with no strings attached; unconditional
(obedience, surrender, etc.); شرط الخيار
proviso of the right of withdrawal (from a
contract, a commercial transaction, an
obligation, and the like, Isl. Law)
شرط šaraṭ pl. اشراط ašrāṭ sign, portent
│ اشراط الساعة the portents of the Day of
Judgment
شرطي šarṭī conditional │ جملة شرطية
(jumla) conditional clause (gram.)
شرطية šarṭīya contract, agreement
شرطة šarṭa pl. شرط šuraṭ stroke, line;
hyphen; dash
شرطة šurṭa police, policemen │ دار
الشرطة police station; تقرير الشرطة police
report
شرطي šurṭī, šuraṭī pl. -ūn policeman,
officer
شريط pl. شرائط šarā’iṭ, اشرطة ašriṭa
band, ribbon, tape; cord, string; leash,
line; thong, strap; braid, galloon, chevron,
stripe; ribbon (of an order), medal ribbon,
service ribbon; (railway) track, line; film
strip; film (also شريط سينمائي ); (magnetic)
tape │ شريط مصغر (muṣaggar) microfilm;
شريط القياس tape measure; measuring tape;
شريط ناطق pl. شرائط ناطقة sound film; sound
track; magnetic tape; شريط النار fuse; دودة
الشريط dūdat aš-š. tapeworm
شريطة šarīṭa condition │ على شريطة on
the condition that ...
مشرط mašraṭ program
مشرط mišraṭ pl. مشارط mašāriṭ2 lancet,
scalpel
تشريط tašrīṭ scarification, incision
مشارطة mušāraṭa agreement,
arrangement
اشتراط ištirāṭ pl. -āt condition,
provision, proviso; stipulation
شرطن šarṭana to consecrate, ordain ( ه s.o.,
Chr.) II to be ordained (Chr.)
شرط šarṭana = شرطونية
شرطونية šarṭūnīya ordination of a priest,
and any ordination of persons by laying
on of hands (Chr.); simony (Copt.-Chr.)
شرع šara‘a a (šar‘, شروع šurū‘) to go (
في into), enter ( في s.th.); to begin, start,
commence ( في or y with; with foil.
imperf.: to do s.th.); to point a weapon ( (ھ
at s.o. ( على ); to untie, unbind, unlace ( ھ
s.th.); to fix ( ھ bayonets, على on rifles); --
šara‘a a (šar‘) to introduce, enact (o
laws), prescribe, give ( ھ ل to s.o. laws),
make laws ( ھ ) for s.o. ( شرع مشروعا │ ( ل to
devise a plan II to draw a weapon ( ھ ) on
s.o. ( على ); to legislate, make laws IV to
draw or train a weapon ( ھ ) on s.o. (( على
اشرع عينه الى │ (‘ainaihi) to cast one’s eyes
on …, turn one’s glance toward ...; اشرع
قلمه (qalamahū) to draw one’s pen = to
prepare to write VIII to introduce, enact (
ھ laws); to prescribe, give ( ل ھ to s.o.
laws), make laws ( ھ ) for s.o. ( (ل
الشرع aš-šar‘ the Revelation, the
canonical law of Islam │ شرعا وفرعا
šar‘an wa-far‘an with full right, with
good cause, by rights; ھم في ھذا شرع واحد
they are alike in this 467
شروق šurūq rise (of the sun)
شراقي šarāqī (eg.) unirrigated land not
reached by the Nile floods
شراق šarrāq suctorial device; part of a
suction pump
□ شراقوة šarāquwa (pl. of (شرقاوي
Levantines (eg.)
مشرق mašriq pl. مشارق mašāriq2 place
of sunrise, east; place of rise; the Orient,
the East; المشرقان East and West │ مشارق
الأرض ومغاربھا m. al-arḍ wa-magāribuhā or
المشرقان والمغربان (magribān) the whole
world; في الغربين وفي المشرقين all over the
world
مشرقي mašriqī eastern, easterly,
oriental; (pl. مشارقة mašāriqa) an Oriental;
المشرقيات orientalia, oriental studies
تشريق tašrīq easternization;
development of domestic production (esp.
in local industry, with the gradual
elimination of Europe), drive for
(economic) independence │ ايام التشريق
ayyām at-t. the old name of the three days
following the day of Immolation (10th of
Zu’lhijja)
during the hadj festival
اشراق išrāq radiance; radiation,
eradiation, emanation; Illuminism
(mysticism deriving from Neoplatonism)
الاشراقيون al-išrāqīyūn the Illuminists,
adherents of Illuminism
الاستشراق al-istišrāq oriental studies
مشرق mašriq resplendent, radiant,
shining
مستشرق mustašriq having oriental
manners; (pl. -ūn) orientalist
شرقرق šaraqraq, شرقراق šarāqrāq green
woodpecker
شرك šarika a (širk, شركة širka, šarika) to share
ه في) with s.o s.th.), participate ( في ه with
s.o. in), be or become partner, participant,
associate ( في ه of s.o. in) III to share ( في or
ھ ه with s.o., s.th.), participate ( في or ھ ه
with s.o. in), be or become partner,
participant, associate ( في or ھ ه of s.o. in);
to associate o.s. ( ه with s.o.), enter into
partnership ( ه with s.o.), form a
partnership, join, combine ( في or ھ ه with
s.o. in); to sympathize ( ه with s.o.) │ شاركه
رأيه (ra’yahū) to share s.o.’s opinion IV to
make ( ه s.o.) a partner, participant,
associate ( في in), give ( ه s.o.) a share ( في
in), have ( ه s.o.) share ( في in); to tie s.th. (
ھ ) closely to s.th. ( ب), associate ( ھ ب s.th.
with s.th.) │ 􀍿 اشركه با to make s.o. the
associate or partner of God (in His
creation and rule); 􀍿 اشرك با to set up or
attribute associates to God. i.e. to be a
polytheist, an idolator VI to enter into
partnership ( مع with s.o.); to participate
together ( في in), share with one another ( في
s.th,) VIII to enter into partnership, to
cooperate ( مع with s.o.); to participate ( مع
في with s.o. in), share ( مع في with s.o.,
s.th.), collaborate, take part ( في in),
contribute ( في to); to subscribe ( في to); to
partake of the Lord’s Supper,
communicate (Copt.-Chr.)
شرك širk polytheism, idolatry │ اھل
الشرك ahl aš-š. the polytheists, the
idolators
شرك šarak pl. شرك šuruk, اشراك ašrāk,
شراك širāk net, snare, gin; trap │ نصب له
شركا to lay a trap for s.o., trap s.o.
شرك spurious, unsound, phony, false
شركة širka, šarika partnership;
communion (Chr.); (pl. -āt) association,
companionship; company, corporation
(com.); commercial enterprise (Isl. Law);
establishment, firm; شركة التأمين insurance
company; شرك تجارية (tijārīya) trading
company, firm; شركة الاذاعة broad- 468
casting corporation; شركة المساھمة š. almusāhama
joint-stock company,
corporation; شركة سھامية (sihāmīya) do.;
شركة الشركات trust (com.)
شراك širāk pl. شرك šuruk, اشرك ašruk,
اشراك ašrāk shoelace
شريك šarīk pl. شركاء šurakā’ اشراك , 2
ašrāk sharer, participant, partner,
copartner; associate, companion,
confederate, ally; co-owner, coproprietor
(Isl. Law); accomplice, accessory (in a
crime) │ O شريك موص (mūṣin) silent
partner (com.)
شريك šuraik (eg.) sesame cake
شريكة šarīk pl. شرائك šarā’ik woman
partner, woman participant, etc. (see
(شريك
تشريك tašrīk: سياية التشريك siyāsat at-t.
policy of alliances
مشاركة mušāraka partnership,
copartnership, participation ( في in);
cooperation, collaboration; communion
(Chr.); complicity, accessoriness (jur.)
اشنراك ištirāk partnership,
copartnership, coparcenary; participation,
sharing, joining, co-operation,
collaboration ( في in); interference ( في in);
subscription ( في to); jointness, community;
communion (Chr.) ; (pl. -āt) subscription
rate; participation fee │ بالاشتراك jointly, in
concurrence, together ( مع with); اشتراك
شھري (šahrī) monthly subscription;
monthly fee or contribution
اشتراكي ištirākī socialist, socialistic; (pl.
-ūn) a socialist
اشتراكية ištirākīya socialism
مشرك mušrik pl. -ūn polytheist
مشترك muštarik pl. -ūn participant;
subscriber
مشترك muštarak common, joint,
combined, concurrent, collective, co- │
الأمن المشترك (amn) collective security; بلاغ
مشترك (balāg) joint communiqué; السوق
المشترك (sūq) the Common Market; الشعور
المشترك community spirit, communality,
solidarity; الضمان المشترك (ḍamān)
collective security
شركسي šarkašī Circassian; (pl. شراكسة šarākisa)
a Circassian
شرم šarama i (šarm) to split, slit, slash ( ھ s.th.)
شرم šarm pl. شروم šurūm cleft, crack,
split, rift, slit, slot; small hay, inlet
اشرم ašram2, f. شرماء šarmā’2 having a
disfigured nose; harelipped
شرمط šarmaṭa (eg., syr.) to shred, tear to
shreds ( ھ s.th.)
شرموطة šarmūṭa pl. شراميط šārāmīṭ rag,
shred, tatter; whore, slut, prostitute
شرنقة šarnaqa pl. شرانق šarāniq2 cocoon (of the
silk worm); chrysalis (of an insect);
slough (of a snake), snakeskin; -- šarāniq2
hemp (Cannahis sativa; bot.); hemp seed
شره šariha a (šarah) to be greedy ( الى or
على for food); to eat greedily, gormandize,
gluttonize, be gluttonous
شره šarah gluttony, gourmandism,
ravenousness, voracity; greediness, greed,
covetousness, avidity
شره šarih greedy ( على for food),
gluttonous; voracious, ravenous; ravenous
eater, glutton; greedy, covetous, avid
شراھة šarāha gluttony, gourmandism,
ravenousness, voracity; greediness, greed,
covetousness, avidity
شرو šarw, širw honey
شروال širwāl pl. شراويل šarāwīl 2 trousers,
pants; drawers
شروة، شروى see شري ٤٦٩
شرى šarā i (širan, شراء širā’) to sell, vend ( ب ھ
s.th. for a certain price); to buy, purchase (
ھ s.th.); to bring upon o.s., to ask for (e.g.,
المتاعب troubles, inconveniences) -- šarā i
(širan) to expose ( ھ s.th.) to the sun for
drying II to expose ( ھ s.th.) to the sun for
drying VIII to buy, purchase ( ھ s.th.); to
buy up, acquire, obtain by commercial
transaction ( ھ s.th.); to sell, vend ( ھ s.th.)
X to become worse, worsen, deteriorate
شرى šary (coll.; n. un. ة) colocynth
شرى širan pl. اشرية ašriya purchase,
buy(ing), bargain
شرى šaran an itching skin eruption
شراء širā’ purchase buy(ing) │ راغب
الشراء eager to buy; O المقدرة على الشراء
(maqdura) or O قوة الشراء qūwat aš-š.
purchasing power
شروة šarwa purchase buy(ing)
شروى šarwā: لا يملك شروى نقير lā yamliku
š. naqīrin he hasn’t a red cent to his name,
he has absolutely nothing; لا يجدي شروى نقير
(yujdī) it is of no use at all
O الحمى الشروية al-ḥummā aš-šarawīya
nettle rash, urticaria (med.)
شريان širyān pl. شرايين šarāyīn2 artery │
تصلب الشرايين taṣallub aš-š. arteriosclerosis
شرياني širyānī arterial │ السدة الشريانية
(sudda) embolism (med.)
اشتراء ištirā’ purchase buy(ing)
شار šārin pl. شراة šurāh seller,
salesman, vendor; purchaser, buyer,
customer; -- O lightning rod (also شارى
الصواعق)؛ الشراة aš-šurāh designation of the
Khawārij
مشتر muštarin purchaser, buyer,
customer; seller, vendor
المشترى al-muštarī Jupiter (astron.)
مشترى muštaran pl. مشتريات muštarayāt,
that which is purchased, purchased
goods; purchase, buy(ing), acquisition
شزرا sażran: نظر اليه شزرا to look askance at
s.o.
عين شزراء ‘ain sazrā’2 an eye looking
askance, distrustfully or maligrantly; نظرة
شزرا (naẓra) distrustful, suspicious glance
شست (Fr. chiste) slate (min.)
شاسع šāsi' far (away), distant, remote; wide,
large, great (distance); huge, vast,
enormous (difference)
ششخان šašakān rifled (gunbarrel)
اسلحة الششخانة aṣliḥat aš-š. firearms
مششخن mušaškan rifled (gunbarrel)
ششم 1 šišm seed of the Cassia absus (bot.), used
as eye powder
ششمة 2 šašma, šišma toilet, lavatory, privy
ششنى šišnī sample, specimen; sampling
ششنجي (eg.) šišnagī assayer (of precious
metals)
شص šiṣṣ pl. شصوص šuṣūṣ fishhook
شصر šaṣara a kind of gazelle
شط šaṭa i u ( شطط šaṭaṭ) to go to extremes, go
too far, exceed the proper hounds, be
excessive ( في in, with); to deviate ( عن
from), digress, stray ( عن الموضوع from the
topic) VIII to go to extremes, go too far,
exceed the proper bounds, be excessive (
في in, with)
شط šaṭṭ pl. شطوط šuṭūṭ bank, shore,
coast, seashore, beach, strand │ شط العرب
š. al-‘arab Shatt-al-Arab, river in SE Iraq
formed by the Tigris and Euphrates rivers;
the region traversed by this river on the
Persian Gulf
شطة šaṭṭa a variety of pepper
(Capsicum conicum Mey.; bot.) 470
شطط šaṭaṭ that which is excessive or
exceeds the proper bounds, excess; inroad,
encroachment, infringement
شطيطة šaṭīṭa a variety of pepper
(Capsicum conicum Mey.; bot.)
مشط mušiṭṭ excessive
شاطئ šāṭi’ pl. شواطئ šawāṭi’ شطآن , 2 šaṭ’ān
shore, coast, seacoast, beach, strand
شطب šaṭab u (šaṭb) to out into slices or strips (
ھ s.th.); to strike out, cross out, scratch
out, write off ( على or ھ s.th.); to erase,
efface ( على or ھ s.th., e.g., a word, a
sentence); to cancel, release ( على or ھ a
mortgage); to drop, nonsuit ( دعوى da‘wā a
case) II to make an incision, a longitudinal
cut, a slit, a slash ( في in s.th.); to strike
out, cross out, scratch out, write off ( على
or ھ s.th.); to erase, efface ( على or ھ s.th.,
e.g., a word, a sentence); to cancel,
release, ( على or ھ a mortgage); to book,
enter, post ( ھ an item, an account); to
finish off, terminate, wind up ( على s.th.)
شطب šaṭb cut, slash; incision, scratch;
crossing out, striking out, writing off;
erasure, effacement; annulment,
cancellation
شطب šaṭb pl. شطوب šuṭūb tall,
strapping, sturdy, husky
تشطيب tašṭīb: تشطيب الحساب posting of an
account (to the ledger); ساعة التشطيب
curfew
شطح šaṭaḥa (šaṭḥ) to roam, rove, stray
شطحة šaṭḥa pl. شطحات šaṭaḥāt escapade
شطر šaṭara ū (šaṭr) to halve, divide into two
(equal) parts, bisect, cut through ( ھ s.th.);
to out off, sever ( ھ s.th.); -- شطر بصره
(baṣaruhū) u ( شطور šuṭūr) to be squinteyed;
-- šaṭara u ( شطور šuṭūr, شطورة
šuṭūra, شطارة šaṭāra) to withdraw,
separate, disassociate o.s. ( عن from); - -
šaṭara u, šaṭura u ( شطارة šaṭāra) to be sly,
cunning, artful, shrewd; to be clever,
smart, bright, skillful, adroit II to halve,
divide into two (equal) parts, to bisect, out
through ( ھ s.th.) III to halve, share by
halves, share equally ( ه with s.o., s.th.),
go halves ( ه with s.o.); to participate, take
part ( ھ in s.th.), share ( ھ s.th.) │ شاطره
آراءه، فرحه (ārā’ahū, faraḥahū) to share
s.o.’s views, s.o.’s joy V to manifest
slyness, cleverness, smartness, adroitness,
skill VII to divide, split ( ھ into, intrans.)
شطر šaṭr partition, division, separation,
halving, bisecting; -- (pl. شطور šuṭūr, اشطر
ašṭur) a half, moiety; hemistich; portion,
share, lot; direction; šaṭra in the direction
of ..., toward │ قصد شطره to move toward
s.o., walk up to s.o.; ولى انظاره شطره (wallā
anẓārahū) to direct one’s glances toward
s.o.; ولى وجھه شطره (wajhahū) to turn one’s
face toward s.th.
شطرة šiṭra side, half
شطارة šaṭāra slyness cunningness
shrewdness, adroitness, skill, cleverness,
smartness
شطيرة šaṭīra sandwich; schnitzel, steak
مشاطرة mušāṭara participation, sharing
انشطار inšiṭār fission, splitting,
cleavage, division, separation
شطر šāṭir pl. شطار šuṭṭār sly, cunning,
shrewd; scoundrel, villain; clever, smart,
bright, adroit, skillful
شطرنج šiṭranj, šaṭranj chess │ لوحة الشطرنج
lauḥat aš-š. chessboard
شطف šaṭafa u (šaṭf) to rinse (under flowing
water), clean with water, wash ( ھ s.th.)
شطف šuṭfa piece, chunk, lump; (pl,
شطف šutaf) flint (of a gunlook. eg.)
شطفة šiṭfa splinter, chip, sliver 471
شطن 1 šaṭana u (šaṭn) to fasten, attach, tie, bind
ھ ب) s.th. with a rope)
شيطان 2 and تشيطن see شيطن (alphabetically)
شظف šaẓafa u (šaẓf) to castrate
شظف šaẓaf pl. شظاف šiẓāf discomfort,
hardship, difficulty; ruggedness of life │
اقام على شظف العيش (š. il-‘aiš) to lead a life
of hardships
شظف šaẓif hard, harsh, rough, rugged,
austere (life, character)
شظي šaẓiya a (šaẓan) to be splintered, be
shattered, splinter, shiver V do.
شظية šaẓīya pl. šaẓīy, شظايا šaẓāyā
splinter, sliver, chip; shinbone; bone
شع ša‘‘a i (ša‘‘, شعاع ši‘ā’) to disperse,
scatter, diffuse, spread; to beam, radiate,
flash up IV to emit, spread, diffuse ( ھ
s.th.); to eradiate ( ھ s.th.); to emit rays or
beams, radiate, beam V to emit rays or
beams, radiate, beam, eradiate
شع šu‘‘ rays, beams; spokes
شعاع ša‘ā’ distracted, confused,
bewildered, perplexed │ ( طار فؤاده (روحه
شعاعا his mind became confused,
bewildered or perplexed
شعاع šu‘ā’ (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اشعة aši‘‘a
rays, beams; spokes; horizontal wooden
crosspieces (on a door or window) │ الأشعة
فوق البنفسجية (banafsajīya) the ultraviolet
rays; الأشعة الي تحت الأحمر the infra-red rays;
صورة اشعة X-ray photograph,
roentgenogram; O فاعلية الأشعة radioactivity
اشعاع iš‘ā’ pl. -āt radiation, eradiation
اشعاعي iš‘ā‘ī radiative, radiational │ O
ذو نشاط اشعاعي (našāṭ) radioactive
تشعع taša‘‘u‘ radiation, eradiation │
التشعع الحراري (ḥarārī) radiation of heat;
التشعع الشمسي (šamsī) solar radiation
مشع muši‘‘ radiating, radiant; emitting
rays, radiative; O radioactive
O مشعة muši‘‘a radiator
شعب ša‘aba a (ša‘b) to gather, assemble, rally
ھم) people, ھ s.th.); to disperse, scatter ( ھم
people, ھ s.th.) II to form branches, to
branch; to branch (out), ramify, divide
into branches or subdivisions ( ھ s.th.) V
to branch (out), ramify; to b. subdivided,
form subdivisions; to diverge, move in
different directions, part company,
separate, split, break up, become
disunited, disorganized, disrupted; to
branch off ( عن from); to result ( عن from)
VIII to branch out, ramify; to branch off
شعب ša‘b pl. شعوب šu‘ūb people, folk;
nation; tribe; race
شعبي ša‘bī national, people’s; popular,
folksy, folk- (in compounds) │ الجبھة الشعبية
(jabha) popular front; ديموقراطية شعبية
people’s democracy (in Marxist
terminology)
شعبية ša‘bīya popularity
شعوبي šu‘ūbī adherent of the شعوبية , see
below
الشعوبية aš-šu‘ūbīya a movement within
the early Islamic commonwealth of
nations which refused to recognize the
privileged position of the Arabs
شعب ši‘b pl. شعاب ši‘āb mountain path,
mountain trail; gorge, ravine, canyon;
gulf, abyss; reef
شعبة ši‘ba reef
شعبة šu‘ba pl. شعب šu‘ab, شعاب ši‘āb
branch, bough, limb, ramification; shoot,
twig, sprig, spray; prong, tine; (sub-)
division, section, department, branch, cell;
field of study, discipline (e.g., at a
university); part, portion; (pl. شعب šu‘ab)
bronchus │ التھاب الشعب bronchitis (med.)
472
شعبي šu‘abī bronchial
شعيب ša‘īb disrupted, disorganized,
disunited, scattered, dispersed
شعبان ša‘bān2 Shaban, name of the
eighth month of the Mohammedan year
اشعب aš‘ab2 name of a legendary miser,
hence, said of s.o. extremely niggardly:
اطمع من اشعب greedier than Aš‘ab
اشعبي aš‘abī extremely miserly,
avaricious, or greedy; (pl. -ūn) skinflint,
miter, niggard │ طمع اشعبي (ṭama‘)
insatiable greed
تشعب taša‘‘ub ramification, branching,
branching off; disruption, split(ting),
disunion
انشعاب inši‘āb ramification, branching,
branching off; disruption, split(ting),
disunion
متشعب mutaša‘‘ib ramified, branching;
manifold, diverse; many-sided, versatile (
متشعب m. al-janabāt)
شعبذ ša‘bada to practice jugglery, legerdemain,
sleight of band, or magic
شعبذة ša‘bada jugglery, legerdemain,
sleight of band, magic
شعث ša‘itqa a (ša‘at) to be or become
disheveled, unkempt, matted (hair) II to
dishevel, ruffle ( ھ the hair) V to become
disheveled, ruffled (hair); to disintegrate,
fall apart, decay (of buildings)
شعث ša‘at: لم شعثه lamma ša‘atahū to
straighten out the muddled affairs of s.o.,
help s.o. to get back on his feet; to
struggle back to one’s feet, “pick up”,
recover
شعث ša‘it matted, disheveled, unkempt
(hair); having matted, unkempt hair
شعوذ look up alphabetically
شعر ša‘ara u ( شعور šu‘ūr) to know ( ب s.th., ان
that), have knowledge, be cognizant ( ب
of); to come to know, realize, notice ( ب
s.th., ان that); to perceive, feel, sense ( ب
s.th., ان that), be conscious, be aware ( ب of
s.th.); -- (ši‘r) to make or compose poetry,
poetize, versify │ لم يشعر الا ب ... (illā bi-),
لم يشعر الا و ... (illā wa-) and ،... ما شعر الا ب
ما شعر الا و ... before be even realized it,
there was all of a sudden ... ; then, all of a
sudden, there was ..., it happened that …
IV to let ( ه s.o.) know ( ب or ھ s.th., of or
about s.th.), notify, inform ( ب or ھ ه s.o.
of or about), give notice or information ( ه
to s.o., ب or ھ of or about), impart ( ه to
s.o., ب or ھ s.th.) X to fee), sense, notice,
perceive, realize ( ب, ھ s.th.), be
conscious, be aware ( ھ of): to be filled ( ھ
with a feeling)
شعر ša‘r, ša‘ar (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. , اشعار
شعور šu‘ūr, شعار ši‘ār hair; bristles; fur,
pelt
شعرة ša‘ra (n. un.) pl. -āt a hair │ ... لا
قدر شعرة (qadra š.) not by a hair’s breadth
شعري ša‘rī, ša‘arī hairy, hirsute, hair
(adj.)
شعرية ša‘rīya pl. -āt wire grille, wire
netting, lattice work; O (without pl.)
capillarity │ شعرية الشباك š. aš-šabbāk
(latticed) window shade, jalousie
شعرية ši‘rīya vermicelli
شعراني ša‘rānī hairy, hirsute, shaggy
شعر ši‘r knowledge │ ليت شعري laita
ši‘rī I wish I knew ...! would that I
knew ...! -- (pl. اشعار aš‘ār) poetry; poem
شعري ši‘rī poetic(al)
شعرى ša‘rā pl. شعارى ša‘ārā scrub
country 473
الشعرى aš-ši‘rā Sirius, Dog Star
(astrron.)
شعار ši‘ār pl. شعر šu‘ur, اشعرة aš‘ira
password, watchword; slogan; motto,
device; mark, token, sign; signal;
distinguishing mark or feature,
characteristic, emblem, badge │ شعار
تجاري I ši‘ār (tijārī) trade mark
شعير ša‘īr (coll.) barley; (n. un. (ة
barleycorn │ شعير لؤلؤي (lu’lu’ī) pearl
barley; شعيرة الجفن š. al-jafn sty (med.)
O شعيرة ša‘īra bead (of a gun sight,
mil.; Syr.)
شعيرات دموية šu‘airāt damawīya blood
capillaries (biol.)
شعيرية ša‘īrīya vermicelli
شعور šu‘ūr knowledge, cognizance;
consciousness, awareness; perception,
discernment; perceptive faculty;
sensation; sentiment; feeling;
perceptiveness, sensitivity, sensibility;
mood │ على غير شعور منه (gairi šu‘ūrin)
without his being aware of it; غاب عن
الشعور to lose consciousness; فاقد الشعور
unconscious, insensible; الشعور بالنفس (nafs)
self-consciousness; الشعور بالذات do.; دقة
الشعور diqqat aš-š. sensitivity, sensibility;
الشعور المشترك (muštarak) community
spirit, communality, solidarity; عديم الشعور
unreeling, insensitive
شعوري šu‘ūrī conscious; emotional │ لا
شعوري unconscious, subconscious
شعارى ša‘ārā (pl.) goats
شعيرة ša‘īra pl. شعائر ša‘ā’ir2 religious
ceremony, rite, cultic practice; pl. also:
places of worship, cultic shrines
اشعر aš‘ar hairy, hirsute, long-haired,
shaggy
شعرور šu‘rūr poetaster, versifier,
rhymester
شويعر šuwai‘ir poetaster, venifier,
rhymester
شعر maš‘ar pl. مشاعر mašā‘ir2 cultic
shrine for ceremonies of the hadj; sensory
organ; pl. senses, feelings, sensations │
المشعر الحرام (ḥarām) the hadj station of
Muzdalifa east of Mecca
اشعار iš‘ār pl. -āt notification,
information ( ب of, about), notice
شاعر šā‘ir knowing (by instinctive
perception), endowed with deeper insight,
with intuition; (pl. الشعراء šu‘arā’2) poet
شاعرية šā‘irīya pl. -āt poetry; poetical
work, poetization; poetical talent; poetship
شواعر šawā‘ir attacks, diatribes,
invectives, calumnies, defamations
مشعور maš‘ūr split, cracked; mad,
crazy, idiotic
مشعراني muš‘irānī hairy, hirsute, shaggy
شعشع ša‘ša‘a to mix with water, dilute ( ھ a
beverage); to shine, beam, radiate, glitter
شعشع muša‘ša‘ half drunk, tipsy,
fuddled
شعط ša‘aṭa a to scorch, sear, singe
شعفة ša‘f􀀀a pl. شعاف ši‘āf summit, top,
peak
شعل ša‘ala a (ša‘l), II and IV to light,
kindle, ignite, inflame, set on fire ( ھ s.th.),
set fire ( ھ to s.th.); to set ablaze, fan ( ھ
s.th.) VIII to catch fire, start burning,
ignite, bum, flame, blaze, flare up, break
out (fire) │ اشتعل غضبا (gaḍaban) to be
flaming with rage; اشتعل رأسه شيبا (šaiban)
his hair was, or turned, white
شعلة šu‘la pl. شعل šu‘al fire, blaze,
flame; torch
مشعل maš‘al, مشعلة maš‘ala pl. مشاعل
mašā‘il2 torch
مشعال miš‘āl torch 474
مشاعلي mašā‘ilī pl. مشاعلية mašā‘ilīya
torch bearer; hangman, executioner
اشعال iš‘āl lighting, kindling, ignition,
setting on fire, fanning
اشتعال išti‘āl ignition, inflammation,
combustion, burning
مشتعل mušta‘il burning, ablaze, on fire
شعنينة ša‘nīna pl. شعانين ša‘ānīn2 palm branch │
احد (عيد) الشعانين aḥad (‘īd) al-š. Palm
Sunday (Chr.)
شعواء ša‘wā’2 (used attributively with غارة
gāra, حرب ḥarb, حملة ḥamla, and the like)
large-scale, devastating everything (over a
wide area)
شعوذ šawada to practice jugglery, legerdemain,
sleight of band, or magic arts
شعوذة ša‘wada pl. -āt jugglery,
legerdemain, sleight of hand; magic,
magic arts; humbug, swindle, tricks
مشعوذ muša‘wid juggler, conjurer,
magician, practitioner of legerdemain;
swindler, trickster (f. (مشعوذة
شغب šagaba, šagiba a (šagb, šagab) to disturb
the peace, make trouble, stir up riots,
cause an uproar, riot; to provoke discord,
dissension, or controversy (among ، ب، على
ه) III to make trouble, disturb the peace; to
rebel ( على against), mutiny
شغب šagab, šagb unrest, trouble,
disturbance, discord, dissension; riot,
commotion, uproar, strife, tumult; brawl,
fight, broil, fracas; row, wrangle,
contention, quarrel, controversy
شغب šaggāb troublemaker, agitator,
subverter
شغوب šagūb causing much noise and
unrest, riotous, turbulent, troublous
مشاغب mašāgib2 troubles, disorders,
disturbances
مشاغبة mušāgaba pl. -āt disorder,
disturbance, trouble, riot, uproar; rebellion
على) against); discord, dissension, row,
wrangle, quarrel, controversy
مشاغب mašāgib pl. -ūn troublemaker,
agitator, subverter, rioter, mischief-maker
شغر šagara II ( شغور šugūr) to be devoid of
fortifications, be unprotected (country); to
be free, vacant, unoccupied, open (seat,
position)
شغور šugūr vacancy (of a position)
شاغر šāgir empty and unprotected (of a
country); free, vacant, unoccupied, open
(seat, position); شواغر šawāgir2 vacancies
شغف šagafa a (šagf) (to hit, or affect, the
pericardium, i.e.) to infatuate, enamor, fill
with ardent passion ( ه s.o.); pass. شغف به
حبا ) ) šugifa bihī (ḥubban) to love s.o. or
s.th. passionately, be madly in love with
s.o., be infatuated with or enamored of
s.o., be extremely fond of s.th. VII انشغف به
= šugifa bihī
شغف šagaf pericardium; passionate
love, passion, sensual desire; infatuation,
enamoredness, amorousness; ardent zeal,
craze, love, passion
شغف šagif madly in love, infatuated ( ب
with), enamored ( ب of), fascinated ( ب by)
شغاف šigāf pericardium
شغوف šagūf obsessed with fervent
affection ( ب for); madly in love, infatuated
ب) with), enamored ( ب of)
مشغوف mašgūf passionately fond ( ب of),
madly in love, infatuated ( ب with),
enamored ( ب of), fascinated ( ب by)
شغل šagala a (šagl, šugl) to occupy, busy ( ه ب
s.o. with); to preoccupy ( ه s.o.), keep ( ه
s.o.) busy, give ( ه s.o.) trouble; 475 to
distract, divert, alienate ( ه عن s.o. from
s.th.).; to occupy, fill, hold, have ( ھ office,
seat, position); to take up, fill ( ھ s.th.),
engage, engross ( ھ the attention); to
engage, tie down ( ھ forces of the
opponent); -- pass. šugila to occupy o.s.,
busy o.s. be busy ( ب with), be engaged in;
to be taken up, occupied ( ب by, e.g.,
ground by buildings); شغل به عن to be
distracted by s.th. from │ شغل نفسه ب to
occupy o.s., busy o.s. with, work at, attend
to; شغل البال to disquiet, discomfit, make
uneasy, trouble, disturb; شغل الوقت ل (waqt)
to devote tim, to II to busy, occupy ( ه s.o.),
engage, engross ( ھ s.th.); to employ ( ه
s.o.), provide employment ( ه for s.o.); to
put ( ه s.o.) to work, make ( ھ a machine)
work, put in operation, make run, start ( ھ
a machine); to make, produce,
manufacture, fabricate ( ھ s.th.); to invest (
ھ money) III to hold in play, keep
occupied, divert ( ه s.o.); to distract ( ه s.o.)
IV to occupy, busy, employ ( ه s.o.); to
occupy, hold, fill, have ( an office, a
position); to fill, take up ( ه s.th.), engage,
engross ( ھ the attention); to cover ( ب ھ a
space with a building or buildings),
occupy, take up, fill ( ب ھ a space with); to
take, take up, require ( ھ time); to engage,
tie down ( ھ forces of the opponent); to
distract, divert, alienate, entice away ( ه عن
from) │ اشغل البال to disquiet, discomfit,
make uneasy, trouble, disturb, preoccupy
VI to occupy o.s., busy o.s. be occupied or
busy, be preoccupied ( ب with), be
engaged ( ب in), attend, devote o.s. ( ب to
s.th.); to pretend to be busy VII to occupy
o.s., busy o.s. be occupied or busy, be
preoccupied ( ب with); to be concerned ( ب
about) VIII to busy o.s. occupy o.s. be
occupied or busy ( ب or في with), be
engaged ( ب or في in), attend, devote o.s. (
في or في to s.th.); to work; to study (Jo
under or with); to work, run, operate, be in
operation, be in motion (machine, and the
like) │ اشتغل قلبه (qalbuhū) to be uneasy,
apprehensive, worried; اشتغل به عن to be
distracted by s.th. from
شغل šugl occupancy, filling, taking up;
detention, prevention, distraction ( عن
from); -- (pl. اشتغال ištigāl, شغول šugūl)
occupation, activity; work, job; business,
concern │ شاغل شغل that which ie
uppermost in one’s mind, chief or
foremost concern; s.th. which preoccupies
s.o.’s mind or distracts s.o. ( عن from);
اشغال شاقة (šāqqa) hard labor; اشغال عامة
(‘āmma) or اشغال عمومية (‘umūmīya) public
works; شغل يدوي (yadawī) handwork;
manual labor; شغل يد š. yad (colloq., used
appositionally) handmade; في شغل
preoccupied ( من with), concerned ( من
about); في شغل ب busy, occupied with; كان
في شغل عن to be too busy or preoccupied (
ب with) to be able to attend to s.th.; الزم
شغلك ilzam šuglaka mind your own
business!
شغال šaggāl very busy; hard-working,
industrious, diligent, laborious, active;
being in operation, running (of a
machine); (pl. -ūn) worker, workman,
laborer
شغيل šaggīl pl. ة (syr.) worker,
workman, laborer, (lowly) employee
شاغول šāgūl mainsheet (of a sailing
vessel)
مشغل mašgal pl. مشا ā غل mašāgil2
workshop; workhouse
شغلة pl. مشاغل mašāgil2 occupation,
avocation, activity, business, concern,
work, job; effort, exertion; diversion,
distraction, preoccupation, disturbance
تشغيل tašgīl employment, occupation;
providing of employment, provision of
work; hiring (of s.o., as a worker);
opening, starting, putting into operation;
476 production, manufacture, making;
investment (of money)
انشغال inšigāl (state of) being busy or
occupied; occupation, activity;
overcharge, overwork; apprehension,
concern, anxiety
اشتغال ištigāl (state of) being busy or
occupied; work, occupation ( ب or في with,
at); syntactical regimen, government (of a
word by another; gram.)
شاغل šāgil pl. شواغل šawāgil that which
preoccupies s.o., engrosses s.o.’s
attention, takes up s.o.’s time; occupation,
activity; object of concern or worry; pl.
شواغل distractions, preoccupations │ وجد
شاغلا عنه في be found distraction from it in
ھو في الف شاغل عن ;… (alfi šāgilin) he had a
thousand other things to think of than ...;
كان اكبر شاغل له (akbara šāgilin) it was his
greatest worry
مشغول mašgūl busy, occupied ( ب with);
distracted, diverted ( عن from); occupied,
taken (seat, space); busy, occupied
(telephone line, and the like); worked on,
processed │ مشغول البال anxious,
apprehensive, concerned, worried;
المشغولات الذھبية والفضية (dahabīya, fiḍḍīya)
gold and silver work
مشغولية mašgūlīya anxiety,
apprehension, concern
مشغل mušaggal employee, worker
مشتغل muštagil busy, occupied ( ب or في
with); in operation, running (of a
machine)
شفة šafa pl. شفاه šifāh, شفوات šafawāt lip;
rim, edge │ الشفة العليا (‘ulyā) upper lip,
الشفة السفلى (suflā) lower lip; شفة الأرنب š.
a1-arnab harelip; بنت شفة bint š. word
شفاھي، شفاھا، شفھى and مشافھة see شفه
شفوي see شفو
شفائف 1 šafā’if شفايف , 2 šafāyif2 lips
شف 2 šaffa i ( شفوف šufūf, شفيف šafīf, شفف
šafaf) to be thin, flimsy; to be transparent,
diaphanous, translucid, pellucid; to let ( عن
s.th.) shimmer through, reveal, disclose,
betray ( عن s.th.) VIII to drink up, drain,
empty ( ھ s.th.); to eat up, devour ( ھ s.th.)
X to look ( ھ through s.th., e.g.. through a
piece of fabric in order to ascertain its
quality); to have a glimpse ( ھ of s.th.),
hope ( ھ for s.th.); to try to see ( ھ through
s.th.), seek to penetrate ( ھ s.th.); to
perceive, discern, make out ( ھ s.th.); to
shimmer ( من through s.th.), show ( من
through s.th.); to manifest itself, become
tangible, perceptible, noticeable
شف šaff, šiff pl. شفوف šufūf diaphanous
fabric, gauze
شفف šafaf transparency, translucence,
diaphaneity
شفيف šafīf thin, flimsy, translucent,
transparent, diaphanous
شفوف šufūf transparancy, translucence,
diaphaneity
شفافة šufāfa the rest in the glass
شفاف šaffāf thin, flimsy, translucent,
transparent, diaphanous
شفافية šaffāfīya transparency,
translucence, diaphaneity
شفت šift pl. شفوت šufūt (eg.) pincers, tweezers
شفتر šaftara to pout, sulk
شفتورة šaftūra thick lip
شفتشي see جفتجي
شفتلك see جفتلك
شفر 1 šafr pl. اشفار ašfār palpebral margin from
which the eyelashes grow, (outer) edge of
the eyelid; edge, rim, border, fringe
شفر šufr pl. اشفار ašfār palpebral margin
from which the eyelashes grow, 477
(outer) edge of the eyelid; edge, rim,
border. fringe; -- labium (anat.)
شفرة šafra pl. šafarāt, شفار šifār large
knife; blade (of a sword, of a knife); razor
blade; (pl. شفار ) brink, edge, verge │ على
شفرة الھاوية on the brink of the abyas
شفير šafīr palpebral margin from which
the eyelashes grow; (outer) edge of the
eyelids; edge, rim, border, fringe
مشفر mišfar pl. مشافر mašāfir2 flew,
chap; trunk, snout, proboscis
شفر 2 (Fr. chiffre) cipher, code
شفري šifrī ciphered, coded, in code
شفرة šifra cipher, code
شفشف šafšafa to dry, dry out, parch, drain ( ھ
s.th.)
شفط la/ala to suck, suck up, absorb; to empty,
drain; to sip
شفاطة šaffāṭa pl. -āt siphon │ O شفاطة
الغبار š. al-gubār vacuum cleaner
شفع šafa‘a a (šaf‘) to double ( ھ s.th.); to
attach, add, subjoin ( ھ ب to s.th. s.th.),
enclose ( ھ ب in s.th. s.th.); to give the
(right of) pre-emption ( ه ب to s.o. on s.th.),
grant ( ه s.o.) the lint refusal ( ب of s.th.); --
شفاعة) šafā‘a) to mediate, use one’s good
offices, put in a good word, intercede,
intervene, plead ( ل or في for or on behalf
of s.o., الى with s.o. else) V to mediate, use
one’s good offices, put in a good word,
intercede, intervene, plead ( ل الى or في for
or on behalf of s.o. with s.o. else)
شفع šaf‘ pl. اشفاع ašfā‘, شفاع šifā‘ either
part of a pair; even number
شفع šaf‘ diplopia, double vision of a
single object
شفعي šaf‘ī even (of a number)
شفعة šuf‘a (right of) pre-emption
شفيع šafī‘ pl. شفعاء šufa‘ā’2 mediator,
intercessor, advocate; patron saint (Chr.);
holder of the right of pre-emption,
preemptor
شفاعة šafā‘a mediation, intercession,
advocacy
شافع šāfi‘ mediator, intercessor,
advocate; holder of the right of preemption,
pre-emptor
الشافععي aš-šāfi‘ī founder of one of the
four orthodox Islamic schools of theology;
شافعي Shafiitic; (pl. -ūn, شوافع šawāfi‘)
adherent of the Shafiitic school, Shafiite
مشفوع mašfū‘ accompanied ( ب by),
attended, combined ( ب with)
شفق IV to pity, commiserate ( على s.o.), feel
pity ( على for), sympathize ( على with); to be
concerned ( ان that, على about) worry ( ان
that, على about), fear ( ان that, على for, من
s.o., s.th.), be apprehensive, feel anxiety (
على about, من as a result of); to shun, shirk
من) s.th.), beware ( من of), be on one’s
guard ( من against)
شفق šafaq evening glow, twilight, dusk
│ الشفق الجنوبي (janūbī) aurora australis;
الشفق الشمالي (šamālī) aurora borealis; الشفق
القطبي (quṭbī) polar light; شفق الآلھة Twilight
of the Gods
شفقة šafaqa compassion,
commiseration, pity, sympathy,
kind(li)ness, tenderness, affectionateness,
solicitude, loving care │ عديم الشفقة pitiless,
merciless
شفوق šafūq compassionate,
sympathetic, affectionate, tender,
solicitous, kind(ly)
شفيق šafīq compassionate, sympathetic,
affectionate, tender, solicitous, kind(ly)
اشفاق išfāq compassion, pity, sympathy;
tenderness, affectionateness; care,
solicitude; concern, worry, anxiety,
apprehension 478
شافن šāfin proud
شفه III to speak (mouth to mouth) ( ه to s.o.)
شفه pl. شفاه، شفوات see شف 2
شفھي šafahī lip-, labio- (in compounds),
labial; oral; الشفھي orals (= oral
examination); شفھيا šafahīyan orally │
الحروف الشفھية the labials b, f, m, w (phon.)
شفاھا šifāhan orally
شفاھي šifāhī oral; الشفاھي the orals (=
oral examination); شفاھيا šifāhīyan orally
مشافھة mušāfahatan orally
شفو IV to be very close ( على to s.th.), be on the
verge, on the brink of s.th. ( اشفى به │ ( على
على حافة اليأس (ḥāffat al-ya’s) he brought
him to the brink of despair
شفا šafan pl. شفاء ašfā’ edge, rim,
border, brink, verge
شفوي šafawī lip-, labio- (in
compounds), labial; oral; شفويا šafawīyan
orally │ الحروف الشفوية the labials b, f, m, w
(phon.)
مشف mušfin moribund, doomed to death
شفى šafā i ( شفاء šifā’) to cure ( ه من s.o. of a
disease), heal ( ه من s.o. of a disease, ھ a
wound), make ( ه s.o.) well, restore ( ه s.o.)
to health; -- pass. šufya to be healed, be
cured, be restored to health, recover,
convalesce, recuperate; to heal, heal up
(wound) │ شفي غلته (غليله ) (gullatahū) to
quench one’s thirst, gratify one’s desire,
satisfy one’s thirst for revenge; شفي غيظه
من (gaiẓahū) to vent one’s anger on s.o.,
take it out on s.o. V and VIII to be cured,
be healed, be restored to health ( ب by); to
take revenge, avenge o.s., satisfy one’s
thirst for revenge, vent one’s anger, take it
out ( من on) X to seek a cure
شفاء šifā’ cure, healing, restoration,
recovery, recuperation, convalescence;
satisfaction, gratification; (pl. اشفية ašfiyah,
اشاف ašāfin) remedy, medicament,
medication, medicine │ قابل للشفاء curable
شفائي `sifā’ī healing, curative,
medicative
مشفى mašfan pl. مشاف mašāfīn2 hospital
تشف tašaffin gratification of one’s thirst
for revenge, satisfaction
استشفاء istišfā’ seeking of a cure; cure,
(course of) treatment
شاف šāfin healing, curative, medicative,
salutary; satisfactory, clear, unquivocal (of
an answer)
مستشفى mustašfā pl. مستشفيات
mustaštayāt hospital; field hospital;
sanitorium │ مستشفى المجاذيب insane
asylum, mental hospital
شق šaqqa u (šaqq) to split, cleave, part, tear,
rend, rip ( ھ s.th.); to break ( ھ s.th.); to
plow, till, break up ( ھ the ground); ھ to
furrow, traverse, cross ( ھ s.th.); to pass
go, travel ( ھ through a region); to break
(dawn); -- ( شقوق šuqūq) to break forth,
shoot up, sprout (plant), break through,
erupt (tooth); -- (šaqq, مشقة mašaqqa) to
be heavy, oppressive, burden some
unbearable ( على for s.o.); to grieve, trouble
على) s.o.); to molest, harass inconvenience
على) s.o.), be troublesome, cumbersome (
على for s.o.); to visit ( على s.o.). call ( على
upon s.o.) │ شقت جيبه (jaibahā) to tear the
front of the garment as a sign of mourning
(woman); شق سبيلا to cut, or open, a way
for o.s.; شق السكون to break the silence; شق
شارعا (طريقا ) to build a street (a road); شق
طريقه to force one’s way, plow ahead; شق
طريقا جديدا to open up, or enter upon, a new
path 479
(fig.); شق العصا (‘aṣā) to part from the
community, break with the community;
شق عصا الطاعة (‘aṣā ṭ-ṭā‘a) to rebel, revolt,
renounce allegiance; شق عصا القوم (‘aṣā lqaum)
to sow discord among people; ما شق
غبارھم (gubārahum) he did not reach their
mark; لا يشق غباره (yušaqqu gubaruhū) he
is unsurpassable, he is incomparable, there
is no one like him II to split ( ھ s.th.); to
tear open, rip open, slit open ( ھ s.th.) V to
be split, be cleft; to split, crack, bunt; to be
cracked VII to be split, be cleft; to split,
crack, burst; to split off, separate,
segregate, secede, break away, withdraw (
عن from), break ( عن with), renounce ( عن
s.th.); to become a schismatic (Chr.); to
break (dawn) │ انشقت عصاھم (‘aṣāhum)
they fell out (with one another); انشقت
مرارته (marāratuhū) he exploded (with
anger), he blew his top VIII to derive ( ھ
من word from)
شق šaqq pl. شقوق šuqūq fissure, crack,
chink, crevice, rift, cleft, crevasse, chasm,
split, rent, tear, rip, gap, slit, slot; half,
moiety; -- fission, splitting, cracking,
cleavage │ شق الذرة š. ad-darra atomic
fission
شق šiqq half, side, part, portion;
trouble, difficulty, hardship │ شق المعارضة
š. al-mu‘āraḍa opposition party; لا ... الا
بشق الأنفس (illā bi-šiqqi l-anfus), بشق النفس
only with great effort, with great
difficulty, barely
شقة šaqqa rift, tear, rip, fissure, crack,
split, crevice
شقة šiqqa pl. شقق šiqaq, شقاق šiqāq a
half, moiety; piece; splinter; trouble, toil,
labor, difficulty, hardship; difficult
journey; destination of a journey; distance
شقة šiqqa, šaqqa pl. شقق šiqaq
apartment, flat, split-level apartment;
compertmeut (in a train)
شقة šuqqa pl. شقق šuqaq trouble, toil,
labor, difficulty, hardship; difficult
journey; destination of a journey; distance
│ بعد الشقة bu‘d aš-šuqqa (and aš-šiqqa)
large or wide distance; بعيد الشقة b. aš-šiqqa
(and aš-šiqqa) far away, distant, remote
شقيق šaqīq a half, moiety; (pl. اشقة
ašiqqa, اشقاء ašiqqā’) full brother, brother
on the paternal and maternal side;
(attributively) brother-, sister-; -- anemone
│ القطر الشقيق (quṭr) the brother country;
الدول الشقيقة (duwal) the sister states (esp.
with reference to Arab countries)
شقيقة šaqīqa pl. -āt, شقائق šaqā’iq2 full
sister, sister on the paternal and maternal
side; hemicrania, migraine │ شقائق النعمان
š. an-nu‘mān red anemones (bot.)
اشق ašaqq2 more troublesome, more
tiresome, more difficult, harder
مشقة mašaqqa pl. -āt, مشاق mašāqq2
trouble, toil, labor, difficulty, hardship
شقاق šiqāq disunity, dissension, discord
انشقاق inšiqāq separation, segregation,
dissociation, spilt; schism (Chr.);
dissension, discord, disunion
اشتقاق ištiqāiq derivation, etymology (of
a word)
شاق šāqq troublesome, tiresome,
wearisome, cumbersome, tiresome,
tedious, fatiguing, arduous, onerous,
difficult, hard │ اشغال شاقة hard labor
مشاق mušāqq schismatic (Chr.)
مشتق muštaqq pl. -āt derivative (gram.)
شقح IV to send far away, remove to a distant
place ( ه s.o.)
شقذف šuqduf pl. شقاذف šaqādif2 a kind of sedan
480
شقر šaqira a (šaqar) and šaqura u ( شقرة
šuqra) to be of fair complexion, be light
skinned; to be blond, fair-haired
شقر šaqar fair-complexionedness;
blondness
شقرة šuqra fair-complexionedness;
blondness; redness
اشقر ašqar2, f. شقراء šaqrā’2, pl. شقر šuqr
fair-complexioned, light skinned; blond,
fair-haired; reddish
شقرق saqraqa to be gay, cheerful, be
exhilarated, amuse o.s.
شقشق šaqšaqa to twitter, peep, chirp; to babble
ب) s.th.); to peep, break (dawn) │ شقشق
بالحديث عن to chat, chatter about s.th.
شقشقة šaqšaqa pl. -āt twitter(ing),
peopling), chirp(ing); (silly) prattle; pl.
شقاشق šaqāšiq2 rigmarole, rambling talk │
شقشقة اللسان (silly) prattle; شقشقة النھار s. annahār
daybreak, peep of dawn
شقشقة šiqšiqa pl. شقاشق šaqāšiq2 faucal
bag of the camel
شقف šaqaf (coll.; n. un. ة) (pot)sherds
شقافة šuqāfa (pot)sherds
شاقل 1 šāqil shekel
شاقول 2 šāqūl plumbline, plummet
شقلب šaqlaba to turn things upside down, upset
things II tašaqlaba to be upset, be toppled;
to turn a somersault
شقلبة šaqlaba pl. -āt somersault
شقو) and شقي) شقا šaqā u ( شقو šaqw) to
make ( ه s.o.) unhappy, miserable,
wretched, distress ( ه s.o.); -- شقي šaqiya a (
شقاء šaqā’, شقاوة saqāwa, شقوة šaqwa) to be
unhappy, miserable, wretched, distressed;
to have trouble ( ب with, in s.th.) IV to
make ( ه s.o.) unhappy, miserable,
wretched, distress ( ه s.o.)
شقاء šaqā’ and شقا saqan misfortune,
distress, misery, wretchedness, pain,
suffering; hardship, trouble, toil, drudgery
شقي šaqīy pl. اشقياء ašqiyā’2 unhappy,
unlucky, miserable, wretched, distressed;
damned; wretch, villain, culprit, criminal,
scoundrel, rogue; nasty, naughty,
mischievous
شقوة šaqwa misfortune, distress, misery
شقاوة saqāwa misfortune, distress,
misery; mischief, nastiness, naughtiness
شك 1 šakka u (šakk) to pierce, transfix ( ه s.o. ب
with); to impale, spit ( ھ ب s.th. on); to
prick, stab ( ھ s.th.); to doubt ( ب or في s.o.,
s.th.); to distrust, suspect, question ( ب or
في s.o., s.th.), entertain doubts, have
misgivings ( ب or في about s.o., about
s.th.); to be skeptical II to make ( ه s.o.)
doubt ( في s.th.), fill ( ه s.o.) with doubt,
misgivings, skepticism, suspicion ( في
about) V to doubt ( ب or في s.o., s.th.), have
doubts ( ب or في about); to be skeptical,
have misgivings
شك šakk pl. شكوك šukūk doubt,
uncertainty, suspicion, misgiving │ بلا شك
(bi-lā), لا شك (šakka), ولا شك wa-lā šakka,
من دون شك min dūni šakk without doubt,
doubtless, undoubtedly, indubitably,
certainly, positively; لا سبيل الى الشك فيه
(sabīla) doubtless, indubitable, beyond
any doubt; لا يتطرق اليه الشك (yataṭarraqu,
šakku) do.
شكة šakka stab, tšhrust, jab (with the
point of a weapon)
تشكك tašakkuk doubt; skepticism
شاك šākk doubting, in doubt, skeptical
│ شاك السلاح or شاك في السلاح armed to the
teeth, bristling with arms
مشكوك فيه maškūk fīhi doubtful, dubious,
uncertain; مشكوك في امره (amrihī)
suspect(ed) 481
شكك 2 šakkaka (eg.) to sell on credit; to buy on
credit; to borrow
شكك šukuk (eg.) on credit
شك 3 (Fr. chèque) pl. شكات check
شكر 1 šakara u (šukr, شكران šukrān) to thank ( ل
or ه s.o., على or ل or ه for s.th.), be
thankful, grateful ( ل or ه to s.o., على or ل or
ه for s.th.); to praise, laud, extol ( ل or ه
s.o.) │ يشكر عليه (yuškaru) worthy of
thanks, deserving acknowledgment,
meritorious, praiseworthy V to thank ( ھ ل
s.o. for s.th.), be thankful, grateful ( ھ ل to
s.o. for s.th.)
شكر šukr pl. شكور šukūr thankfulness,
gratefulness, gratitude; thanks,
acknowledgment; praise, laudation │ شكرا
لك šukran lak I thank you! thanks! شكره
شكرا جزيلا to express many thanks to s.o.
شكري šukrī of thanks, thanking
شكران šukrān thankfulness,
gratefulness, gratitude; thanks,
acknowledgment; praise, laudation
شكور šakūr very thankful
شاكر šākir thankful, grateful
مشكور maškūr worthy of thanks,
deserving acknowledgment, meritorious,
praiseworthy
شكارة 2 šikāra pl. شكائر šakā’ir2 (eg.) sack,
gunny sack
شوكران 3 look up alphabetically
شيكران 4 look up alphabetically
شكس šakusa u ( شكاسة šakāsa) and šakisa a
(šakas) to be malicious, spiteful,
querulous, quarrelsome, peevish, petulant,
ill-tempered, morose, surly, sullen, sulky,
grumpy, unfriendly III to pick a quarrel, to
quarrel ( ه with s.o.) VI to quarrel (with
one another), be querulous, quarrelsome,
petulant; to be incongruous
شكس šakis pl. شكس šuks malicious,
spiteful, querulous, quarrelsome, peevish,
petulant, ill-tempered, morose, surly,
sullen, sulky, grumpy, unfriendly
شكاسة šakāsa malice, spite,
querulousness, peevishness, petulance, illtemperedneess,
moroseness, surliness,
sullenness, sulkiness, grumpiness,
unfriendliness; rudeness
مشاكسة mušākasa pl. -āt quarrel,
controversy, dispute, wrangle; plot,
conspiracy; moroseness, surliness,
grumpiness; petulance, nagging,
querulousness
تشاكس tašākus incongruity, absurdity
شاكوش and شكوش look up alphabetically
شكل šakala u (šakl) to hobble ( ھ بالشكال an
animal with the šikāl, q.v.); to vowel,
point, provide with vowel points ( ھ a
text); to be dubious, ambiguous,
equivocal, vague, obscure, intricate,
difficult II = I; to shape, fashion, form,
create, mold, organize, build up ( ھ s.th.);
to diversify, vary, variegate ( ھ s.th.),
bring variety ( ھ into s.th.) III to be similar
ھ، ه) to s.o., to s.th.), resemble ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), be like s.o. or s.th. ( ھ، ه ) IV to be
dubious, ambiguous, equivocal, vague,
obscure, intricate, difficult ( على for s.o.) V
to be formed, fashioned, shaped, molded,
created, organized, built up, take form,
take shape; to be variegated, shaded,
graded, form various gradation; to
materialize, appear in visible form ( ل to
s.o.) │ تشكل بشكله (bi-šaklihī) to take on the
shape of s.o., assume the form of s.th. X to
regard as dubious ( ه s.th.); = IV
شكل šakl pl. اشكال aškāl, شكول šukūl
similarity, resemblance, likeness; outward
appearance, figure, form, shape, build;
form of perception, perceptual form (as
opposed to matter or content; philos.); 482
type, out, pattern; mode, manner; sort,
kind, specimen; شكل vowelization,
voweling; شكلا formally, in form │ ھم
وأشكالھم they and the like of them
شكلي šaklī formal; pl. شكليات formalities
O شكلية šaklīya formalism
شكل šikl coquetry, coquettishness
شكلة šakila coquettish woman, coquette,
flirt
شكلي šuklī quarrelsome, peevish
شكل šikal pl. -āt, شكل šukul fetter,
hobble (for shackling the feet of a riding
animal)
تشكيل taškīl pl. -āt forming, formation,
shaping, molding, fashioning, creation,
organization, building up; order of march
(mil.); pl. تشكيلات formations;
organizations
تشكيلة taškīla assortment, selection,
variety; formation
مشاكلة mušākala similarity,
resemblance, likeness
اشكال iškāl dubiosity, ambiguity,
obscurity, vagueness
تشاكل tašākul similarity, resemblance
شاكلة šākila way, manner, mode; (pl.
شواكل šawākil2) flank, side, groin │ على
شاكلة in the manner of, of the kind of, like,
على شاكلتھم of their kind, like them; كان على
شاكلتھم to be of the same kind, of the same
strain as s.th.
مشكل mušakkal different, diverse,
manifold, miscellaneous, variegated;
vowel(iz)ed
مشكل muškil turbid, murky (liquid);
dubious, ambiguous, equivocal, obscure,
vague, hazy; difficult, intricate, involved,
problematic; problem, unsolved question,
issue; difficulty
مشكلة muškila pl. -āt, مشاكل mašākil2
problem, unsolved question, issue;
difficulty
شكم šakama u (šakm) to bridle ( ھ an animal);
to bribe ( ه s.o.); to silence, gag, muzzle
(s.o.)
شكيمة šakīma pl. شكائم šakā’im شكم , 2
šukum, شكيم šakīm bit, curb, snaffle,
bridoon; (pl. شكائم ) O brake (of a wheel);
unruliness, unyieldingness obstinacy;
contempt, disdain, scorn │ شديد الشكيمة
stubborn, obstinate, unyielding; قوة الشكيمة
quwwat aš-š. energy; قوي الشكيمة qawīy ašš.
energetic, vigorous, active
شكه III to resemble ( ھ s.th.), he like
s.th. ( (ھ
شكا (شكو ) šakā u ( شكو šakw, شكوى
šakwā, شكاة šakāh, شكاية šikāya, شكية
šakīya) to complain ( من or ھ، ه of, about, ل
or الى to s.o., من or ھ of or about s.th.),
make a complaint; to raise or lodge a
complaint ( من or ھ، ه of, about or against
s.o., ل or الى with s.o.); to suffer ( ھ from
s.th.) V = I; VI to complain to one another
ھ) of, about s.th.) VIII = I
شكوة šakwa complaint, grievance; (pl.
شكوات šakawāt, شكاء šikā’) small skin (for
water or milk)
شكوى šakwā pl. شكاوى šakāwā
complaint; accusation; suffering,
grievance
شكاة šakāh complaint; accusation;
suffering, grievance
شكاية šikāya complaint; accusation;
suffering, grievance
شكية šakīya complaint; accusation;
suffering, grievance
شكاء šakkā’ given to complaining,
querulous
مشكاة miškāh pl. مشكاوات miškāwāt, مشاك
mašākin niche (for a lamp); lamp, pendent
lamp 483
شاك šākin complainant, plaintiff │ شاكي
السلاح = شاك السلاح šākk as-s.
منه) مشكو) maškūw complained of,
accused, charged; an accused, defendant
مشتك muštakin complainant, plaintiff
مشتكى عليه muštaka ‘alaihi complained
of, accused, charged; an accused,
defendant
شكوريا šikūriyā chicory
شكولاته šukūlāta (eg.), šikōlāta (syr.), chocolate
شاكوش and شكوش see شاكوش (alphabetically)
شل šalla a (šall, شلل šalal) to dry up, wither,
become crippled, stunted; to be paralyzed,
be lame; -- šalla u to paralyze ( ھ s.th.) │
شل حركته (ḥarakatahū) to overwhelm s.o.,
لاring s.o. down IV to cause ( ھ the hand)
to wither; to paralyze ( ھ s.th.); to
neutralize, bring to a stand-still ( ھ s.th.)
VII to be paralyzed, be lamed
شلة šalla destination (of a journey)
شلة šilla pl. شلل šilal hank, skein (of
yarn); coil, spool; party, group
شلل šalal paralysill, pelsy, paralyzation
(also fig.) │ شلل الأطفال š. al-aṭfāl, الشلل
الطفلي (ṭiflī) infantile paralysis,
poliomyelitis; الشلال الاھتزازي (ihtizāzī)
paralysis agitans, Parkinson’s disease
شلال šallāl pl. -āt cataract, waterfall,
rapids
اشل ašall2, f. شلاء šallā’2 withered,
stunted (hand); paralyzed, lame; a
paralytic
مشلول mašlūl paralyzed, lame
شلبي šalabī dandyish, foppish; dandy,
fop; (pal.) nice, handsome, beautiful
شلت 1 II to kick
شلتة 2 šalta pl. -āt, شلت šilat mattress
شلح šalaḥa a (šalḥ) to take off ( ثيابه tiyābahū
one’s clothes); to shed the cloth ( ,(ھ
renounce the ministry (monk, prieat) II to
undress, disrobe, strip ( ه s.o.); to roh,
plunder ( ه s.o.)
مشلح mašlaḥ pl. مشالح mašāliḥ, (syr.,
nejd.) long, sowing cloak of wool or
camel’s hair, also one with gold
embroidery
تشليح tašlīḥ robbing, plundering,
robbery
مشلح mušallaḥ dressing room (in a
public bath)
شلشل šalšala to dribble, trickle
شلفة šilfa (razor) blade
شلق 1 šalaqa u (šalq) to split lengthwise ( ھ
s.th.)
شلق bale (e.g., of hay)
شولقي 2 šaulaqī person with a sweet tooth
شليك look up alphabetically
شولم 1 look up alphabetically
شيلم 2 look up alphabetically
شلن (Engl.) šilin pl. -āt shilling
شلو šilw pl. اشلاء ašlā’ corpse (esp. one in a
state of decay); severed member (of the
body); part torn off, fragment; remnant;
stump of a limb
شليك (Turk. çilek) šilek (eg.) strawberries
شم šamma (1st pers. perf. šamimtu) a and (1st
pers. perf. šamamtu) u (šamm, شميم šamīm)
to smell, sniff ( ھ s.th.); to snulf ( ھ s.th.);
to emanate, exude ( من from) │ شم النسيم
الھواء )) (hawā’a) to get a breath of fresh
air, take a walk; -- šamma (1st pers. perf.
šamimtu) a ( شمم šamam) to behave
proudly or haughtily, be proud, haughty,
supercilious II to give ( ھ ه s.o. s.th.) to
smell, 484 let ( ه s.o.) smell ( ھ s.th.) IV –
II V to savor the smell of s.th. ( ھ ), sniff ( ھ
s.th.) │ تشمم الأخبار to nose about for news
VIII to smell, sniff ( ھ s.th.); to gather,
understand ( من ھ s.th. from), read ( من ه
s.th. into)
شم šamm smelling; sense of smell,
olfaction │ شم النسيم Egyptian popular
holiday on the Monday following the
Greek Coptic Easter at the end of March,
in April or in early May
شمة šamma pinch (of snuff); smell,
odor; slight trace of s.th., whiff
شمي šammī olfactory
شمم šamam pride, haughtiness,
superciliousness
شمام šammām pl. -ūn (tobacco) snuffer
شمام šammām (coll.; n. un. ة) muskmelon,
cantaloupe
اشم ašamm 2, f. شماء šammā’2, pl. شم
šumm having a sensitive, or good, nose;
supercilious, haughty; proud (in a
complimentary sense); highborn; most
honorable
الإشمام al-išmām the pronunciation of u
with a trace of i, as rüdda for rudda, and
vice versa, qǖla for qīla (gram.)
شامة šāmma sense of smell, olfaction
مشموم mašmūm musk
اشمأز (شمأز ) išma’azza = to contract, get
contracted, shrink; to shrink back, recoil (
من from), shudder ( من at), abhor, detest ( من
s.th.), feel disgust ( من for), be nauseated (
من by)
اشمئزاز išmi’zāz shudder; disgust,
aversion, repugnance
مشمئز mušma’izz disgusted, nauseated,
revolted ( من by)
شمبانيا (Fr.) šambanyā champagne
شمت šamita a ( شمات šamāt, شماتة šamāta) to
rejoice at the misfortune of s.o. ( ب), gloat
over s.o.’s ( ب) mishaps, savor s.o.’s ( (ب
bad luck II to disappoint ( ه s.o.) IV to
cause s.o. ( ه) to take malicious pleasure in
the mishaps of another ( (ب
شمات šamāt malicious joy,
Schadenfreude
شماتة šaamāta malicious joy,
Schadenfreude, malice
شامت šāmit pl. شمات šummāt, pl. f. شوامت
šawāmit2 enjoying another’s misfortune,
malicious, gloating
شمخ šamaka a (samk, شموخ šumūk) to be
high, tall, lofty, tower up, loom
(mountain, building); to disdain ( على
s.th.), turn up one’s nose ( على at s.th.) │
شمخ بأنفه (انفه ) (bi-anfihī, anfahū) to be
arrogant, haughty, proud, supercilious VI
to be high, tall, lofty, tower up, loom; to
be boastful, put on airs; to be proud,
haughty, supercilious
تشامخ tašāmuk pride, haughtiness,
arrogance
شامخ šāmik pl. شمخ šummak, شوامخ
šawāmik2 high, tall, lofty, towering;
proud, haughty, supercilious │ شامخ الأنف
š. al-anf proud, haughty, supercilious,
arrogant
متشامخ mutašāmik high, tall, lofty,
towering; proud, haughty, supercilious;
towering in lofty heights
مشمخر mušmakirr lofty, towering (of
buildings)
شمر II to gather up, lift, roll up, tuck up,
turn up ( ھ a garment); to prepare, get
ready │ شمر للأمر to embark upon s.th.,
buckle down to s.th.; شمر عن ساعده to bare
the upper arm (by rolling up the sleeve),
get to work; شمر عن يد الجد (s. al-jidd) to
buckle dawn to a job, rally all one’s
forces, put one’s shoulder to the wheel V
to set to work briskly 485
شمر šamar fennel (bot.)
شمرة šumra, šamra fennel
شمار šamār fennel
مشمر mušammir busily at work in (an
activity)
شمروخ šumrūk pl. شماريخ šamārīk2 stalk with
date cluster; date-palm panicle, branch
stripped of its leaves; little stick;
detonator, primer cap
اشمأز see شمأز
شمس šamasa u ( شموس šumūs, شماس šimās) to
be headstrong, balky, restive (of a horse);
-- šamasa i u and šamisa a (šamas) to be
sunny (day) II to expose ( ھ s.th.) to the
sun, lay ( ھ s.th.) out in the sun to dry; to
perform the office of deacon (Chr.) IV to
be sunny (day) V to bask, sun o.s., lie or
sit in the sun
شمس šams f., pl. شموس šumūs sun │
سمت الشمس samt aš-š. ecliptic (astron.);
شروق الشمس sunrise; ضربة الشمس ḍarbat ašš.
sunstroke, heat prostration; عباد الشمس
‘abbād aš-š. sunflower; غروب الشمس sunset
شمسي šamsī sun- (in compounds), solar
│ الحروف الشمسية (gram.) the sun letters
(which assimilate the l of the article);
صورة شمسية (ṣūra) photograph, photo;
التصوير الشمسي phtoography
شمسية šamsīya pl. -āt (colloq. شماسي
šamāsī) sunshade, parasol; umbrella;
curtain, screen; stop (of a wind
instrument) │ شمسية الشباك š. aš-ubbāk
window curtain, drape; O شمسية الطيار š. aṭ-
ṭayyār parachute
شموس šamūs pl. شمس šumus headstrong,
balky, restive (horse)
شماس šammās pl. شممسة šamāmisa
deacon of the lower rank of the ministry,
nowadays, with unconsecrated persons
frequently performing this office,
corresponding to the sexton or sacristan
(Chr.); acolyte and liturgical cantor of
Oriental Christian rites (clerics and
laymen)
شامس šamis sunny (day)
مشمس mušmis sunny (day)
شمشم šamšama to sniff ( ھ s.th.)
شمط šamiṭa a (šamaṭ) to become gray, haired,
turn gray
اشمط ašmaṭ2, f. شمطاء šamṭā’ 2, pl. شمط
šumṭ, شمطان gray-haired
شمع II to rub, or smear, with wax, to wax ( ھ
s.th.) │ شمع الفتلة (fatla) to slip away,
abscond, make off, decamp
شمع šam‘, šama‘ (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. شموع
šumū‘ wax; (wax) candles │ الشمع الأحمر
sealing wax; شمع الختم š. al-katm do.; شمع
لتلميع الأرضية (li-talmī‘ al-araḍīya) floor
wax
شمعة šam‘a, šama‘a (n. un.) (wax)
candle │ O شمعة الشرارة š. aš-šarāra spark
plug
شمعي šam‘ī, šama‘ī waxy, waxen,
ceraceous, cero- (in compounds), made of
wax
شماع šammā‘ chandler, maker or seller
of candles
شماعة šammā‘a clothes rack, clothes
peg, hat rack
مشمع mušamma‘ waterproof,
impermeable (of a garment); -- (pl. -āt)
waterproof material; impregnated linen;
waterproof cover or coating; oilcloth, wax
cloth; linoleum │ مشمع بتيومين للسقف (li-ssaqf)
bituminous roof covering, roofing
felt, tar paper; معطف مشمع (mi‘ṭaf) raincoat
شمعدان šam‘addān pl. -āt, شماعد šamā‘id2,
شماعدين candlestick, candelabrum
يشمق look up alphabetically 486
شمل 1 šamila a (šamal) and šamala u (šaml,
شمول šumūl) to contain, comprise,
comprehend, enclose ( ھ s.th.); to imply,
implicate, include ( ھ s.th.); to touch,
affect, fill, overcome, pervade ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th., of feelings, emotions); to prevail, be
general, universal │ شمله بعنايته
(bi-‘ināyatihī) to bestow one’s care on
s.o., take s.o. under one’s wing V تشمل
بالشملة to wrap o.s. in the šamla (q.v.) VIII
= V; to wrap o.s. ( ھ، ب in s.th.); to
contain, comprise, comprehend, enclose,
enfold, imply, implicate, include ( على
s.th.) │ اشتمله السواد (sawādu) it was
completely black
شمل šaml uniting, gathering,
concentration; unity. union │ جمع الشمل
jam‘ aš-š. reunion, reunification; اجتماع
الشمل reunion; unity, union; مزق شمله
mazzaqa šamlahū to break up, dismember,
dismantle, parcel s.th.; to partition s.th.,
divide s.th. up
شملة šamla pl. šamalāt cloak; turban │
ام شملة ummu šamlata the world, the
temporal joys
شمائل šamā’il2 (pl.) good qualities;
character, nature
اشمل ašmal more comprehensive; more
general, more universal
شامل šāmil comprehensive, exhaustive;
general, universal, complete, total
مشمول mašmūl contained, comprised,
included, implied │ مشمول برعايته (biri‘
āyatihī) enjoying the protection or
patronage of s.o.; مشمولات الوظيفة the
inherent functions of an office
مشتمل muštamal comprising, containing,
including ( على s.th.)
مشتمل muštamal cottage (for rent)
مشتملات muštamalāt contents
شمال 2 šamāl, šimāl north; north wind; šimāl
left hand; left side; left; الشمال the left
(pol.); شمال šimāla north of …; شمالا
šimālan to the left; northward, to the north
│ شمال شرقي (šarqī) northeast; شمال غربي
(garbī) northwest; كوكب الشمال kaukab ašš.
polar star; اليد الشمال (yad) the left hand
شمالي šamalī, šimālī northern, northerly,
north; situated on the left; الشماليون the
leftist parties (pol.) │ الشفق الشمالي (šafaq)
aurora borealis, northern lights
شملول 3 šumlūl pl. شماليل šamālīl2 small amount,
small quantity; -- (eg.) šamlūl brisk, vivid,
agile, lively, nimble
مشملة، مشملا 4 look up alphabetically
شمندر šamandar white beet, chard
شمندورة šamandūra buoy
شن 1 šanna u (šann): شن غارة (gāratan) to make
a raid, an invasion; to make an attack,
launch an attack ( على against, on) IV = I
شن šann pl. شنون šunūn (water)skin
مشنة mišanna basket without handles
اشنان look up alphabetically
شنأ šana’a a ( شنآن šan’ān, šana’ān) to hate
شنب šanab pl. اشنب ašnāb mustache
شنتيان šintiyān pl. شناتين šanātīn2 loose trousers
resembling pantalets, worn by women
شنج šanija a (šanaj) to contract, shrink; to
suffer from convulsions V = I; to twitch
تشنج tašannuj contraction, shriveling,
shrinking (of the skin); convulsive
contraction (of a muscle), twitch, jerk,
convulsion, spasm, fit, cramp │ التشنج
الرعشي (ra‘šī) clonic spasm; التشنج الكزازي
(kuzāzī) tonic spasm
تشنجي tašannujī spastic, spasmodic,
cramplike, paroxysmal, convulsive 487
شنخوبة šunkūba pl. شناخيب šanākīb2 large rock,
boulder
شنر II to blame, censure, revile, slander, abuse
على) s.o.)
شنار šanār disgrace, ignominy
شنارق šanāriq شرانق = 2 šarāniq2
شنشنة šanšana rustling (of paper); cracking,
crackling
شنشنة šinšina pl. شناشن šanāšin2 nature,
disposition; habit, custom, practice
شنيطة 1 šunaiṭa knot; noose, loop
شنطة 2 šanṭa pl. شنط šunaṭ suitcase; satchel;
bag, traveling bag │ شنطة اليد š. al-yad
handbag
شنع šanu‘a u (šana‘, شناعة šana‘a) to be ugly,
abominable, repugnant, repulsive,
atrocious, hideous, horrid, horrible,
disgraceful; -- šana‘a a (šan‘) to dishonor,
disgrace ( ب or ه s.o.) II to calumniate,
slander, revile, defame ( على s.o.); to
pillory, expose, condemn, denounce ( على
s.o., s.th.)
شنع šanī‘ ugly, abominable, repugnant,
repulsive, disgusting, atrocious, hideous,
horrid, horrible, disgraceful, ignominious
شنعة šun‘a ugliness, hideousness,
horridness, repulsiveness
شنيع šanī‘ ugly, abominable, repugnant,
repulsive, disgusting, atrocious, hideous,
horrid, horrible, disgraceful, ignominious
شناعة šanā‘a ugliness, hideousness,
horridness, repulsiveness
اشنع ašna‘2, f. شنعاء šan‘ā’2 ugly,
abominable, repugnant, repulsive,
disgusting, atrocious, hideous, horrid,
horrible, disgraceful, ignominious
شنغوبة šungūba pl. شناغيب šanāgīb2
spicate protuberance; thorn, spike
شنف II شنف الآذان (ādāna) to please the ears, to
delight (of a voice)
شنف sanf pl. شنوف šunūf earring
شنق šanaqa u (šanq) to hang ( ھ s.th., ه s.o. on
the gallows)
شنق šanq hanging
شنق šanaq rope
مشنقة mišnaqa pl. مشانق mašāniq2
gallows, gibbet; scaffold, place of
execution (by hanging); mašnaqa gallows,
gibbet
مشنوق mašnūq hanged
شنقب šunqub bécassine, snipe (zool.)
شنكل šankala (eg.) to trip ( ه s.o.) up; to hook up
شنكل šankal pl. شناكل šanākil2 clothes
peg; hook
شنھق šanhaqa to bray (donkey)
شھب šahab gray color, gray
شھبة šuhba gray color, gray
شھاب šihāb pl. شھب šuhub, شھبان šuhbān
flame, blaze, fire; shooting star, luminous
meteor; star
اشھب ašhab2, f. شھباء šahbā’2, pl. شھب
šuhb gray; الشھباء epithet of Aleppo (Syria)
شھد šahida a ( شھود šuhūd) to witness ( ھ
s.th.), be witness ( ھ of s.th.); to
experience personally ( ھ s.th.), see with
one’s own eyes ( ه s.o. in a situation); to be
present ( ھ at), attend ( ھ a celebration); to
be present at the public appearance of s.o.
ه) ); to see ( ھ s.th.); -- ( شھادة šahāda) to
testify, bear witness; to attest, confirm,
certify ( ب s.th., ان that), testify, give
testimony, give evidence ( على against s.o.,
to or about s.th., ل in s.o.’s favor); to sign
as a witness, to witness (J. a document);
488 to acknowledge, adjudge ( ب ل to s.o.,
s.th.) │ شھد to swear by God; شھد قانونيا to
notarize ill to see (with one’s own eyes),
view, inspect, watch, observe, witness ( ھ
s.th.) IV to call ( ه upon s.o.) as a witness (
على for s.th.); pass. ušhida to be martyred,
die as a martyr X to call ( ه or ب upon s.o.)
or cite ( ه or ب s.o.) as witness ( على against
or for, في in); to cite, quote ( ب s.th.); to
attest (e.g., على معنى كلمة ببيت the meaning
of a word by a verse); pass. ustušhida to
be martyred, die as a martyr
شھد šahd, šuhd pl. شھاد šihād honey;
honeycomb
شھدة šahda carbuncle
شھيد šahīd pl. شھداء šuhadā’2 witness;
martyr, one killed in battle with the
infidels; one killed in action
شھيدة šahīda (woman) martyr
شھادة šahāda pl. -āt testimony, witness,
evidence, deposition; statement;
certificate, certification, testimonial,
affidavit; attestation, attest; credentials,
identification; (Muslim) creed (= doftrinal
formula); martyrdom, شھادة الإثبات š. alitbāt
evidence for the prosecution; شھادة
حسن السير والسلوك (š. ḥusn as-sair)
certificate of good conduct; شھادة خلو الطرف
عن العمل š. kulūw aṭ-ṭaraf ‘an il-‘amal
certificate of discharge (from a position);
شھادة الدراسة الثانوية (tānawīya) secondary
school diploma; شھادة زور š. zūr false
testimony; شھادة على شھادة indirect
testimony (Isl. Law); شھادة العالمية š.
al-‘ālimīya (Eg.) diploma of higher
learning (highest diploma awarded by Al
Azhar University); شھادة عالية (‘āliya)
diploma; شھادة النفي š. an-nafy evidence for
the defense; شھادة الولادة birth certificate
مشھد mašhad pl. مشاھد mašāhid2 place of
assembly, assembly, meeting; place where
a martyr or hero died; religious shrine
venerated by the people, esp. the tomb of
a saint; funeral cortege; profession; view,
aspect, spectacle, sight, scenery; place or
object of interest; scene (e.g., of a crime,
of nature); act, number (as part of a
program, e.g., in vaudeville), scene (in
theater, as part of a play); aspect │ مشھد
غنائي (ginā’ī) song scene, vocal recital;
مشاھد الحياة m. al-ḥayāh aspects of life
مشاھدة mušāhada seeing, viewing,
witnessing, inspection; (pl. -āt) view,
sight, spectacle; apparition, vision
اشھاد išhād pl. -āt written certification
استشھاد istišhād citation. quotation;
death of a martyr; death of a hero, heroic
death; martyrdom
شاھد šāhid pl. شھود šuhūd, شھد šuhhad
present; -- (pl. شھود šuhūd, اشھاد ašhād)
witness ( على for); notary public; -- pl.
شواھد šawāhid2) (piece of) evidence ( على
for); attestation; quotation serving as
textual evidence; testimony; an oblong,
upright tombstone │ شاھد الإثبات š. al-itbāt
witness for the prosecution; شاھد السمع š.
as-sam‘ earwitness; شاھد s. al-‘ain, شاھد
عيان š. ‘iyān, شاھد عياني (‘iyānī) eyewitness;
شاھد النفي š. an-nafy witness for the
defense; على رؤوس الأشھاد in public, for
everyone to see
شاھدة šāhida pl. شواھد šawāhid2 an
oblong, upright tombstone; index finger;
true copy, copy of a letter, duplicate;
الشاھدة the Earth
مشھود mašhūd taking place in the
presence of spectators or witnesses;
happening before a large audience, wellattended;
memorable (day, event) │ بالجرم
المشھود (jurm) in the act, red-handed,
flagrante delicto │ اليوم المشھود (yaum) the
Day of Resurrection; red-letter day,
festive public holiday 489
مشاھد mušāhid pl. -ūn spectator,
onlooker, observer
مشاھد mušāhad visible, perceptible; pl.
مشاھدات things seen, sights; visible things
شھر šahara a (šahr) to make well-known,
famous, renowned, notorious ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to spread, make known, divulge,
proclaim, announce ( ھ s.th.); to draw,
unsheathe ( ھ a weapon); pass. šuhira to
be or become well-known, famed, famous,
renowned, notorious ( ب by or for s.th.
respectively, by or under a name) │ شھر
الحرب عليه (ḥarb) to declare war on s.o.;
شھر البندقية (bunduqīya) to level a gun ( على
at s.o.) II to make well-known, famous,
renowned, notorious ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
spread, make known, divulge, proclaim,
announce ( ھ s.th.); to defame, slander,
revile publicly, pillory, condemn,
denounce ( ه s.o.) III to engage or hire ( ه
s.o.) on a monthly basis, rent ( ھ s.th.) by
the month IV to make known, proclaim,
announce, spread, divulge ( ھ s.th.); to
unsheathe, draw ( ه a weapon); to sell at
auction, also اشھر المزاد (mazāda) │ اشھر
مزاد بيع شيء (mazāda bai‘i š.) to auction
s.th. off, put s.th. up at auction VIII to be
or become well-known, famed, famous,
renowned, notorious ( ب by or for s.th.
respectively, by or under a name); to be
known ( عن of s.o., a trait, and the like); to
be widespread, common
شھر šahr pl. اشھر ašhur, شھور šuhūr new
moon; month │ شھر العسل š. al-‘asal
honeymoon
شھري šahrī monthly, mensal; شھريا
šahrīyan monthly, per month, by the
month │ اشتراك شھري monthly
subscription; monthly fee or contribution;
نصف شھري niṣfu šahrīyin fortnightly,
semimonthly, appearing biweekly
شھرية šahrīya monthly salary
شھرة šuhra repute, reputation, renown,
fame, famousness, celebrity; notoriety;
surname (Syr., Leb.) │ شھرة عالمية
(‘ālamīya) world-wide renown, worldwide
fame
شھير šahīr widely known, well-known,
famous, renowned, celebrated ( ب by a
name); notorious, ill-reputed
اشھر ašhar2 better known, more widely
known
مشاھرة mušāhara pl. -āt monthly salary;
pl. monthly payments, monthly
allowances; mušāharatan monthly, per
month, by the month
اشھار išhār announcement,
proclamation, declaration; public sales,
auction; publicity, advertising │ اشھار
الإفلاس i. al-iflās notice of bankruptcy,
declaration of insolvency
اشتھار ištihār repute, reputation,
renown, fame, famousness, celebrity;
notoriety
مشھور mašhūr pl. مشاھير mašāhīr2 wellknown,
widely known, renowned, famous,
celebrated; notorious, ill-reputed; widespread,
common; a famous, celebrated
personality, a celebrity; accepted,
established, canonical (textual variant,
version of the Koran) │ على المشھور
according to the general belief, as it is
(was) generally understood
مشھر mušahhar well-known, widely
known, renowned, famous, celebrated;
notorious, ill-reputed
شھق šahaqa a i ( شھيق šahīq) to bray (donkey);
-- šahaqa a i and šahiqa a ( شھيق šahīq,
شھاق šuhāq, تشھاق tašhāq) to inhale; to sigh
deeply; to sob, gulp; to moan, groan IV
اشھق بالبكاء (bi-l-bukā’) to burst into tears,
break out into loud weeping
شھقة šahqa moan(ing), groan(ing);
gulping 490
شھيق šahīq braying, brays (of a
donkey); sobbing, sobs; sighing, sighs;
inhalation, breathing in
شاھق šāhiq pl. شواھق šawāhiq2 high,
lofty, towering (building, mountain) │ علو
شاھق (‘ulūw) tremendous height
شواھق šawāhiq2 heights
شھل II to accelerate, speed up, expedite ( ھ
s.th.); to remove quickly, hurry off ( ه s.o.)
شھل šahil nimble, swift, quick
شھلة šuhla bluish-black color of the
eyes
اشھل ašhal, f. شھلاء šahlā’2 having
bluish-black eyes
شھم šahm, pl. شھام šihām perspicacious,
sagacious, astute, clever, bold, audacious;
energetic; noble, gallant, decent;
gentleman
شھامة šahāma perspicacity, sagacity,
astuteness, cleverness; audacity, boldness,
gallantry, noble-mindedness; energy,
vigor, verve; decency, respectability
شاھين pl. شواھين look up alphabetically
شھو ) and شھا (شھي šahā u and شھي šahiya a (
شھوة šahwa) to desire, wish, covet, crave (
ھ s.th.), long ( ھ for s.th.) II to make
covetous, fill with desire, allure, entice ( ه
s.o.); to arouse greed, desire, appetite ( ه in
s.o., ھ for s.th.); to whet the appetite, be
appetizing (food) V and VIII to be
covetous, greedy, to long ( ھ for s.th.),
crave, desire, wish ( ھ s.th.), ffeel appetite
ھ) for s.th.) │ شيء لا يشتھى (yuštahā) an
undesirable thing
شھوة šahwa pl. šahawāt greed, craving,
desire, ardent wish, longing, yearning,
eagerness, passion, carnal appetite, lust;
appetite
شھوي šahwī sensual, sensuous, lustful,
instinctual, uninhibited
شھوان šahwān, f. شھوى šahwā, pl. شھاوى
šahāwā covetous, greedy; lewd,
lecherous, lascivious, libidinous,
dissolute, debauched
شھواني šahwānī covetous, greedy; lewd,
lecherous, lascivious, libidinous,
dissolute, debauched; sensual, sensuous,
lustful, instinctual, uninhibited
شھي šahīy pleasant, agreeable,
desirable; appetizing, inviting, tasty
شھية šahīya appetite │ فاتح الشھية or ما
يفتح الشھية (yaftaḥu) stimulating the
appetite, appetizing; قلة الشھية للطعام qillat
aš-š. li-ṭ-ṭa‘ām want of appetite
تشه tašahhin greed, avidity, cupidity,
craving, desire
اشتھاء ištihā’ greed, craving, desire, dent
wish, longing, yearning. eagerness,
passion, carnal appetite, lust; appetite
مشه mušahhin stimulating the appetite,
appetizing; مشھيات appetizers, relishes,
hors d’oeuvres
مشته muštahin covetous, greedy, avid,
craving, desirous, lustful
مشتھى muštahan desirable; desired,
welcome, agreeable, pleasant; (pl. مشتھيات
muštahayāt) that which is coveted, object
of desire
شاء šā’ (coll.; n. un. شاة šāh) pl. شواه šiwāh, شياه
šiyāh sheep; ewe
شوال šuwāl, šiwāl pl. -āt (large) sack
شاب (شوب 1 ) šāba u (šaub, شياب šiyāb) to mix,
blend ( ھ ب s.th. with); to adulterate,
vitiate, contaminate, spoil, corrupt,
pollute, tarnish, sully, stain, spot ( ھ s.th.);
to mix, blend, intermix ( ھ with) │ لا تشوبه
شائبة blameless, flawless, unblemished,
immaculate
شوب šaub mixture; tarnishing, sullying,
roiling, rendering turbid; impairment,
blemish, flaw; hot wind 491
شائبة šā’iba pl. شوائب šawā’ib dirt,
stains, spot, flaw, blemish, defect, fault;
suspicion, reason for suspicion, suspicious
fact
مشوب mašūb mixed; adulterated,
vitiated│ مشوب بالھموم troubled with
worries
شابة 2 look up alphabetically
شوبق šaubaq pl. شوابق šawābiq2 rolling pin
شوبك šaubak: pl. شوابك šawābik2 rolling pin
شوح 1 II (eg.) to grill, broil, roast ( ھ s.th.)
شوح 2 šūḥ (coll.; n. un. ة) fir, sapin
شوحة 3 šūḥa kite (zool.)
مشاحة 4 see شح
شور II to make a sign, beckon, signal, wink,
blink ( الى to s.o.); to point out ( الى s.th.),
point ( الى at) III to ask s.o.’s ( ه) advice,
seek s.o.’s ( ه) advice, consult ( ه s.o.); to
consult, take counsel ( ه with s.o.),
شاور نفسه (nafsahū) to take counsel with
o.s., reflect, bethink o.s. IV to make a
sign, beckon, signal, wink, blink ( ل or الى
to s.o.), motion ( ل or الى s.o., ب to do
s.th.); to ask, invite, urge ( الى s.o.); to
point, allude ( الى to), hint ( الى at), indicate,
point out ( على or الى s.th.), call s.o.’s ( (ل
attention to ( على ); to advice ( ب على s.o. of
s.th., على ان s.o. to do s.th.), suggest ( ب على
to s.o. s.th., على ان to s.o. to do s.th.),
command, order ان or على ب s.o. to do
s.th.); to state, indicate ( ب s.th.) │ ما يشار
اليه بالبنان (yušāru, banān) that which is
pointed at with the finger tips, i.e., s.th.
very remarkable, s.th. outstanding; ما اشار
بطرف (bi-ṭarfin) he did not bat an eye VI
to take counsel, deliberate, consult ( في مع
with s.o. about) X to ask for advice ( ه
s.o.), take counsel ( ه with s.o.), consult ( ه
s.o.)
شارة šāra pl. -āt sign, token,
distinguishing mark, badge; guile,
outward appearance │ شارة الصليب sign of
the cross
شورى šūrā consultation, deliberation,
taking counsel; counsel; advice │ مجلس
الشورى majlis š-šūrā and مجلس شورى الدولة
m. š. d-daula state council
شوري šūrī consultative, advisory
مشوار mišwār pl. مشاوير mašāwīr2
errand; O stroke, (of an internalcombustion
engine; techn.) │ محرك ثنائي
المشوار muḥarrik tunā’ī l-m. two-cycle
engine; محرك رباعي المشوار (rubā‘ī l-m.)
four-cycle engine
مشورة mašwara, mašūra pl. -āt
consultation, deliberation, conference;
counsel, advice, suggestion
مشاورة mušāwara pl. -āt consultation,
deliberation, conference
اشارة išāra pl. -āt sign, motion, nod,
wink, wave; gesture; signal; indication;
allusion, hint, intimation; symbolic
expression; (silent) reminder; advice,
counsel, suggestion; instruction, order,
command │ اشارة برقية (barqīya) telegram,
wire, dispatch, cable(gram); اشارة تلغرافية
telegram, wire; اشارة الخطر i. al-kaṭar airraid
warning, alert; اشارة الصليب sign of the
cross (Chr.); اشارة ضبط الوقت i. ḍabt alwaqt
(radio) time signal; اشارة لا سلكية (lāsilkīya)
radio message; محطة الإشارات
maḥaṭṭat al-i. signal post; اسم الإشارة ism
al-i. demonstrative pronoun; وحدات الإشارة
waḥdat al-i. signal corps units (mil.); رھن
اشارته (rahna) at s.o.’s beck and call, at
s.o.’s disposal
اشاري išārī (mil.) signalman, member of
the signal corps (Eg. 1939)
اشارجي išargī (mil.) signalman, member
of the signal corps (Eg.)
تشاور tašāwur joint consultation,
deliberation ( مع with)
استشارة istišāra pl. -āt a seeking of
advice, consultation; guidance, advice
(one receives) 492
استشاري istišārī consultative, advisory
مشاور mušāwar adviser, counselor,
consultant
مشير mušīr indicative ( الى of); adviser,
counselor, consultant; field marshal (Eg.;
1933); Fleet Admiral (Eg. 1939)
المشار اليه al-mušār ilaihi the
aforementioned, the aforesaid, the said
مستشار mustašār adviser, counselor,
consultant, councilor; chancellor; approx.:
justice (title; Eg.) │ مستشار السفارة
counselor of embassy; مستشار المفوضية m.
al-mufawwaḍīya counselor of legation
دار المستشارية dār al-mustašārīya office
of the chancellor, chancellery
شورب 1 šaurab flycatcher (zool.)
شوربة 2 šōrba (eg.), šōraba (syr.) and شوربا soup
شورت (Engl.) šort short, short feature (motion
pictures)
شورمة
اشوس ašwas2, f. شوساء šausā’2, pl. شوس šūs,
اشاوس ašāwis2 proud; bold, audacious,
daring, venturesome │ شوس الحرب š. al-
ḥarb war heroes
شوش 1 II to muddle, confuse, confound, jumble
ھ) s.th.), disturb ( على or ھ s.th.),
complicate ( ھ s.th.) V to be confused,
confounded, muddled, jumbled, deranged,
disturbed; to feel indisposed, be ill
شاش šāš muslin; white cloth
شاشة šāša white cloth; الشاشة aš-šāša
and الشاشة البيضاء (baiḍā’) (motion picture)
screen
شاشية šāšiya, šāšīya pl. شواشي šawāšī a
kind of headgear, cap, skullcap
شوش šūš Maria Theresa dollar (Nejd)
شوشة šūša tuft of hair, lock; crest (of
birds)
شواش šawāš confusion, muddle, (state
of) disorder, disturbance, derangement
(e.g., of the mind)
شواشي šawāšī pl. شواشية šawāšīya a
maker of šāšiya’s (see above)
تشويش tašwīš confusion, confounding,
muddling; disturbance, derangement;
ailment
مشوش mušawwaš muddled, jumbled,
befuddled, confused; disturbed, deranged
(e.g., of a sensorial function); ailing, ill │
مشوش الفكر m. al-fikr bewildered, confused,
baffled
شاوش 2 pl. شواش look up alphabetically
شاويش 3 look up alphabetically
شوشبرك šušbarak (eg.) small pastry stuffed
with meat and served with milk rice
شوط šauṭ pl. شوط ašwāṭ to a goal; state, phase;
round, game, half, course (in sports and
games); goal, aim │ قطع شوطا كبيرا (بعيدا) في
التقدم (الرقي ) (taqaddum, ruqiy) and قطع في
ميدان الرقي اشواطا (maidān r-ruqīy) to make
good progress or headway, advance in
great strides, قطع اشواطا شاسعة do.; يفوقه
اشواطا (yafūquhū) he surpasses him by far
شواظ šuwāẓ flame; fire, fervor, ardor, passion
شوف 2 II to polish ( ھ s.th.); to adorn, deck out (
ھا a woman) V to look out expectantly,
longingly ( الى for), look forward ( الى to),
expect, anticipate ( الى s.th.)
شوف šauf harrow
الشوف aš-šūf name of an administrative
district of Lebanon
شوفة šaufa (colloq.) sight, spectacle,
view
شوفان šūfān oats
شاق (شوق ) šāqa u (šauq) to please
delight ( ه s.o.), give joy ( ه to s.o.); to fill ( ه
s.o.) with longing, craving, desire, 493
arouse longing, craving, desire ( ه in s.o.) II
to fill ( ه s.o.) with longing, craving, desire,
arouse longing, craving, desire ( ه in s.o.)
V and VIII to long, yearn ( الى or ه، ھ for),
crave, covet, desire ardently ( الى or ھ s.th.)
شوق šauq pl. اشواق ašwāq longing,
yearning, craving, desire, wish
شيق šayyiq longing, yearning, craving,
desirous, covetous; brilliant, gorgeous,
splendid
تشويق tašwīq arousing of desire, of
longing; fascination, thrilling, awakening
of excitement, of eagerness
تشوق tašawwuq longing, yearning,
desire, inclination, craving, eagerness
اشتياق ištiyāq longing, yearning, desire,
inclination, craving, eagerness
شائق šā’iq arousing longing, stimulating
desire; brilliant, gorgeous, splendid,
beautiful
مشوق mušawwiq arousing desire or
longing; thrilling, exciting, fascinating,
absorbing, stimulating, stirring, attractive,
interesting; -- mušawwaq filled with
longing ( الى for), desirous, covetous ( الى
of)
مشتاق muštāq longing, yearning,
craving, desirous, covetous
شاك (شوك ) (šauk) to sting, prick, hurt, injure,
pierce ( ب ه s.o. with a thorn, a needle, and
the like) II to be thorny; to stud (. s.th.)
with thorns or spikes; to sting, prick, hurt,
injure, pierce ( ب ه s.o. with a thorn, with a
needle) IV to sting, prick, hurt, injure
شوك šauk (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اشواك
ašwāk thorns, spikes, pricks, prickles,
spines; fishbone; forks │ على الشوك on
tenterhooks, on pins and needles
شوكة šauka (n. un.) thorn, spike, prick,
prickle, spine, sting, point; tine, prong;
spur (of a rooster); fork; fishbone; furor of
fighting, bravura, bravery, valor, verve,
dash, élan; might, power
شوكي šaukī thorny, spiky, prickly,
spiny; spinal │ الطين الشوكي (ṭīn) fruit of
the Indian fig (Opuntia ficus-indica Haw.;
bot.); الحبل الشوكي (ḥabl) spinal cord; الحمى
الشوكية المخية (ḥummā, mukkīya)
cerebrospinal meningitis (med.); العمود
الشوكي (‘amūd) vertebral column,
backbone; spine; النخاع الشوكي (nukā‘)
spinal cord
شوك šawik thorny, spiky, prickly, spiny
شائك šā’ik thorny, spiky, prickly, spiny;
delicate, ticklish, critical, difficult │ سلك
شائك (silk) pl. اسلاك شائكة barbed wire
شوكران šaukarān poison hemlock (Conium
maculatum; bot.)
شال (شول 1 ) šāla u (šaul) to rise, be raised,
elevated; to raise, lift ( ھ or ب s.th.); to
carry ( ھ or ب s.th.) │ شالت نعامته
(na‘āmatuhū) he went away, departed; he
died, be is dead II to become sparse,
scarce, short in supply III to attack, assail
ه) s.o.) IV to raise, lift ( ھ s.th.); to carry ( ھ
s.th.)
شول šawil nimble, adroit, swift, quick,
expeditious (at work)
شوال šawwāl pl. -āt شواويل šawāwīl2,
الشوال Shawwal, name of the tenth month
of the Muslim year
مشال mašāl carrying, carriage,
conveyance, transportation (of loads);
porterage, carrying charges
شال 2 pl. شيلان look up alphabetically
شوال 3 look up alphabetically
شولقى šaulaqī person with a sweet tooth
شولم šaulam darnel (Lolium temulentum; bot.);
a variety of vetch 494
شام، شامي 1 pl. شوام، مشوم see شأم
شومة 2 šuma stick, cudgel
شون II to garnmer, store ( ھ s.th., esp. grain)
شون šūna pl. -āt, شون šuwan (eg.)
storehouse, granary, shed, barn
شوندر šawandar white beet, chard
شوه 1 šawiha a (šawah) and شاه šāha u ( شوه
šauh) to be or become ugly, misshapen,
deformed, defaced, disfigured, distorted,
malformed II to disfigure, deform, deface,
distort, mar, mutilate ( ه s.o., ھ s.th., esp.
the face); to revile, slander, defame ( ه
s.o.); to jam ( اذاعة a broadcast) │ شوه وجه
الحقيقة (wajah l-ḥ) to distort the truth; شوه
وجه وظيفته to disgrace one’s profession V =
I
شوه šawāh ugliness, misshapenness,
malformation, deformity, disfigurement,
distortion, perversion
اشوه ašwah2, f. شوھاء šauhā’2, pl. شوه šūh
misshapen, malformed, ugly, disfigured,
deformed, disfeatured, defaced; distorted,
perverted
تشويه tašwīh deformation,
disfigurement, defacement, mutilation;
defamation; crippledness
تشوه tašawwuh ugliness,
misshapenness, malformation, deformity,
disfigurement, distortion, perversion
شائه šā’ih misshapen, malformed, ugly,
disfigured, deformed, disfeatured,
defaced; distorted, perverted
مشوه mušawwah disfigured, defaced,
deformed; mutilated, maimed; misshapen,
malformed, ugly; distorted, perverted │
مشوه الحرب m. al-ḥarb disabled (inactive
service); disabled veteran
شاه 2 look up alphabetically
شاة 3 (n. un.) see شوء
شواه pl. of شاء see شوء
شوى šawā i ( شي šayy) to broil, grill, rout ( ھ
meat)
شواء šiwā’ broiled, or grilled, meat, and
the like │ شواء السجق š. sujuq grilled
sausage
شوى šawīy broiled, grilled, rosted
شواة šawāh pl. شوى šawan scalp
شواية šawāya gridiron, grill
مشواه mišwāh pl. مشاو mašāwin gridiron,
grill
شى 1 see شوى
شية، شيات 2 see وشي
شاء (شيأ ) šā’a a ( مشيئة mašī’a) to want; to wish (
ھ s.th., ان that) │ ان شاء لله (in) God
willing; it is to be hoped; I (we) hope so;
ما شاء لله whatever (howsoever, how long
soever) God intend (used to express an
indefinite quantity, amount, number, or
period of time); various, sundry, all kinds
of, God knows what; also, exclamation of
surprise: amazing! that’s right! good!
bravo! الى ما شاء لله forever and ever, for all
time and time to come; لفق ما شاء له التلفيق
(laffaqa, talfīqu) to fabricate the moot
outrageous lies
شيء šai’ pl. اشياء ašyā’2 thing;
something; (with neg.) nothing │ شيء من
... some
a little, a certain (amount of), a
considerable ...; شيء من النشاط (našāṭ) some
activity; شيء من القلق (qalaq) some
uneasiness, some anxiety; بدون شيء من الجھد
(jahd) without any effort at all; ھذا شيء
وذاك شيء آخر (ākar) this and that are two
entirely different things (or matters); في
الأمر شيء there is s.th. wrong, there is a fly
in the ointment; بعض الشيء ba‘ḍ š. to a
certain extent, a little, somewhat; بشيء, في
شيء in negative sentences: not in any way;
in no 495 way, by no means, not at all, not
in the least; على شيء كثير من very,
extremely, e.g., على شيء كثير من البساطة
(basāṭa) very simple; الشيء الكثير the most;
اشبه شيء ب (ašbahu šai’in) very much
like ...; شيئا بعد شيء or شيئا فشيئا (fa-šai’an)
bit by bit, one after the other, by and by,
gradually; لا شيء a nothing, nil, nonentity;
nothing (in sport scoring); اللاشيء the
nothing; لا شيء nothing (as object); ... لا
غير الشيء اليسير (gair š-šai’ l-yasīr) only
very little; ليس بشيء it is nothing, it is of no
consequence; ليس ھذا في شيء من ذلك this has
absolutely nothing to do with that
شيئي šai’ī objective, factual
لاشيئية lā-šai’īya nonexistence,
nothingness, nihility, nullity
شيئ šuyyai’ a little thing, trifle
شوية šuwayya (colloq.) a little, a bit,
somewhat
مشيئة mašī’a volition, will; wish, desire
│ بمشيئة لله God willing
شاب (شيب 2 ) šāba i (šaib, شيبة šaiba, مشيب
mašīb) to become white-haired, grayhaired;
to turn white or gray (hair); to
grow old, to age; to make white-haired; to
bleach ( ھ s.th.) II to make ( ه s.o.) whitehaired,
cause s.o.’s ( ه) hair to turn white
(grief) IV = II
شيب šaib grayness of the hair, gray or
white hair; old age
شيبة šaiba a variety of Artemisia
(Artemisia arborescens L.; bot.)
اشيب ašyab2, f. شيباء šaibā’2, pl. شيب šīb
white, gray (hair); white-haired, grayhaired
(person); old, aged; old man
مشيب mašīb grayness of the hair, gray
or white hair; old age
شائب šā’ib white, gray (hair); whitehaired,
gray-haired (person); old, aged;
old man
شابة 2 look up alphabetically
شيت šīt pl. شيوتات šuyūtāt chintz. Printed calico
(eg.)
شيح 1 II (tun.) to dry, blot ( ھ s.th.) IV to turn
away, avert ( ب the eyes, one’s face, عن
from)
شياح šayyāḥ blotting paper
شيح 2 šīḥ an oriental variety of wormwood
(bot.)
شاخ (شيخ ) šāka i ( شيخ šayak, شيوخة šuyūka,
شيخوخة šaikūka) to age, grow old; to attain
a venerable age
شيخ šaik, pl. شيوخ šuyūk, اشياخ ašyāk,
مشيخة mašyaka, مشايخ mašāyik مشائخ , 2
mašā’ik2 an elderly, venerable gentleman;
old man; elder; chief, chieftain, sheik,
patriarch, head (of a tribe); title of the
ruler of anyone of the sheikdoms along
the Persian Gulf; title of native scholars
trained in the traditional sciences such as
clerical dignitaries, members of a religious
order, profesors of spiritual institutions of
higher learning, etc.; master; master of an
order (Sufism); senator (parl.) │ الشيخ ارز
اسمر (aruzz asmar), الشيخ ارز ابيض (abyaḍ)
(eg.) popular names for certain rice
dishes; شيخ البحر š. al-baḥr sea calf (zool.);
شيخ البلد š. al-balad chief of a village,
village mayor; شيخ السجادة š. as-sajjāda title
of the leaders of certain dervish orders in
their capacity of inheritors of the
founder’s prayer rug; شيخ الإسلام š. al-islām
sheikh ul-Islam, formerly, esp. in
medieval Egypt, title of the Grand Mufti,
the spiritual head of Islam, later being
bestowed more and more exclusively
upon the Mufti of Constantinople in the
Ottoman Empire; title of the chief mufti in
Tunisia; شيخ المدينة inspector of police
(Magr.); مشيخة الجامع الأعظم professoriate,
or faculty, of the Great Mosque in Tunis;
الشيوخ (pl. of majesty) title of a ruler 496
among the inhabitants of Nejd; مجلس الشيوخ
majlis aš-š. senate
شيخة šaika pl. -āt an old, or elderly,
woman, a matron
شياخة šiyāka position, or dignity, of a
sheik
شيخوخة šaikūka old age, senility
شيخوخي šaikūkī senile, characteristic of
old age
مشيخة mašyaka pl. -āt, مشايخ mašāyik2
office, or dignity, of a sheik; sheikdom (in
general, specif., anyone of the semiindependent
territories on the Persian
Gulf); an administrative subdivision
(Tun.); professoriate (e.g., of Al Azhar)
شاد (شيد ) šāda i ( شيد šaid) to erect, set up,
construct, build ( ھ an edifice, and the like)
II = I; IV = I; به or اشاد بذكره (bi-dikrihī) to
celebrate, praise, commend s.o. or s.th.,
speak in glowing terms of s.o. or s.th.
شيد šīd plaster (of a wall); plaster of
Paris; mortar
تشييد tašyīd erection, setting up,
construction, building (of an edifice)
اشادة išāda praise, commendation,
extolment ( ب of)
مشيد mušayyad high, lofty, imposing (of
a structure)
شيراز šīrāz2 Shiraz (city in SW Iran)
شيرج šīraj sesame oil
شيرة šīra a refreshment (made of fruit juice)
شيزوفرانيا šīzofrāniyā schizophrenia
شيش 1 šīš foil, rapier; jalousie, Venetian blind │
معلم الشيش mu‘allim aš-š. fencing
instructor; لعبة الشيش la‘bat aš-š. fencing,
swordplay
شيشة 2 šīša bottle of the narghile; narghile,
hookah
شاط (شيط ) šāṭa i ( شيط šaiṭ) to burn (esp. food) II
to burn slightly, singe, scorch, sear ( ھ
s.th.) IV = II; V = I; X استشاط غضبا
(gaḍaban) to be or become fuming with
rage, flare up, fly off the handle
شيطان II tašaiṭana to behave like a devil
شيطان šaiṭān pl. شياطين šayāṭīn2 Shaitan,
Satan, devil, fiend
شيطاني šaiṭānī satanic, devilish,
fiendish; demonic, demoniac, hellish,
infernal
شيطنة šaiṭana devilry, villainy, dirty
trick
شاع (شيع ) šā‘a i ( شيع šai‘, شيوع šuyū‘) to spread,
be divulged, become known, become
public (news); to spread (out), diffuse ( في
over); to fill, pervade, dominate ( في s.o.,
s.th.; of a feeling); شاع في to be generally
attributable, be generally applicable to
s.th.; شاع به to spread, divulge, publicize,
circulate s.th.; make s.th. known, bring
s.th. to public notice II to see ( ه s.o.) off,
escort, accompany ( ه s.o.); to bid farewell
ه) to s.o.); to pay ( ه the deceased) the last
honors; to send ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.); to adhere (
ھ to a faction) │ شيعت الجنازة šuyyi‘at iljanāzatu
the deceased was escorted to his
final resting place, the funeral took place
III to follow ( على ه s.o. in), adapt o.s. ( على ه
to s.o. in); to conform, fall in ( على ه with
s.o. in); to side ( على ھ, ه with s.o., with
s.th. in), take sides ( على ھ, ه for s.o., for
s.th. in) IV to spread, divulge, publish,
publicize, make known, bring to public
notice, circulate ( ب or ھ s.th.) V to side ( ل
في with s.o., with s.th. in), take sides ( ل في
for s.o., for s.th. in), join ( ل s.o., s.th., a
faction), make common cause, hold ( ل
with s.o.); to become a Shiite; to pretend
to be a Shiite VI to come to an agreement
على) in, about) 497
شيعة šī‘a pl. شيع šiya‘ followers,
adherents, disciples, faction, party, sect;
الشيعة the faction of Ali, the Shiah, the
Shiites (that branch of the Muslims who
recognize Ali, the Prophet’s son-in-law, as
his rightful successor), pl. اشياع ašyā‘
adherents, followers, partisans
شيعي šī‘ī Shiitic, (pl. -ūn) Shiite
شياع šiyā‘ community (of property)
(jur.)
شيوع šuyū‘ publicity, spread, circulation
(of news) │ على الشيوع in common, jointly,
in joint possession
شيوعي šuyū‘ī communistic, communist;
(pl. -ūn) a communist
شيوعية šuyū‘īya communism
تشييع tašyī‘: تشييع الجنازة ṯ al-janāza
funeral, burial
مشايعة mušāya‘a partisanship, partiality
اشاعة išā‘a spreading, publication,
circulation (of news); rumor; news,
information
O اشاعية išā‘īya collectivism (pol.)
تشيع tašayyu‘ partisanship, partiality,
bias ( ل for)
شائع šā’i‘ widespread, (well-)known,
public; general, universal; common, joint
│ الشائع ان it is rumored that ...; شائع الذيوع
widely known, widespread, common; شائع
الاستعمال in general use, commonly used,
generally accepted; ملك شائع (milk) joint
property
شائعة šā’i‘a pl. -āt, شوائع šawā’i‘ rumor
مشايع mušāyi‘ partial, adherent, partisan
مشاع mušā‘ widespread; (well-)known,
public; general, universal; common, joint;
joint (or collective) ownership, joint
tenancy (Isl. Law); public property, public
domain
متشيع mutašayyi‘ partial; partisan
مشتاع muštā‘ partner, co-partner, coowner
شاف II to cut up, chop or slice ( ھ fruit)
اشياف ašyāf (pl.) cuts, slices
شيون šīfūn chiffon (fabric)
شيق see شوق
شيك 1 (Fr.) šīk chic
اشيك ašyak2 very chic
شيك 2 (Fr. cheque) šēk, šīk pl. -āt check │ شيك
السياحة traveler's check
شيكوريا (It. cicoria) šīkōriyā chicory
شيكولاته šīkōlāta (syr.) chocolate
شال (شيل 1 ) šāla , to carry, convey,
transport ( ھ s.th.); to raise, elevate, lift ( ھ
s.th.)
شيلة šaila pl. -āt load, burden
شيالة šiyāla carrying, carriage,
conveyance, transportation (of loads);
porterage, carrying charges
شيال šayyāl pl. -ūn, شيالة šayyāla porter,
carrier
شيالة šayyāla suspender
مشال mašāl carrying, carriage,
conveyance, transportation (of loads);
porterage, carrying charges
شال 2 pl. شيلان look up alphabetically
شيلام šailām darnel (Lalium temulentum; bot.);
a variety of vetch
شيلمان šīlmān (coll.; n. un. ة) steel
girders (ir.)
شيلي šīlī Chile
شام (شيم ) šāma i to look out ( ھ for), be
on the lookout, watch; to expect ( ھ s.th.),
hope ( ھ for)
شيمة šīma pl. شيم šiyam nature, temper,
disposition, character; habit, custom,
practice 498
شامة šāma pl. -āt, شام šām mole, nevus,
birthmark
شيمية šīmīya pl. شيامي šayāmī (eg.)
vortex, whirlpool, eddy
مشيمة mašīma pl. مشيم mašīm, مشايم
mašāyim2 placenta
شان (شين 1 ) šāna i ( شين šain) to disfigure,
disfeature, mar, .dishonor, disgrace ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.) │ شان سمعته (sum‘atahū) to
detract from s.o.’s good reputation II = I
شين šain disfigurement, marring,
dishonoring, disgracing; disgrace, shame
شائن šā’in dishonorable, scandalous,
disgraceful
مشين mušayyin dishonorable,
scandalous, disgraceful
شين 1 šīn name of the letter ش
شاي look up alphabetically
شياخ pl. of شاء , see شوء
ص
ص abbreviation of صفحة ṣafḥa page (of a
book)
ص ب abbreviation of صندوق البريد ṣundūq albarīd
post-office box, p. o. b.
صؤاب ṣu’āb (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. صئبان ši’bān,
صيبان ṣībān nit
صابورة see صبر 2
صابون see صبن
صاج ṣāj thin sheet iron; bread tin, baking tin │
صاج مضلع (muḍalla‘) corrugated iron
يا صاح yā ṣāḥi = يا صاحبي yā ṣāḥibī
صاد name of the letter ص
صاغ in order, right, proper, sound, regular,
standard; a rank in army and police
(intermediate between captain and major);
a naval rank intermediate between
lieutenant and lieutenant commander (Eg.)
│ عملة صاغ (‘umla) standard currency;
غرش صاغ (girš) standard piaster
صاغقول اغاسي (Turk. sağkol ağasι) military
rank intermediate between captain and
major (Eg.)
صالة (It. sala) ṣāla pl. -āt hall, large room
صالون ṣālūn salon, parlor, reception room │
عربة صالون ‘arabat ṣ. parlor car, club car
صامولة see صمولة ṣamūla
صأى ṣa’ā a i ( صئى ṣa’īy) to twitter, chirp (of a
bird)
صب ṣabba u (ṣabb) to pour, pour forth, cast,
empty, fill ( في ھ s.th. into); to impose, عليه
بلاء (balā’an) a trial upon s.o. │ صب الغارة
to commit an assault; -- i (ṣabb) to be
poured out, pour forth, shed, flow ( في
into); to befall ( على s.o.), come upon s.o. (
على)؛ -- ( ١ st pers. perf. ṣabibtu) a ( صبابة
ṣabāba) to love ardently ( الى s.o.) V to
pour forth, shed, flow; to drip, outflow ( ھ
with), be bathed ( ھ in); to dissolve, melt,
deliquesce │ تصبب عرقا (‘araqan) to be
wet with perspiration, break into a sweat
VII to be poured out, pour forth, flow,
shed, effuse, gush out; to be intent, be
bent ( على or الى on), be out for ( على or ;(الى
to apply o.s. ( على or الى to s.th.), study,
endeavor ( على or الى to be or do s.th.); to
be aimed, directed, oriented ( على at), bear
upon ( على) ٤٩٩
صب ṣabb pouring; casting, founding
(of metal); cut; flow gush; outpour,
effusion; ardently in love, enamored
صبيب ṣabīb pl. اصباب aṣbāb declivity;
slope, incline, hillside
صبيب ṣabīb poured out, shed, spilled;
blood; sweat, perspiration
صبابة ṣabāba ardent love, fervent
longing
صبابة ṣubāba rest, remainder, remnant
مصب maṣabb pl. -āt, مصاب maṣābb2
outlet, escape, drain; mouth (of a river,
and the like); drainpipe; funnel
مصبوب maṣbūb lead (metal); pl.
مصبوبات cast-metal goods, foundry
products
صبأ 1 ṣaba’a a ( صبوء ṣubū’) to grow (tooth,
nail), sprout (plant); -- ṣaba’a a to turn (
الى to, toward)
صابئ 2 ṣābi’ Sabian; Mandaean, see the
following
الصابئة aṣ-ṣābi’a the Sabians,
designation of two different sects, 1) the
Mandaeans, a Judeo-Christian Gnostic,
baptist sect in Mesopotomia (Christians of
St. John), used in this sense in the Koran.
2) The Sabians of Harran, a pagan sect
extant as late as the 11th century A. D.
صبح ṣabaḥa a (ṣabḥ) to offer a morning
draught ( ه to s.o.); -- ṣabuḥa u ( صباحة
ṣabāḥa) to be beautiful, graceful,
handsome, comely, pretty; to beam, be
radiant (face) II to offer a morning
draught ( ه to s.o.); to come in the morning
ه) to s.o.); to which a good morning ( على
or ه to s.o.) III يصابحه ويماسيه he attends to
it mornings and evenings, he is constantly,
incessantly occupied with it IV to enter
upon morning; to wake up, be awake, be
in one’s senses; to be or become clear; to
become, be, or happen in the morning; to
get ( في into a situation), reach a state,
come to a point where ...; to become,
grow, turn; to be │ اصبح الصباح (ṣabāḥu) it
became morning; اصبح على خير to have a
good morning, begin the day happily;
تصبح على خير (tuṣbiḥ) porting word at
night: may you he well tomorrow
morning! يفعله اذا اصبح ويفعله اذا امسى (amsā)
he does it mornings and evenings, he does
it all the time, incessantly; اصبح الحق
(ḥaqqu) truth has come to light; لم يصبح
يفعل he no longer did (so); لم يصبح له وجود it
no longer existed VIII to have a morning
draught; to light ( ھ s.th., e.g., a lamp); to
use for lighting ( ب s.th.) X to begin the
day
صبح ṣubḥ pl. اصباح aṣbāḥ dawn;
daybreak; morning; (ellipt. for صلاة الصبح
ṣalāt aṣ-ṣ.) morning prayer (at dawn)
صبحة ṣubḥa early morning; breakfast,
morning meal
صباح ṣabāḥ morning; صباحا ṣabāḥan in
the morning │ صباح مساء ṣabāḥa masā’a
in the morning and in the evening,
mornings and evenings; صباح اليوم ṣabāḥ
al-yaum this morning; صباحك بالخير, صباح
الخير (bi-l-kair) good morning! عم صباحا
(‘im) do.
صباحي ṣabāḥī morning (adj.)
صباح ṣubāḥ and صبحان ṣabḥān2, f. صبحى
ṣabḥā pretty, comely, handsome,
beautiful, graceful
صبيح ṣabīḥ pl. صباح ṣibāḥ pretty,
comely, handsome, beautiful, graceful
صباحة ṣubāḥa beauty, gracefulness,
grace
صبيحة ṣabīḥa morning
صبوح ṣabūḥ morning draught; beautiful
as the early day, radiant, bright
مصباح miṣbāḥ pl. مصابيح maṣābīḥ2 lamp;
light, luminary (also fig.); head-light (of
an automobile) │ مصباح الإضاءة ٥٠٠
incandescent light, light bulb; مصباح كشاف
(kaššāf) searchlight; مصباح كھربائي
(kahrabā’ī) electric light, light bulb; مصباح
كھربائي يدوي (yadawī) electric flashlight
اصباح iṣbāḥ morning
استصباح istiṣbāḥ illumination, lighting │
غاز الاستصباح illuminating gas
مصبح muṣbaḥ morning
صبر ṣabara i (ṣabr) to bind, tie, fetter, shackle
ه) s.o.); to be patient, be forbearing, have
patience, take patience, persevere; to bear
calmly, patiently, stoutly, endure ( على
s.th.); to refrain, abstain, desist ( عن from),
renounce ( عن s.th.); to hold one’s own ( ل
against s.o.), withstand ( ل s.o.) II to ask ( ه
s.o.) to be patient; to admonish ( ه s.o.) to
be patient; to console, comfort, solace ( ھ
the heart); to make ( ھ s.th.) durable; to
conserve ( ھ s.th.); to preserve, can ( ھ
s.th.) │ صبر بطنه (baṯnahū; eg.) to have a
snack III to vie in patience ( ه with s.o.); to
bear stoutly V to be patient, be forbearing,
have or take patience, persevere
VIII = V
صبر ṣabr fettering, shackling; patience,
forbearance; composure, equanimity,
steadfastness, firmness; self-control, selfcommand,
self-possession; perseverance,
endurance, hardiness │ قتله صبرا qatalahū
ṣabran to kill s.o. in captivity; لا صبر لي
(ṣabra) I cannot bear it! this is
unbearable! قلة الصبر qillat aṣ-ṣ.
impatience; قليل الصبر impatient; قل صبره
qalla ṣabruhū to be impatient; to lose
patience; لم يبق في قوس صبري منزع lam
yabqa fī qausi ṣabrī minza‘ (there is no
arrow left for the bow of my patience, i.e.)
my patience is at an end
صبر ṣabir, ṣabr aloe (bot.)
صبرة ṣabra severe cold
صبرة ṣabra heap, pile; ṣubratan
summarily, on the whole, in the lump
صبار ṣabbār (very) patient, enduring,
perseverant, steadfast
صبار ṣubār Indian fig (Opuntia ficusindica;
bot.)
صبر ṣubbair Indian fig (Opuntia ficusindica;
bot.)
صبور ṣabūr pl. صبر ṣubur (very)
patient, enduring, perseverant, steadfast
صبارة ṣabāra and ṣabārra severe cold
تصبيرة taṣbira (eg.) light meal in the
forenoon, a snack
مصابرة muṣābara long-suffering,
longanimity, endurance, perseverance,
patience, forbearance
اصطبار iṣtibār patience, forbearance,
endurance, perseverance
صابر ṣābir patient, long-suffering,
enduring, perseverant, steadfast
مصبرات muṣabbarāt conserves, canned
goods
صبر 2 ṣabbara to ballast ( ه a ship)
صابورة ṣābūra ballast of a ship
صبع ṣaba‘a a (ṣab‘) to point with the finger (
على or ب at); to insert one’s finger ( ھا into
the hen, so as to ascertain whether she is
going to lay an egg)
اصبع iṣba‘ pl. اصابع aṣābi‘2 finger; toe
(also اصبع القدم i. al.qadam); a linear
measure (Eg.; = 3.125 cm) │ اصابع من
البطاطس French fried potatoes; اصبع الأحمر
lipstick; اصابع السجق s. as-sujuq
frankfurters; بصمة الأصابع baṣmat al-a.
fingerprint; طابع الأصابع do.; له اصبع في ھذا
الأمر he has a hand in this matter
صباع ṣubā‘ (eg.) finger; toe (also صباع
القدم ṣ. al-qadam)
اصبوع uṣbū‘ pl. اصابيع aṣābī‘ finger; toe
مصبع muṣabba‘ gridiron, grill 501
صبغ ṣabaga u i a (ṣabg, ṣibag) to dye,
stain ( ھ s.th., e.g., a fabric), color, tint,
tinge, paint, daub ( ھ s.th.); to give s.th. (
ھ ) the air, touch, or appearance ( ب of
s.th.); to dip, immerse ( ھ s.th., في in
water); to baptize ( ه s.o.) │ صبغه صبغة
(ṣibgatan ukrā) to transform, change s.o.
VIII to be dyed, be or become colored or
tinted; to be baptized, receive baptism
صبغ ṣibg pl. اصباغ aṣbāg color, dye,
dyestuff; pigment; (coat of) paint, varnish;
make-up, grease paint, face paint
صبغة ṣibga color, dye, dyestuff;
pigment; tincture (med.); coloring, tinge,
tint, shade, hue, nuance, touch, air; nature,
character; (coat of) paint, varnish;
baptism; religion │ صبغة الأفيون ṣ. al-afyūn
tincture of opium, laudanum; صبغة اليود ṣ.
al-yūd tincture of iodine; صبغة محلية
(maḥallīya) local touch, local color; اخرجه
من صبغته (akrajahū) to change, disfigure
s.o. or s.th.
O صبغيات ṣibgīyāt chromosomes
صباغ ṣibāg pl. اصبغة aṣbiga color, dye,
dyestuff; spice, condiment, seasoning,
sauce
صباغ ṣabbāg dyer
صباغة ṣibāga dyer’s trade, art of dyeing
or staining
مصبغة maṣbaga dyehouse, dye works
صابغ ṣābig dyer; baptist │ يوحنا الصابغ
(yūḥannā) John the Baptist
مصبوغ maṣbūg dyed, stained, colored,
tinted; having a touch or air ( ب of);
influenced ( ب by); imbued ( ب with)
صبن II to soap, rub with soap ( ھ s.th.)
صابون ṣabūn soap │ حجر الصابون ḥajar
aṣ-ṣ. soapstone, steatite
صابونة ṣābūna (n. un.) a cake of soap
صابوني ṣābūnī soapy, soap-like,
saponaceous, made of soap
صبان ṣabbān soap boiler
مصبنة maṣbana soap works
صبا (صبو ) ṣabā u (ṣabw, ṣubūw, صبا
ṣiban, صباء ṣabā’) to be a child, be
childish; -- (ṣubūw, صبوة ṣabwa) to bend,
incline ( الى to), feel sensual desire ( الى for);
to strive ( الى for), aspire ( الى to); -- ṣabiya
a ( صباء ṣabā’, صبا ṣiban) to behave like a
child, act in a childish manner II to
rejuvenate, render youthful again V to
behave like a child, act in a childish
manner; to incline to youthful pleasures;
to rejuvenesce, undergo rejuvenation,
regain youth, become young again; to
woo, court ( ھا a woman); to tempt, entice,
captivate, charm ( ه s.o., ھ the heart) VI to
behave like a child X = VI
صبا ṣaban pl. صبوات ṣabawāt, اصباء
aṣbā’ east wind
صبا، صبى ṣiban childhood, boyhood,
youth; youthfulness; inclination,
propensity, bent, longing, desire
صباء ṣabā’ childhood, boyhood, youth;
youthfulness
صبوة ṣabwa youthful passion; amorous
disposition; sensual desire; childish
manners
صبو ṣubūw youthful passion; amorous
disposition; sensual desire; childish
manners
صبوة ṣubūwa childhood, boyhood,
youth; youthfulness
صبي ṣabīy pl. صبية ṣibya, ṣabya, صبيان
ṣibyān, ṣubyān, اصبية aṣbiya boy, youth,
lad
صبية ṣabīya pl. صبايا ṣabāyā girl; young
girl 502
صبياني ṣibyānī boyish, childlike;
childish, puerile; children’s
صاب ṣābin youthful, juvenile
thoughtless, rash
صبي see صبو
صح ṣaḥḥa i ( صحة ṣiḥḥa, صحاح ṣaḥāḥ) to be
healthy; to be all right, be in order; to
recover, recuperate ( من from); to heal (of
a wound); to be sound, strong, vigorous,
firm, right, correct, faultless, unimpaired,
unblemished; to be firm, unshakable
(resolution); to be admissible, permissible;
to be true, authentic, certain, sure; to
prove true, turn out to be true; to hold
good. go ( على for), apply ( على to), b. true (
على of); to result or follow definitely ( عن
from); to be a fact, turn out ( ل for); to
become a fact; to be successful, work out
well ( ل for s.o.); to fall to s.o. or to s.o.’s
share ( صحت عزيمته على │ ( ل or صح عزمه
(‘azmuhū) he was firmly resolved to ...,
his mind was made up to ...; يصح الاعتماد
عليه it may serve as a basis; يصح ان يقال فيه it
is rightly said of him ...; صح في الأذھان to
appear right, adequate, reasonable II to
restore, to health, cure, heal ( ه s.o.); to
correct, emend, rectify ( ھ s.th.); to
prepare, a critical edition ( ھ of a text); to
legalize, authenticate ( ھ a document),
certify, confirm, attest ( ھ the authenticity
of a document), sign ( ھ a document); to
impose one’s signature, undersign (magr.)
V to undergo correction, emendation,
rectification, be corrected, emended,
rectified X to regain health; to recover,
recuperate ( من from)
صحة ṣiḥḥa health; hygiene;
faultlessness, rightness, soundness,
correctness; truth, genuineness, verity,
veracity, credibility, authenticity; validity;
legal validity, legality │ وزارة الصحة
العمومية (‘umūmīya) Ministry of Public
Health (Eg.)
صحي wholesome, salubrious, healthy,
healthful (diet, and the like); sanitary;
hygienic │ المحجر الصحي (maḥjar)
quarantine
صحيح pl. صحاح ṣiḥāḥ, ṣiḥāḥ, اصحاء
aṣiḥḥā’2 healthy, well, sound, healthful;
complete, integral, perfect; whole, entire,
undivided; right, correct, proper; true,
veritable, actual, real; authentic, genuine,
truthful, reliable, credible, believable;
valid, legally valid, legal, lawful, rightful;
strong (gram.; of a consonant, a verb) │
جمع صحيح (jam‘) sound plural (ending in
ون -ūn or ات -āt; gram); عدد صحيح (‘adad)
whole number, integer (math.); صحيح ... انه
(annahū) he was (he is) …, he was (he is),
it is true, …
اصح aṣaḥḥ2 sounder, healthier; more
correct, more proper │ او على الأصح or
more properly speaking
اصحاح aṣḥāḥ, iṣḥāḥ chapter of the Holy
Scriptures (Chr.)
مصح maṣaḥḥ pl. -āt sanatorium; health
retreat, sanitarium
مصحة maṣaḥḥa that which promotes or
is conducive to health; sanatorium
تصحيح taṣḥīḥ correction, rectification;
emendation, critical revision
مصحح muṣaḥḥiḥ O vernier (of a range
finder) │ المصحح اسفله (asfalahū) the
undersigned
صحب ṣaḥiba a ( صحبة ṣuḥba, صحابة
ṣaḥāba, ṣiḥāba) to be or become a
companion, an associate, a comrade, a
friend ( ه of s.o.), make or become friends,
be friends ( ه with s.o.); to associate, have
social intercourse ( ه with s.o.); to
accompany, escort ( ه s.o.); to be closely
associated ( ه with s.o.) III = I; to keep ( ه
s.o.) company IV to send along, delegate
as companion or escort ( ه ه or ھ for s.o.
s.o. else or s.th.) VI to 503 have social
intercourse, associate ( مع with); to become
friends, be friends ( مع with) VIII to
accompany, escort ( ه s.o.); to take ( ه s.o.)
as companion or escort, have o.s. escorted
or accompanied ( ه by s.o.): to take along ( ه
s.th., ه a companion) X to take a
companion or escort, take along
صحبة ṣuḥba friendship, companionship,
comradeship; accompanying, company,
escort; association, intercourse; friends,
companions, associates, comrades; (eg.)
nosegay, bunch of flowers: ṣuḥbata
accompanied by; with │ صحبة ھذا
(ṣuḥbata) herein enclosed
الصحابة aṣ-ṣaḥāba the Companions of
the Prophet Mohammed
صحابي ṣaḥābī a Companion of the
Prophet Mohammed
مصاحبة muṣāḥaba accompanying,
company, escort
اصطحاب iṣṭiḥāb accompanying,
company, escort; association
صاحب ṣāḥib pl. اصحاب aṣḥāb, صحب
ṣuḥub, صحابة ṣaḥāba, صحبان ṣuḥbān, صحبة
associate, companion, comrade, friend;
adherent, follower; the other (of two);
(with foll. genit.) man, owner, possessor,
holder, master, lord, commander,
representative, author or originator of …;
entrusted with; addicted or given to; يا صاح
yā ṣāḥi = يا صاحبي yā ṣāḥibī│ صاحب الأمر ṣ.
al-amr ruler, master, overlord, sovereign;
صاحب البواخر shipowner; صاحب الجلالة ṣ. aljalāla
His Majesty; صاحب حال the noun to
which a circumstantial phrase (ḥāl) refers;
صاحب الدولة ṣ. ad-daula (formerly) title of
the Prime Minister (Eg.); صاحب السجادة ṣ.
as-sajjāda title of the leaders of certain
dervish orders in their capacity of owners
of the founder’s prayer rug; صاحب السعادة ṣ.
as-sa‘āda title of a pasha; صاحب السماحة ṣ.
as-samāḥa title of a mufti, approx. “His
Eminence”; صاحب السمو الملكي ṣ. as-sumūw
al-malakī His Royal Highness; اصحاب الشأن
a. aš-ša’n those concerned; the important,
influential people; اصحاب الشبھات a. aššubuhāt
dubious persons, people of ill
repute; صاحب الطبع (formerly) Keeper of
the Seal (of the Bey of Tunisia); صاحب
العزة ṣ. al-‘izza title of a bey; صاحب العظمة
ṣ. al-‘aẓama His Majesty; صاحب المعالي ṣ.
al-ma‘ālī title of a cabinet minister; صاحب
العمل ṣ. al-‘amal employer; صاحب الغبطة ṣ.
al-gibṭa title of the Coptic Patriarch;
صاحب الفضيلة title of Islamic theologians
and sheiks, such as Rector and Professors
of Al Azhar University; صاحب ṣ. al-fikra
father to the thought, the originator of an
idea; صاحب المقام الرفيع (ṣ. al-maqam)
formerly, title bestowed on bearers of the
order القلادة established by Fuad I in 1936
صاحبة ṣāḥiba pl. -āt, صواحب ṣawāḥib2,
صواحبات ṣawāḥibāt fem. of صاحب woman
companion. etc. │ صاحبة الجلالة ṣ. al-jalāla
Her Majesty; صاحبة السمو الملكي ṣ. assumūw
al-malakī Her Royal Highness;
صاحبة العصمة ṣ. al-‘iṣma title of a lady of
high social standing
صويحب ṣuwaiḥib friend (diminutive of
(صاحب
صويحبة ṣuwaiḥiba pl. -āt girl friend
(diminutive of (صاحبة
مصحوب maṣḥūb accompanied ( ب by);
attended ( ب with); associated ( ب with);
provided ( ب with)
اصحر aṣḥar2 f. صحراء ṣaḥrā’2 desertlike; of the
color of desert sand; desolate, bleak
صحراء ṣaḥrā’2 pl. صحار ṣaḥārin, صحاري
ṣaḥārā, صحروات ṣaḥrawāt desert, steppe
504
صحراوي ṣaḥrāwī desert, desolate, waste
│ اراض صحراوية (arāḍin) desert areas
صحارة ṣaḥāra pl. صحاحير ṣaḥāḥīr2 case,
chest, crate, box
صحف II to misplace the diacritical marks; to
misread, mispronounce, misspell ( ھ a
word); to misrepresent, distort, twist ( ھ a
report, etc.) V to be misread or misspelled
(word)
صحفة ṣaḥfa pl. صحاف ṣiḥāf bowl, dish,
platter
صحيفة ṣuḥaifa saucer
صحيفة ṣaḥīfa pl. صحف ṣuḥuf, صحائف
ṣaḥā’if2 leaf (in a book or notebook),
page; newspaper, paper, daily, journal;
epidermis; surface; exterior │ الصحيفة
البيضاء (baiḍā’) honorable name, honor
صحفي ṣuḥufī newspaper-, news-, press-
(in compounds), journalistic; (pl. -ūn)
newspaperman, journalist │ مؤتمر صحفي
(mu’tamar) press conference
صحافة ṣiḥāfa journalism, news
business; the press
صحافي ṣaḥāfī journalistic; journalist,
newspaperman, newsman
صحافية ṣiḥāfīya woman journalist
مصحف maṣḥaf, muṣḥaf pl. مصاحف
maṣāḥif2 volume; book; copy of the Koran
(مصحف شريف)
تصحيف taṣhīf misplacement of the
diacritical marks; misspelling, slip of the
pen; (grammatical) mistake;
misrepresentation, distortion
صحل ṣaḥal raucous voice
صحن 1 ṣaḥn pl. صحون ṣuḥūn bowl, dish; plate;
dish, meal, food; yard, courtyard; surface,
plane; disk; (pl. اصحنة aṣḥina) phonograph
record, disc (tun.) │ صحن الدار courtyard,
patio; صحن السجار ashtray; على صحن الخد (ṣ.
il-kadd) on the (surface of the) cheek
مصحون maṣḥūn ground, brayed,
pounded, crushed, grated
صحناة 2 ṣaḥnāh sardine
صحو) and صحي) صحا ṣaḥā u (ṣaḥw) and صحي
ṣaḥiya a ( صحا ṣaḥan) to be or become
clear, bright, cloudless, serene (day, sky);
صحو) -- ṣaḥw, ṣuḥuw) to regain
consciousness, come to; to recover ( من
from intoxication), sober up; to wake up,
awake ( من from sleep); to become alert (
الى to s.th.), become aware ( الى of s.th.) II
to wake up, awaken, rouse ( ه s.o.) IV to be
or become clear, bright, cloudless, serene
(day, sky); to wake up, awaken, rouse ( ه
s.o.)
صحو ṣaḥw cloudlessness, brightness
serenity (of the weather); clarity, alertness
of the mind, consciousness; bright, serene,
cloudless, sunny (weather)
صحوة ṣaḥwa awakening, recovery of
consciousness; state of consciousness
صاح ṣāḥin bright, serene, cloudless,
clear (weather); -- (pl. -ūn, صحاة ṣuḥāh)
awake, wakeful, watchful, alert, vigilant;
conscious; sober
صخب ṣakiba a (ṣakab) to shout, cry, yell,
clamor, roar, bellow; to scold ( على s.o.,
s.th.); to rage, roar, be loud VIII to raise a
din, roar simultaneously, be tumultuous,
resound in utter confusion, rage
صخب ṣakab shouting, roar(ing),
bellowing, yelling, clamor, din, hubbub;
cry, outcry, yell; raging
صخب ṣakib crying, yelling, noisy,
clamoring, vociferous, roaring, raging
صخاب ṣakkāb clamorous, boisterous,
roaring, bellowing, raging
اصطخاب iṣtikāb noise, din, clamor,
hubbub, uproar, tumult, turmoil, roar,
raging
صاخب ṣākib loud, noisy, clamorous,
boisterous, vociferous, tumultuous,
roaring, 505 raging │ قوة صاخبة (qūwa)
power of the voice
مصطخب muṣṭakab noise, din, hubbub,
tumult, raging, roar(ing)
صخر ṣakr (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. صخور ṣukūr,
صخورة ṣukūra, صخرات ṣakarāt rocks, solid
rock, boulders, rock formations; pl. صخور
rock (geol.)
صخرة ṣakra boulder, rock │ قبة الصخرة
qubbat aṣ-ṣ. the Dome of the Rock, the
Mosque of Omar (in Jerusalem)
صخري ṣakrī rocky, stony
صخر ṣakir rocky, stony
صد ṣadda u (ṣadd) to turn away, alienate,
discourage, divert, deter, restrain, reject,
send away ( عن ه s.o. from); to dissuade (
عن ه s.o. from his desire); to repel, parry,
ward off ( ھ s.th., e.g., an attack); to
hinder, prevent ( عن ه s.o. from); to
impede, hamper, stop, bring to a standstill
ه) s.o.); to resist, oppose ( ه s.o.) │ لا يصد
النظر (naẓara) it does not offend the eye, it
is nice to look at; -- i u (ṣadd, صدود ṣudūd)
to turn away ( عن from), turn one’s back (
عن on s.o., on s.th.); to stay away, remain
aloof ( عن from s.th.) II to suppurate,
maturate, fester IV do. V to face, confront
ل) s.o.)
صد ṣadd averting, turning away;
checking, stopping; repulsion, rejection;
hindering, impeding, obstruction,
prevention; resistance, aversion,
reluctance
صدد ṣadad nearness, proximity;
intention, purpose, design, aim; respect,
regard, relation, concern, subject, matter;
topic (of a discussion); ṣadada (prep.)
opposite, in front of │ على صدد and بصدد
opposite, in front of; في صدد concerning,
regarding, re, with respect to; في ھذا الصدد
in this respect, with regard to this, with
relation to this, on this occasion, in this
connection; ھو بصدد امر he is currently
busy with s.th., he is at present occupied
with a matter; نرجع الى ما نحن بصدده (narji‘)
we return to what is our present concern
or to what we are just discussing
صديد ṣadīd pus, matter
صديدي ṣadīdī suppurative, purulent,
festering
صدئ ṣadi’a a ( صدأ ṣada’) and صدؤ ṣadu’a u
(ṣadā’a) to become or be rusty, rust,
oxidize II = I; to make ( ھ s.th.) rusty,
cause ( ھ s.th.) to rust, corrode ( ھ s.th.)
صدأ ṣada’a rust; oxidation; smut, rust
(plant disease)
صداءة ṣadā’a rustiness
صدئ ṣadi’a rusty, rust-covered; dirty,
mean, shabby
مصدأ maṣda’ rusty, rust-covered
صدح ṣadaḥa a (ṣadḥ, صداح ṣudāḥ) to chant,
sing; to play ( ب a song, a tune)
صدح ṣadaḥ banner
صدحات ṣadaḥāt (musical) strains
O صادح ṣādiḥ note raised a semitone, a
sharp (mus.)
صدر ṣadara a i ( صدور ṣudūr) to go out,
step out ( عن or من of, from within); to
proceed, emanate, arise, originate, stem (
عن or من from), have its origin ( عن or من
in); to come out, be issued, be
promulgated (order, ordinance, law); to
appear, be published (book); to leave, go
out (mail); to go ( الى to); to happen, occur,
come to pass; pass. ṣudira to have a chest
complaint │ صدر عن الجد (jidd) to set about
seriously, get to work earnestly; صدر عن
ارادته to act on one’s own volition II to
send, send off, dispatch, forward ( ھ s.th.);
to export ( ھ s.th.); to publish, bring out ( ھ
a book); to preface ( ھ a book); to
introduce, commence ( ب ھ a book with)
506 III to seize, impound, confiscate ( ھ
s.th.); to urge, press, oppress (s.o.), throw
obstacles in s.o.’s ( ه) way IV to send, send
out, dispatch ( ھ s.th.); to export ( ھ s.th.);
to issue ( ھ s.th., e.g., banknotes, bonds),
make out ( ھ s.th., e.g., a passport); to
publish, bring out ( ھ s.th., e.g., a book); to
give, issue ( ھ an order); to pronounce,
pass ( ھ a legal sentence); to utter, express
ھ) an opinion, a view) V to be sent, be
dispatched; to preside ( ھ over), head ( ھ a
group); to have a front seat ( ھ at a social
gathering); to resist, oppose ( ل s.o.), throw
obstacles in s.o.’s ( ل) way, stand in s.o.’s (
ل) way X to bring about, obtain ( ھ s.th.,
esp. حكما ḥukman a legal judgment or
sentence); to issue (marsūman an
ordinance)
صدر ṣadr pl. صدور ṣudūr chest, breast,
bust; bosom, heart; front part, front; part,
portion; first hemistich; leader,
commander; beginning, start, outset,
commencement, inception; early period,
beginnings, dawn (fig.) │ صدر الدار one
who occupies the highest position in the
house, who plays first fiddle in the house;
صدر رحب (raḥb) generosity, magnanimity;
open-mindedness, broadmindedness,
liberality, frankness, candor; صدر الإسلام
early period of Islam, early Islam; الصدر
الأعظم title of the Grand Vizier in the
Ottoman Empire; grand vizier (Mor.); صدر
المكان ṣ. al-makān the foremost part of a
room; صدر النھار ṣ. an-nahār daybreak,
beginning of the
day; ابو صدر robin (zool.); بنات الصدر
banāt aṣ-ṣ. worries, anxieties,
apprehensions; باب الصدر front door; ذات
الصدر chest complaint; bottom of the heart,
secret thoughts; رحب الصدر raḥb aṣ-ṣ.
generous, magnanimous; open-minded,
broad-minded, liberal; free of misgivings,
unhesitating; رحيب الصدر do.; ضيق الصدر
ḍayyiq aṣ-ṣ. annoyed, angry ( ب at);
disgruntled, depressed; منقبض الصدر
munqabiḍ aṣ-ṣ. dejected, low-spirited,
crestfallen; مكانة الصدر makānat aṣ-ṣ. first
place, precedence, priority; = واسع الصدر
رحب الصدر؛ صدرا من الزمان (zamān) quite a
stretch of time, for some time; في الصدر in
the foreground; سخم بصدره (sakkama) to
irritate s.o., make s.o. angry; انشرح صدره
inšaraḥa ṣadruhū to be gladdened, be
pleased, be cheered, be happy, rejoice
صدري ṣadrī pectoral, chest (used
attributively) │ نزلة صدرية (nazla)
bronchitis
صدرة ṣudra vest, waistcoat; camisole,
(under)waist, bodice
صديري ṣudairī and صديرية pl. -āt vest,
waistcoat; bodice
صدار ṣidār vest, waistcoat;
(under-)waist, bodice
صدارة ṣadāra, ṣidāra precedence;
presidency, chairmanship; first place, preeminence;
grand vizierate, office,
chancellery, or position, of the Grand
Vizier (Mor.)
صدور ṣudūr coming out, appearance,
publication (e.g., of a book), issuance
(e.g., of an ordinance)
مصدر maṣdar pl. مصادر maṣādir starting
point, point of origin; origin, source (fig.);
(gram.) infinitive, verbal noun; absolute
or internal object
تصدير taṣdīr sending (off), dispatch,
forwarding; exportation, export; preface,
foreword (of a book); issuance
مصادرة muṣādara seizure, confiscation
اصدار iṣdār exportation, export; issue,
issuance, bringing out, edition,
publication; making out, issuance │
مصرف الاصدار maṣrif al-i. bank of issue
استصدار istiṣdār issue, making out;
issuance 507
صادر ṣādir going out, emanating,
originating; issued, come out, published,
etc.; exportation, export; yield; الصادرات
export goods, exports
مصدور maṣdūr affected with a pectoral
ailment, phthisical, consumptive,
tubercular
مصدر maṣdar export merchant, exporter
صدع ṣada‘a a (ṣad‘) to split, cleave, part,
sunder ( ھ s.th.); to crack, break ( ھ an
object), cause ( ھ an object) to crack; to
break ( ھ through obstacles), conquer,
overcome, surmount ( ھ obstacles,
difficulties) │ صدع بالحق (ḥaqq) to come
out openly with the truth; صدع بأمر (amr)
to execute an order, comply with an order;
pass. sudi‘a to have or get a headache II
to cause a headache ( ه to s.o.); to molest,
harass, trouble ( خاطره kāṭirahū s.o.); pas.
ṣuddi‘a to have or get a headache V to get
split, let cleft, come apart, burst, break,
crack; to go to pieces; to reel, waver, be
shaken; to separate ( عن from), part ( عن
with) VII to get split, get cleft, come
apart, break, crack; to be rudely
interrupted; to break, dawn (morning)
صدع ṣad‘ pl. صدوع ṣudū‘ crevice,
fissure, crack, break, rift, cleft
صداع ṣudā‘ headache
مصدوع maṣdū‘ having a crack, cracked,
broken
صدغ ṣudg pl. اصداغ aṣdāg temple (anat.);
earlock, lovelock (also قصة الصدغ quṣṣat
aṣ-ṣ.)
صدغي ṣudgī temporal (anat.)
صدف ṣadafa i u (ṣadf, صدوف ṣudūf) to turn
away ( عن from), avoid, shun ( عن s.o.,
s.th.); -- i (ṣadf) to turn ( ه s.o.) away ( عن
from), discourage, restrain, deter ( عن ه s.o.
from); to happen by chance III to find (، ھ
ه s.o., s.th.), meet ( ه s.o., ھ with s.th.); to
meet unexpectedly, by chance ( ه s.o.),
light ( ھ، ه on), come across s.o. or s.th. (، ھ
ه), run into s.o. or s.th. ( ھ، ه ), encounter (
ھ , s.o., s.th.); to coincide, be coincident,
concur ( ھ with s.th.); to fall ( ھ on a given
date); to happen by chance, come to pass (
ان that) │ صادف الاستحسان to meet with
approval; صادف محله (maḥallahū) to come
in handily, be convenient, be opportune V
to turn away ( عن from), avoid, shun ( عن
s.o., s.th.) VI to happen by chance, come
to pass
صدف ṣadaf (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اصداف
aṣdāf pearl oyster, sea shell, conch │ صدفة
الاذن ṣ. al-udun external ear, auricle, pinna
صدف ṣadaf, مرض الصدفية maraḍ aṣ-
ṣadafīya a noncontagious skin disease,
psoriasis (med.)
صدفي ṣadafī sea-shell, shell (adj.);
nacreous, mother-of-pearl (adj.)
صدفة ṣudfa pl. صدف ṣudaf chance,
haphazard, coincidence, unexpected
concurrence; صدفة ṣudfatan by chance, by
coincidence, accidentally │ بالصدفة or
بطريق الصدفة by chance, by coincidence,
accidentally; as chance will have it,
haphazardly
مصادفة muṣādafa pl. -āt encounter,
meeting; chance, haphazard, coincidence,
unexpected concurrence; muṣādafatan by
chance, by coincidence, accidentally
مصادف muṣādif corresponding ( ل to),
concurrent ( ل with a date of another
chronological system), coincident ( ل
with), falling ( ل on a given date)
صدق ṣadaqa u (ṣadq, ṣidq) to speak the truth,
be sincere; to tell ( ه s.o.) the truth ( عن
about); to prove to be true, turn out to be
correct, come true; to be right; to fit
exactly ( على s.o. or s.th.), apply ( على to),
hold true ( على of) │ وعده 508 or في وعده (fī
wa‘dihī or wa‘dahū) to keep, or fulfill,
one’s promise; صدقه النصيحة (naṣīḥata) to
advice s.o. sincerely; صدقه الحب (ḥubba) to
love s.o. sincerely, truly II to deem ( ھ، ه
s.o. s.th.) credible, accept ( ھ s.th.) as true,
give credence ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.),
believe, trust ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to consider
or pronounce ( ھ s.th.) to be true, right,
correct or credible; to believe ( ب in); to
give one’s consent, to consent, assent,
agree ( على to s.th.), approve ( على of s.th.),
grant, license, sanction, certify, confirm,
substantiate, attest, ratify, authenticate,
legalize, verify ( على s.th.) │ لا يصدق
(yuṣaddaqu) incredible, unbelievable,
unreliable, untrustworthy; صدق او كذب
ṣaddiq au kaddib (as an affirmative
parenthesis) believe it or not III to treat ( ه
s.o.) &s a friend; to maintain one’s
friendship ( ه with s.o.); to be or become
friends ( ه with s.o.), befriend ( ه s.o.); to
give one’s consent, to consent, assent,
agree ( على to s.th.), approve ( على of),
grant, license, sanction, certify, confirm,
substantiate ( على s.th.); to legalize,
authenticate ( على a signature, etc.) IV to
fix a (bridal) dower ( ھا for a woman) V to
give alms ( على to s.o.); to give as alms,
donate ( على to s.o., ب s.th.)
صدق ṣidq truth, trueness, truthfulness;
sincerity, candor; veracity, correctness (of
an allegation); efficiency; صدقا ṣidqan
truly, really, in truth
صدقة ṣadaqa pl. -āt alms, charitable
gift; almsgiving, charity, voluntary
contribution of alms, freewill offering;
legally prescribed alms tax (Isl. Law) │
صدقة الفطر ṣ. al-fiṭr almsgivings at the end
of Ramadan (Isl. Law)
صداق ṣadāq, sidāq pl. صدق ṣuduq, اصدقة
aṣdiqa (bridal) dower; -- (pl. (اصدقة
marriage contrast (tun.)
صداقة ṣadāqa pl. ·41 friendohip
صديق ṣadīq pl. اصدقاء aṣdiqā’ صدقاء , 2
ṣudaqā’ صدقان , 2 ṣudqān friend; friendly,
connected by bonds of friendship
صدوق ṣadūq veracious, truthful, honest,
sincere
صديق ṣiddīq strictly veracious, honest,
righteous, upright; الصديق epithet of the
first Caliph, Abū Bakr
اصدق aṣdaq2 truer, sincerer │ اصدق
برھان على (a. burhānin) the most reliable,
or best, proof for ...; اصدق صديق the most
loyal, or best, friend
مصداق miṣdāq confirmation,
corroboration, substantiation; touchstone,
criterion
تصديق taṣdīq belief, faith ( ب in);
consent, assent, agreement ( على to),
approval, sanctioning, licensing,
certification, confirmation, attestation,
ratification, verification, authentication,
legalization ( على of s.th.) │ سرعة التصديق
sur‘at at-t. credulity; سريع التصديق
credulous مصادقة muṣādaqa consent,
assent, agreement ( على to), concurrence (
على in); approval, sanctioning,
certification, confirmation, attestation,
ratification ( على of s.th.); legalization,
authentication ( على of a document)
تصادق taṣāduq legalization,
authentication ( على of a document)
صادق ṣādiq true, truthful, veracious,
sincere, candid; reliable; accurate, true,
genuine, faithful, authentic
مصدقة muṣaddiqa certificate,
certification, attestation
مصدق muṣaddaq credible, believable,
reliable, trustworthy │ غير مصدق
incredible; مصدق عليه رسميا (rasmīyan)
legalized, officially certified 509
صيدلي look up alphabetically
صدم ṣadama i (ṣadm) to bump, strike, knock,
dash, bounce, bang, run ( ھ، ه against), hit
(a upon); to run ( ه into s.o., e.g., an
automobile, etc.); to collide, clash ( ب
with, e.g., train with car) ill to bump,
strike, knock, dash, bounce, bang, run (، ھ
ه againat s.o. or s.th.); to resist, oppose (، ھ
ه s.o., s.th.), battle ( ھ، ه against); to
encounter (hostilely), clash; pass. صودم
ṣūdima to be severely afflicted ( ب by) VI
to collide (e.g., trains), encounter
(armies); to clash, conflict (e.g., different
opinions) VIII to collide, clash ( ب or مع
with); to bump, strike, run ( ب against), hit
ب) s.th., e.g., a mine); to take offense ( ب
at, e.g., at mistakes), take exception ( ب
to); to fail ( ب due to), be thwarted ( ب by);
= VI
صدمة ṣadma pl. ṣadamāt push, thrust,
jolt, shook, blow, stroke; upset,
commotion, (psychic) shock; obstacle,
difficulty
صدام ṣidām collision, clash; breakdown,
collapse │ صدام وجداني (wijdānī) mental
breakdown
مصادمة muṣādama, pl. -āt collision,
clash, impact
تصادم taṣādum collision, clash; bounce,
impact ( ب on); upset, commotion,
(psychic) shock │ طاسة التصادم buffer
(railroad)
اصطدام iṣṭidām collision, clash; bounce,
impact ( ب on); upset, commotion,
(psychic) shock
صدى ṣadiya II (ṣadan) to be very thirsty IV to
echo, resound, reverberate V to occupy
o.s. ( ل or الى with); to turn, apply o.s. ( ل or
الى to s.th.); to undertake ( ل or الى s.th.),
embark ( ل or الى upon); to oppose, resist,
counteract, antagonize ( ل s.o.), throw
obstacles in s.o.’s ( ل) way, be in s.o.’s ( (ل
way
صدى, صدا ṣadan pl. اصداء aṣdā’ echo,
reverberation
تصدية taṣdiya hand clapping
صر ṣarra i (ṣarr, صرير ṣarīr) to chirp,
stridulate (cricket); to creak (door); to
squeak, screech; to grate, scratch; to
gnash, chatter (teeth); to lace, cord, tie up,
truss up, bind ( ھ s.th.); to shove, put ( ھ في
money into a purse); to prick up ( ھ or ب
one’s ears) IV to persist ( على in), insist (
على on); to make up one’s mind, resolve,
determine, decide ( على to do s.th.); to
prick up ( ھ or ب one’s ears)
صرة ṣurra pl. صرر ṣurar (money) bag,
purse; bundle, packet, parcel │ الصرة or
صرة الحرمين ṣ. al-ḥaramain the ṣurra for
Mecca and Medina, the traditional funds
sent by the different Islamic countries
(nowadays, e.g., by Egypt and Tunisia)
with the hadj caravan to be distributed
among the poor of Mecca and Medina;
امين الصرة the Trustee of the ṣurra (who is
responsible for its delivery); صرة النقود
cash remittance
صرير ṣarīr chirping, stridulation (of
crickets); squeaking, screeching
صرار ṣarrār or صرار الليل ṣ. al-lail
cricket (zool.)
صريرة ṣarīra coins wrapped in a purse
اصرار iṣrār penitence, perseverance (
على in), insistences ( على on) │ سبق الإصرار
sabq al-i. premeditation, willfulness (jur.)
مصر muṣirr persistent, insistent;
determined, resolute
الصرب aṣ-ṣirb Serbia; the Serbs
صربي ṣirbī Serbian
صرح ṣaruḥa u ( صراحة ṣarāḥa, صروحة
ṣurūḥa) to be or become pure,
unadulterated, uncontaminated, clear; --
ṣaraḥa a (ṣarḥ) to make clear, clarify,
explicate, 510 explain ( ھ s.th.) II to
explain, explicate, clarify, make clear ( ھ
s.th.); to declare, state, announce ( ب s.th.),
make a statement ( ب about); to speak out
frankly, openly, be clear, be explicit (, ب
عن about), let ( ب، عن s.th.) be known; to
allow, permit, grant ( ب ل to s.o. s.th.); to
license ( ب s.th.), give a permit, grant a
license ( ب for) III to speak frankly,
openly; to speak out frankly or openly, be
clear, be explicit ( ب about), avow ( ب
s.th.), let ( ب s.th.) be known; to declare ( ه
ان to s.o. that) IV to make clear, clarify,
explicate, explain ( ھ s.th.) VI to become
clear, evident, manifest, come to light VII
to become evident, manifest, clear
صرح ṣarḥ pl. ṣurūḥ castle, palace, lofty
edifice, imposing structure
صراح ṣurāḥ pure, unadulterated,
uncontaminated, clear; distinct, plain,
obvious, evident, patent, manifest,
unambiguous, unequivocal
صريح ṣarīḥ pl. صرحاء ṣuraḥā’ صرائح , 2
ṣarā’iḥ2 pure, unadulterated,
uncontaminated; clear; distinct, plain,
obvious, evident, patent, manifest,
unambiguous, unequivocal; open, frank,
sincere, candid; free, openhearted
صراحة ṣarāḥa clearness clarity,
distinctness, plainness; unambiguousness;
openness, frankness, candor, sincerity,
openheartedness; ṣarāḥatan clearly,
plainly, distinctly, patently,
unequivocally, unambiguously; openly,
frankly, bluntly, straightforward, honestly,
openheartedly
اصرح aṣraḥ2 purer, clearer; sincerer
تصريح taṣrīḥ pl. -āt, تصاريح taṣārīḥ2
(public) statement, declaration;
permission, (official) permit, license
صرخ ṣaraka u ( صراخ ṣurāk, صريخ ṣarīk) to
cry, yell, scream, shriek, shout; to cry for
help; to call ( ب s.o.); to call out, shout ( على
to s.o.); to yell, bellow, roar ( في or في وجھه
at s.o.) │ صرخ صرخة (ṣarkatan) to cry out,
let out a cry X to cry for help; to call ( ه to
s.o.) for help
صرخة ṣarka pl. -āt cry, outcry, yell,
scream; call for help
صراخ ṣurāk crying, yelling; clamor,
screaming, screams
صريخ ṣarīk crying, yelling; clamor,
screaming, screams
صراخ ṣarrāk crier, screamer, bawler;
peacock
صاروخ ṣārūk pl. صواريخ ṣawārīk2
rocket; siren (magr.) │ O صاروخ عابر
القارات intercontinental ballistic missile
ICBM
قنبلة صاروخية qunbula ṣārūkīya rocket
bomb, guided missile
صارخ ṣārik gaudy, flashy (color);
glaring (color, light); crude, gross, coarse;
noisy, loud; crier, caller
صرد ṣard severe cold (spell)
صراد ṣarrāad drifting clouds, cirrus
صريد ṣurraid drifting clouds, cirrus
صرصر ṣarṣara to let out a piercing cry,
scream shrilly
ريح صرصر rīḥ ṣarṣar violent, cold
wind, icy gale
صرصر ṣurṣur pl. صراصير ṣarāṣīr2 a
variety of cockroach (Blatta aegyptiaca;
zool.); cricket (zool.)
صرصور ṣurṣūr pl. صراصير ṣarāṣīr2
cricket (zool.); cockroach (syr.)
صرصار ṣarṣār cricket (zool.)
صراط ṣirāṯ way, path, road
صرع ṣara‘a a (ṣar‘, ṣir‘, مصرع maṣra‘) to
throw down, fell, bring to the ground ( ه
s.o.); -- pass. ṣuri‘a to be epileptic, have
an epileptic fit; to be or go mad 511 III to
wrestle (also as a sport), fight ( ه with s.o.)
VI to wrestle with one another VII to be
or go mad VIII = VI
صرع ṣar‘ epilepsy
صرع ṣur‘ rein
صريع ṣarī‘ pl. صرعى ṣar‘ā thrown to
the ground, felled; epileptic; demented,
insane, mad, crazy; (with foll. genit.)
succumbing to s.th., fallen victim to s.th.,
│ سقط صريعا to be killed (in battle); صريع
الشراب ṣ. aš-šarāb addicted to the bottle;
صريع الكرى ṣ. al-karā overcome by sleep
مصرع maṣra‘ pl. مصارع maṣāri‘2 battleground;
ruin, destruction, perdition, death;
fatal accident; vital part of the body (the
injury of which can cause death)
مصراع miṣrā‘ pl. مصاريع maṣārī‘2 leaf
of a door; hemistich │ صفائح المصراع door
panel; الباب مفتوح على مصراعيه (miṣrā‘aihi)
the door is wide open
صراع ṣirā‘ wrestling, wrestling match;
fight, struggle
مصارعة muṣāra‘a wrestling, wrestling
match; fight, struggle
اصطراع iṣṭirā‘ fight, struggle, conflict,
controversy
مصروع maṣrū‘ thrown to the ground,
felled; epileptic; demented, insane, mad,
crazy
مصارع muṣāri‘ wrestler; fighter
صرف ṣarafa i (ṣarf) to turn; to turn away,
avert ( عن ھ، ه s.o., s.th. from); to dissuade,
alienate, keep away ( عن ه s.o. from); to
divert, distract ( عن ه s.o. from); to turn,
direct ( الى ه s.th., e.g., one’s eyes, one’s
attention, to s.th.); to grant leave, dismiss,
send away ( ه s.o.); to give s.o. ( ه) the
brush-olf; to spend, expend ( على ه money
for); to defray the cost ( على of s.th.), pay (
على for s.th.); to pay out, disburse ( ل ھ
money to); to issue, give out ( ھ s.th., e.g.,
tickets), make out ( ھ s.th., e.g., a permit);
to spend, devote ( ل or الى or في ھ time,
effort on); to pass, spend ( في ھ time at
s.th., doing s.th.); to change money ( ھ ); to
inflect ( ھ a word) │ صرف النظر عن (naẓar)
to avert one’s glance from, disregard s.th.,
pay no attention to s.th., leave s.th. out of
consideration; -- i ( صريف ṣarīf) to creak,
grate II to cause to flow off, draw off ( ھ
water); to drain ( ھ land); to dispatch,
expedite, wind up, liquidate ( ھ business);
to change money ( ھ ); to market, retail,
distribute, sell ( ھ merchandise), dispose (
ھ of merchandise); to circulate ( ھ s.th.);
to give a free hand ( ه في to s.o. in s.th.), let
ه) s.o.) dispose freely ( في over, in), grant
the right of disposal ( في ه to s.o. over or in
s.th.); to inflect ( ھ a word), conjugate ( ھ a
verb), decline ( ھ a noun) V to act
independently; to dispose freely, have the
right of disposal ( في over); to move freely,
act without restriction ( في in), administer
(freely) ( في s.th.); to behave, act, conduct
o.s., comport o.s. ; to exercise sacerdotal
functions (Copt.-Chr.); to be inflected
(gram.); to be derived │ تصرف تصرفا كيفيا
في (taṣarrufan kaifīyan) to proceed
arbitrarily in or at VII to turn away; to go
away, depart ( عن from), leave ( عن s.th.); to
give up, abandon, relinquish, quit ( عن s.o.,
s.th.); to flow off, drain; to pass on,
change over, turn one’s attention ( الى to
s.th.); to proceed ( الى to some activity or to
do s.th.); to apply o.s., devote o.s. ( الى to
s.th.); to be spent, be expended (money);
to be issued, be made out (e.g.. ticket); to
be fully, i.e., triptotically, inflected │
انصرف الى نفسه to withdraw by o.s., isolate
o.s.; انصرف يفعل to set about to do s.th.,
proceed to do s.th. 512
صرف ṣarf averting, turning away;
expenditure, expense; spending, use,
application (e.g., of time, of effort, etc.);
issuance, issue, making out; disbursement;
money changing; barter (Isl. Law);
drainage; inflection (gram.); (pl. صروف
ṣurūf) adversities, misfortunes (also
صروف الدھر ṣurūf ad-dahr) │ محطة الصرف
maḥaṭṭat aṣ-ṣ. (el.) power station;
drainage station, pumping
station; سعر الصرف ṣi'r aṣ-ṣ. exchange
rate; علم الصرف ‘ilm aṣ-ṣ. morphology
(gram.); ممنوع من الصرف indeclinable
(gram.); بصرف النظر عن (bi-ṣ. in-naẓar)
regardless of, irrespective of,
notwithstanding, to say nothing of
صرف ṣirf pure, unadulterated,
unmixed; mere, sheer, absolute
صرفيات ṣarfīyāt payments,
disbursements
صريف ṣarīf squeak(ing), creak(ing),
squeal(ing)
صراف ṣarrāf money changer; cashier,
teller, treasurer; paymaster; banker
صرافة ṣarrafa (woman) cashier │ صرافة
التذاكير (woman) ticket agent
صيرف ṣairaf pl. صيارف ṣayārif2 money
changer; cashier, teller, treasurer
صيرفي ṣairafī pl. صيارفة ṣayārifa money
changer; cashier, teller, treasurer
صريفة ṣarīfa pl. صرائف ṣarā’if2 reedmat
hut
مصرف maṣrif pl. مصارف maṣārif2
drainage canal, drainage ditch, drain;
bank; pay office, teller’s window (at a
bank)
تصريف taṣrīf drawing off (of water),
drainage; sale, retail, disposal,
distribution; change, alteration; inflection,
declension, conjugation │ تصاريف الدھر t.
ad-dahr the vicissitudes of fate; تصريف
الشئون settlement, windup, or management,
of affairs
تصرف taṣarruf pl. -āt free disposal ( في
over), right of disposal; usufruct;
administration; action, way of acting,
demeanor, behavior, conduct; outflow,
efflux, effluence, output (in terms of the
capacity of a pump), discharge,
throughput, quantity of water flowing
through; pl. تصرفات measures,
dispositions, regulations │ تصرف منجز
(munjaz) regulation effective immediately
(Isl. Law); حسن التصرف ḥusn at-t.
discretion; مطلق التصرف muṭlaq at-t.
having unrestricted right of disposal,
invested with full power; بتصرف freely;
تحت تصرفه at s.o.’s disposal; وضع شيئا تحت
تصرفه to put s.th. at s.o.’s disposition;
تصرفات الزمن t. az-zaman the vicissitudes
of time
انصراف inṣirāf going away, leave,
departure; avertedness, aversion ( عن to);
abstention ( عن from). renunciation ( عن of)
مصروف devoted, dedicated ( الى to s.th.);
money spent, expenditure; pl. -āt, مصاريف
maṣārīf2 expenses, expenditures, costs │
مصروف البريد and مصاراف البريد postage;
مصروف الجيب m. al-jaib pocket money;
خالص المصاريف postage free, franked; وفى
المصاريف (wafā) to cover the cocte, defray
the expense; مصروف من الخدمة (kidma)
dismissed, discharged
متصرف mutaṣarrif approx.: provincial
governor (Ir.; administering anyone of the
14 liwā’, q.v.); former title of a Turkish
administrative officer in Arab countries
متصرف mutaṣarrifa jurisdiction of a
mutaṣarrif (q.v.), approx.: province;
dignity, government, authority, etc., of a
mutaṣarrif
منصرف munṣarif fully inflected, i.e.,
triptotical (gram.); المنصرف the money
spent, expenditures
منصرف munṣarif departure, leave,
going away │ لا منصرف عنه (munṣarafa)
513 indispensable, inevitable; منصرفھم
munṣarafahum at their departure, when
they left; في صرف النھار (m. in-nahār) at
the parting of day, at day’s end
صرم 1 ṣaruma u ( صرم ṣarāma) to be sharp; to
be stern, hard, harsh, severe; -- ṣrama i
(ṣarm, ṣurm) to cut, cut off, sever ( ھ
s.th.); to leave, forsake ( ه s.o.), separate ( ه
from s.o.), part ( ه with s.o.) II to cut, cut
off, cut through, sever, separate ( ھ s.th.) V
to decrease, wane, dwindle; to elapse, go
by, pass; to be past, be bygone, be over
(time) VII to elapse, go by, pass; to be
past. be bygone, be over (time)
صرم ṣarm severance, separation
صرمة ṣirma pl. صرم ṣiram herd of
camels
صرامة ṣarāma sharpness, keenness;
harshness, sternness, severity, rigor,
unfriendliness
صريمة ṣarīma horse bridle
مصارمة muṣārama estrangement, break,
antagonism, hostility
صارم ṣārim sharp, harsh, hard, severe,
stem
منصرم munṣarim elapsed, past, bygone
(period of time)
صرم 2 ṣurm = سرم
صرم 3 ṣarma pl. صرم ṣuram (eg.) shoe
صرمايا ṣurmāyā pl. -āt, صرامى ṣarāmī
(syr.) shoe made of red or yellow leather;
shoes
مصارين see مصر
صار ṣārin and صارية ṣāriya pl. صوار ṣawārin
mast, pole │ صارى العلم ṣ. l-‘alam flagpole
مصطبة maṣṭaba, miṣṭaba pl. مصاطب maṣāṭib2
outdoor stone bench (built into the side of
a house), maṣṭaba
مصطول maṣṭūl fool
صعب ṣa‘uba u ( صعوبة ṣu‘ūba) to be hard,
difficult ( على for); to be embarrassing,
shocking, unpleasant ( على for, to) II to
make hard, make difficult ( على for s.o.
s.th.); to present as difficult ( على to s.o.
s.th.) V to become difficult; to make ( ھ
s.th.) hard or difficult VI to be difficult (of
a person); to be hard to please X to find or
consider difficult ( ھ s.th.)
صعب ṣa‘b pl. صعاب ṣi‘āb hard, difficult;
pl. difficulties │ صعب الاحتمال hard to bear,
oppressive; صعب الارضاء ṣ. al-irḍā’ hard to
please, fastidious; صعب المراس obstinate,
stubborn, self-opinionated, recalcitrant,
headstrong; عملة صعبة (‘umla) hard
currency
صعوبة ṣu‘ūba difficulty │ صعوبة المراس
obstinacy, stubbornness, recalcitrance,
refractoriness
مصاعب maṣā‘ib2 difficulties
صعتر ṣa‘tar wild thyme (Thymus serpyllum;
bot.)
صعد ṣa‘ida a ( صعود ṣu‘ūd) to rise, go up; to
lift, climb, ascend, slope upward; to
mount, scale, ascend, climb ( ھ s.th.),
climb up ( ھ on s.th.); to take off
(airplane); صعد به الى to make s.o. ascend,
lead s.o. up to … II to ascend, mount; to
go upstream; to travel to Upper Egypt; to
send up ( ه s.o.); to cause ( ھ s.th.) to rise or
ascend; to heave
(from one’s breast), utter ( ھ sigh,
wails, and the like); to cause (s.th.) to
evaporate, vaporize, volatilize ( ھ s.th.); to
sublimate ( ھ s.th.; chem.) │ صعد الزفرات
(zafarāt) to heave deep sighs IV to make (
ه s.o.) ascend or advance; to ascend ( الى to
elevated terrain); to go upstream; to travel
up, travel V to evaporate, vaporize VI to
rise, lift, ascend 514
صعود ṣu‘ūd height, altitude
صعدة ṣa‘da pl. ṣa‘adāt rise, incline;
slope, declivity
صعود ṣu‘ūd rising, lifting, ascending;
take-off (of an airplane); ascent; boom;
advance ( الى toward) │ صعود الرب ṣ. arrabb
and عيد الصعود ‘īd aṣ-ṣ. Ascension
Day (Chr.)
صعود ṣa‘ūd steep hill
صعيد ṣa‘īd pl. صعود ṣu‘ūd highland,
upland, plateau; الصعيد and صعيد مصر ṣ.
miṣr Upper Egypt │ في صعيد واحد on a
common basis, on common ground, on
equal footing, without distinction,
indiscriminately; على صعيد واحد congenial,
like-minded, kindred in spirit, agreed
صعيدي ṣa‘īdī pl. صعايدة ṣa‘āyida Upper
Egyptian
صعداء ṣu‘adā’2 (deep) sigh │ تنفس
الصعداء tanaffasa ṣ-ṣu‘adā’ to sigh
(deeply), heave a (deep) sigh
مصعد maṣ‘ad pl. مصاعد maṣā‘id2 point
of ascent
مصعد miṣ‘ad pl. مصاعد maṣā‘id2
elevator, lift; O anode
مصعدة miṣ‘ada elevator, lift
صاعد ṣā‘id pl. صواعد ṣawā‘id 2 rising,
ascending (also, e.g., of vapors) │ فصاعدا
fa-ṣā‘idan and beyond that, and more; من
فصاعدا -- from -- on, from --upward; من الآن
فصاعدا (min al-āna) from now on,
henceforth
متصاعد mutaṣā‘id rising, ascending
(also, e.g., of vapors)
صعر ṣa‘ra a (ṣa‘ar) to be awry (face; with
pride) II صعر خده (kaddahū) to put on a
contemptuous mien
صعق ṣa‘aqa a ( صاعقة ṣā‘iqa) to strike s.o. ( (ه
down with lightning, destroy, hit, slay ( ه
s.o.; of lightning); to stun, stupefy, make
unconscious ( ه s.o.); -- ṣa‘iqa a and pass.
ṣi‘iqa (ṣa‘aq, صعقة ṣa‘qa) to be
thunderstruck; to lose consciousness │
صعق في مكانه (makānihī) to stop dead in
one's tracks, stand as if thunderstruck IV
to strike down, slay, destroy ( ه s.o.; of
lightning); to stun, stupefy, make
unconscious ( ه s.o.) VII to be struck by
lightning
صعق ṣa‘aq thunder, peal of thunder
صعق ṣa‘iq thunderstruck, dumfounded
صاعقة ṣā‘iqa pl. صواعق ṣawā‘iq 2 bolt of
lightning, thunderbolt
مصعوق maṣ‘ūq struck by lightning;
thunderstruck, stupefied, dumfounded;
crushed, destroyed
صعلكة ṣa‘laka loitering, loafing
صعلوك ṣu‘lūk pl. صعاليك ṣa‘ālīk2 utterly
destitute; have-not, pauper, poor wretch;
beggar; tramp, vagabond, loafer
صغر ṣagura u (ṣigar, صغارة ṣagāra)
and ṣagira a (ṣagar) to be or become
small, little, scanty; to diminish, decrease,
wane, dwindle; to be young; to be lowly,
submissive, servile, humble; -- ṣagara u
(ṣagr) to be younger ( ب ه than
s.o. by) │ ما صغرني الا بسنة (bi-sanatin)
he was only one year younger than I
II to make small(er) or little(r), lessen,
minimize, reduce, diminish, decrease ( ھ
s.th.); to belittle, deride, ridicule, debase,
bemean ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to form a
diminutive ( ھ of a noun) VI to prove o.s.
contemptible, be servile, fawn, cringe,
grovel X to deem ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) small,
little or paltry; to make light ( ھ، ه of s.o.,
of s.th.), undervalue ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
think little ( ھ، ه of s.o., of s.th.) │ استصغر
نفسه (nafsahū) to feel inferior
صغر ṣigar smallness, littleness,
scantiness, paltriness, paucity,
insignificance; youthfulness, juvenility
(also صغر السن ṣ. as-sinn) صغرة 515 ṣigra:
ھو صغرة ابويه (ṣ. abawaihi) he is the
youngest of his parents’ children
صغير ṣagīr pl. صغار ṣigār, صغراء
ṣugarā’2 small, little; paltry, scanty,
insignificant; tiny, minute; young,
juvenile, minor; a minor, one under age │
صغير السن ṣ. s-sinn young; صغير النفس ṣ. annafs
mean-spirited, base, servile,
Toadying, cringing, groveling صغار
الموظفين ṣ. al-muwaẓẓafīn small officials,
subaltern officials; العيد الصغير (‘īd) Little
Bairam, i.e., the feast of fast breaking on
the 1st of Shawwal; كل صغيرة وكبيرة kullu ṣ.
wa-kabīra every detail
صغير ṣagīra pl. صغائر ṣagā’ir2 venial
sin (Isl. Law); minor mistake; pl.
trivialities, trifles
صغارة ṣagāra littleness, paltriness,
scantiness, paucity; lowliness, servility,
humility, humbleness
اصغر aṣgar f. صغرى ṣugrā pl. m. اصاغر
aṣāgir2 smaller, littler; younger │ اصغر
الشرين a. aš-šarrain the lesser of two evils,
آسيا الصغرى Asia Minor; الدول الصغرى
(duwal) the small countries; سوريا الصغرى
(sūriyā) Palestine; النھاية الصغرى the
minimum
تصغير taṣgīr diminution, lessening,
decrease, reduction │ اسم التصغير ism at-t.
diminutive (gram.)
اصغار iṣgār disdain, contempt,
disregard
تصاغر taṣāgur servility, toadying,
cringing, groveling
صاغر ṣāgir low, lowly, despised,
contemptible, humiliated, meek, dejected;
submissive, servile; subject ( ل to s.o.)
مصغر muṣaggar reduced, decreased,
diminished │ في صورة صغيرة (ṣūra) on a
reduced or small scale, in miniature; فلم
مصغر (film) microfilm
صغو ) and صغا (صغي ṣagā u ( صغو ṣagw, sugūw)
to incline, bend, lean ( الى to, toward); --
صغي ṣagiya a (ṣagan, ṣugīy) to incline,
bend, lean ( الى to, toward); to listen ( ل to)
IV to listen, pay attention, lend one’s ear (
ل or الى to s.th., to s.o.). heed ( ل or الى s.th.)
صغو ṣagw and صغا ṣagan inclination,
disposition, tendency, affection,
attachment, good will
اصغاء isgā’ attention, attentiveness
صاغ ṣāgin inclined, disposed, attentive;
listener, hearer
مصغ attentive; listener, hearer
صفة 1 see وصف
صف 2 ṣaffa u (ṣaff) to set up in a row or
line, line up, align, array, arrange, order (
ھ s.th.); to eat, compose ( ھ type, typ.); to
range, class, classify ( مع ه s.o. among); to
cut ( ھ s.th.) in strips II to set up in a row
or line, line up, align, array, arrange, order
ھ) s.th.); to comb ( ھ the hair) straight VI
to line up, take position in a row or line,
stand in a row or line, be lined up, be
aligned, be strung in a line VIII - VI; to
fall in, stand in formation (of a military
detachment) │ اصطف الى جانب الطريق to
line the rood, form a lane (e.g., troops,
police, etc.)
صف ṣaff aligning or arranging in a line
or row; -- (pl. صفوف ṣufūf) row, line, file,
rank, queue; row, or tier, of seats; grade,
form (in school), class course, section,
division, group │ صف الدم ṣ. ad-dam,
blood group; آلة صف الحروف typesetting
machine, ضابط الصف (also صف ضابط pl.
صف ضباط ) non-commissioned officer; انتظم
صفوفا intaẓama ṣufūfan to line up in rows
or files
صفة ṣuffa pl. صفف ṣufaf (stone)
molding; ledge 516
صفاف ṣaffāf and صفاف الحروف typesetter,
compositor
مصف maṣaff pl. مصاف maṣaff2 position
(of an army); battle line; row, line, file;
composing stick (typ.) │ رفعه الى مصاف
(with foll. genit.) to class s.o. with, put
s.o. on the same level with
صفح ṣafaḥa a (ṣafḥ) to broaden, widen, flatten,
beat into a leaf, foliate, plate ( ھ s.th.); to
pardon, forgive ( عن s.o., s.th.) II to
broaden, widen, flatten,
beat into a leaf, foliate ( ھ s.th.); to roll
out ( ھ s.th.); to plate, overlay, or cover,
with metal plates ( ھ s.th.); to armor ( ھ
s.th.); to equip, furnish, cover ( ھ ب s.th.
with) ill to shake hands ( ه with s.o.); to
greet (.s.o.); to touch ( ھ s.th.) lightly or
gently, graze ( ھ s.th.), brush, glide ( ھ
over s.th.), pass, blow ( ھ over s.th., of the
wind, breath, etc.) │ صافح سمعه (sam‘ahū)
to reach s.o.’s ear V to leaf, thumb ( ھ a
book, etc.); to examine, scrutinize, regard,
study ( ھ s.th.) VI to shake hands X to ask
s.o.’s ( ه) forgiveness ( ھ for), apologize ( ھ
ه to s.o. for)
صفح ṣafḥ pardon, forgiveness; (pl. صفاح
ṣifāḥ) side, surface │ ضرب (اضرب) عنه
صفحا to turn away from s.o. or s.th., pass
over s.o. or s.th., ignore, snub, slight,
disregard s.o. or s.th., desist from s.th.
صفحة ṣafḥa pl. ṣafaḥāt outside, exterior;
plane, surface; page; leaf, sheet; phase
صفيح ṣafīḥ broad side or surface; sheet
iron; tin, tinplate; tin plates, tin sheets
صفيحة ṣafīḥa pl. صفائح ṣafā’iḥ2 plate,
sheet (of metal), leaf (of wood), slab, flag
(of stone), ledger stone (on a tomb); tin
plate, tin sheet; can, jerry can │ صفائح
المصراع ṣ. al-miṣrā‘ door panel; O صفائح
المقول ṣ. al-miqwal phonograph records,
gramophone discs
صفوح ṣafūhḥ forgiving, reedy to forgive
صفاح ṣuffāḥ pl. -āt, صفافيح ṣafāfīḥ plate,
sheet, leaf; flagstone, stone slab
تصفيح taṣfīḥ plating
تصفح taṣaffuḥ examination,
scrutinization, scrutiny, study
مصفح muṣaffaḥ, shaped into plates or
thin layers, plated, foliated; armored,
armor clad, ironclad, metal-covered│ خشب
مصفح (kašab) plywood; سيارة مصفحة
(sayyāra) armored car
مصفحة muṣaffaḥa pl. -āt armored car,
armored reconnaissance car (mil.)
صفد ṣafda i (ṣafd) to bind, fetter, shackle ( ه
s.o.) II and IV = I
صفد ṣafad pl. اصفاد aṣfād bond, tie,
fetter
صفاد ṣifād bond, tie, fetter │ صفاد اليدين
ṣ. al-yadain manacle, handcuff
صفر 1 ṣafara i ( صفير ṣafīr) to whistle (bird,
person); to hiss (snake); to chirp,
stridulate (cricket); to seream (siren) II = I
صفير ṣafīr whistling, whistle, etc. (see
above); high, thin tone (e.g., of a flute) │
حروف الصفير sibilants; -- see also below
and alphabetically
صفارة ṣaffāra pl. -āt whistle; siren │
صفارة الأمان ṣ. al-amān all-clear siren; صفارة
الإنذار ṣ. al-indār warning siren
صفر 2 II to dye yellow, make yellow, to yellow
ھ) s.th.) IX to turn yellow, to
yellow; to pale, become pale │ اصفر
وجھه (wajhuhū) he grew pale, he turned
white
صفر ṣufr brass; money
صفر ṣafar jaundice
صفرة ṣufra yellow color, yellowness,
yellow; pallor, paleness (of the face) 517
صفار ṣafar yellow color, s.th. yellow;
pallor, paleness │ صفار البيضة ṣ. al-baiḍa
egg yolk
صفار ṣaffār pl. ة brass founder
اصفر aṣfar2, f. صفراء ṣafrā’2, pl. صفر
ṣufr yellow; pale, pallid, wan │ ضحكة
صفراء (ḍaḥka) forced, or embarrassed,
laugh; نحاس صفر (nuḥās) brass
صفراء ṣafrā’ bile, gall
صفير (eg.) golden oriole (zool.)
صفارية ṣufārīya golden oriole (zool.)
صفراوي ṣafrāwī bilious; choleric │
الحمى الصفراوية (ḥummā) yellow fever;
ضحكة صفراوية (ḍaḥka) bitter, or sardonic,
laugh (= Fr. rire jaune)
اصفرار iṣfirār yellowing, yellow; pallor,
paleness (of the face)
مصفر muṣfarr yellow-colored; pale,
pallid, wan
صفر 3 ṣafira a (ṣafar, صفور ṣufūr) to be empty,
be devoid, vacant ( من of) │ صفرت يده من
الشيء (ṣafirat yaduhū) to have lost s.th. II
to empty, void, vacate, evacuate, free ( ھ
s.th.) IV = II
صفر ṣafr, ṣifr, ṣufr, ṣafir, ṣufur pl. اصفار
aṣfār empty, void, devoid, ( من of), free ( من
from) │ صفر اليدين ṣifr al-yadain emptyhanded
صفر ṣifr zero, naught; nothing
اصفر aṣfar empty, void
مصفر muṣfir empty-handed │ مصفر اليد
m. al-yad with an empty hand; مصفر اليد من
كل شيء without any possessions at all,
completely destitute
صفر 4 ṣafar pl. اصفار aṣfār Safar, name of the
second month of the Mohammedan year
صفصف 1 ṣafṣaf (coll.; n. un. ة) a variety of
willow (Salix Safsaf F.; bot.)
صفصف 2 ṣafṣaf even, level; waste, desolate,
barren, empty │ قاع صفصف wasteland,
desolate area; جعله قاعا صفصفا to devastate
s.th., lay s.th. waste
صفع ṣafa‘a a (ṣaf‘) to cuff, buffet, slap lightly
ه) s.o.); to slap s.o.’s ( ه) face, box s.o.’s ( (ه
ears; to violate ( ھ a rule) VI to slap one
another
صفعة ṣaf‘a (n. vic.) slap, cuff, smack;
blow
صفاع ṣaffā‘ pl. -ūn a kind of buffoon
صفق ṣafaqa i (ṣafq) to slap, smack ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to aet into motion ( ھ s.th.); to flap,
clap; to shut, slam, bang ( ھ a door); --
ṣafuqa u ( صفاقة ṣafāqa) to be thick, heavy,
close in texture (cloth) II to flap, clap,
smack; to clap one’s hands (also ,(بيديه
applaud ( ل s.o.); to flap ( ب the wings)
صفقة ṣafqa pl. ṣafaqāt handclasp (in
concluding a deal); conclusion of a
contract (Isl. Law); deal, bargain,
transaction │ صفقة خاسرة poor deal, bad
bargain; صفقة رابحة favorable deal, good
bargain; صفقة واحدة ṣafqatan wāḥidatan all
at once, wholly, entirely, altogether; اعطى
صفقة (a‘ṭā), عقد صفقة to conclude a bargain,
effect a transaction; عاد (رجع) بصفقة المغبون
to lose the game, return empty-handed;
كانت له الصفقة الخاسرة do.
صفاق ṣifāq pl. صفق ṣufuq dermis
underskin; peritoneum
صفيق ṣafīq pl. صفاق ṣifāq thick, heavy,
close in texture (cloth) │ صفيق الوجه ṣ. alwajh
impudent, insolent, brazen
صفاقة ṣafāqa impudence, insolence,
brazenness
تصفيق taṣfīq hand clapping; applause,
acclaim │ تصفيق الاستحسان applause
صفاكس ṣafākis2 Sfax (aeaport in Tunisia) 518
صفن 1 ṣafana i to stand with one foot ( (ب
slightly raised; to pore, brood, ponder,
reflect, muse
صفن ṣafan pl. اصفان aṣfān scrotum
صفين 2 ṣafīn (Juniperus Sabina; bot.)
صفا (صفو ) ṣafā u (ṣafw, ṣufūw, صفاء ṣafā’) to be
or become clear, unpolluted, limpid,
cloudless, untroubled, serene, undisturbed,
pure; صفا ل to apply o.s. to s.th. with clear
intent, devote o.s. wholeheartedly to, be
completely given to, be solely
preoccupied with, be exclusively ready for
(heart, mind) II to make clear, limpid,
pure, clarify, clear, purify ( ھ s.th.); to
settle, straighten out ( مسألة mas’alatan a
question, a problem); to remove the water,
pour off the water ( ھ from s.th., e.g., in
cooking; also صفاه من الماء ); to rid of
moisture, dry out ( ھ s.th.); to clarify,
purify, rectify ( ھ s.th., من by removing
s.th.); to filter, strain ( ھ s.th.); to settle,
pay, liquidate ( ھ s.th.); to realize ( ھ
assets) III to be sincere ( ه toward s.o), deal
honestly ( ه with s.o.) IV = III ( ه or ل): to
be no longer in a position (to ), posses no
longer, forfeit; to cease composing poetry
(poet) │ اصفاه بالشيء to have s.o. in mind
for s.th., choose, select, or single out s.o.
for s.th.. grant s.o. s.th. in preference to
others, bestow upon s.o. s.th. ( دون فلان
which others do not have) VI to be sincere
toward one another, be honest with one
another, be of pure intent toward one
another VIII to choose, select ( ه s.o.) X =
VIII; to deem ( ھ s.th.) clear or pure │
استصفى ماله to realize all one’s assets; to
confiscate s.o.’s property
صفو ṣafw clearness, clarity, limpidity,
untroubledness, cloudlessness, serenity,
purity, sheerness; happiness, felicity,
pleasure, delight; clear, limpid;
untroubled, undisturbed, serene, pure,
sheer
صفوة ṣafwa the best, or choicest, part,
prime, cream, flower, elite, quintessence
صفا ṣafan (coll.: n. un. صفاة ṣafāh pl.
صفوات ṣafawāt) stone(s), rock(s)
صفوان ṣafwān stones, rocks
صفوة ṣifwa sincere friend, best friend,
bosom friend
صفاء ṣafā’ clearness, clarity, limpidity,
untroubledness, cloudlessness, serenity,
purity, sheerness; happiness, felicity,
serenity, gaiety, cheerfulness; sincerity,
candor, honesty │ ساعات صفاء pleasant
time, delightful hours
صفى ṣafīy clear, limpid, untroubled,
undisturbed, serene, cloudless, pure,
sheer; (pl. اصفياء aṣfiyā’2) sincere friend,
best friend, bosom friend
صفية ṣafīya pl. صفايا ṣalafīya leader’s
share of the loot; lion’s share of the booty
مصفى maṣfan refinery
مصفى miṣfan sieve
مصفاة miṣfāh pl. مصاف maṣāfin strainer,
colander, filter; strainer cloth; sieve;
refinery, purification plant │ مصفاة القھوة
coffee filter, percolator
تصفية taṣfiya pl. -āt clarification,
clearance, purification (also fig.); filtering,
filtration; elimination (also in sports);
settlement, straightening out, adjustment;
clearing (com.); liquidation (com.);
clearance sale │ تصفية الحسابات t. al-ḥisābāt
settlement of accounts; مأمور التصفية
official receiver, receiver in equity
مصافاة muṣāfāh cordiality, concord,
harmony; good will, sincere attitude or
disposition 519
تصاف taṣāfin peaceful settlement,
compromise ( بين between)
اصطفاء iṣṭifā’ selection (also biol.)
استصطفاء istiṣfā’: اصطفاء الأموال
sequestration of property
صاف ṣāfin clear, limpid; sheer, pure,
straight, unmixed, undiluted,
unadulterated; untroubled, undisturbed;
serene; pure; net │ صافى النية ṣ. an-nīya
sincere, candid, openhearted; صافي الحمولة
net tonnage; صافى الأرباح net profit
مصف muṣaffin official receiver,
receiver in equity; clarifier, clarifying
agent
مصفى muṣaffan purified, pure, clear,
limpid, cloudless
مصطفى mušṭafan chosen, selected;
المصطفى epithet of Mohammed
صفير ṣafīr sapphire
صقالة (It. scala) ṣaqāla pl. صقائل ṣaqā’il2
scaffold; gangway, gangplank
صقب III to approach ( ه s.o.), go or come near ( ه
s.o.); to be neighbor ( ه with s.o.), be
adjacent ( ھ to s.th.), adjoin ( ھ s.th.)
O مصاقبة muṣāqaba affinity
صقر 1 ṣaqr pl. صقور ṣuqūr, اصقر aṣqur saker,
falcon, hawk
صاقور 2 ṣaqūr stone axe
صقع ṣaqa‘a a (ṣaq‘, صقاع ṣuqā‘) to crow
(rooster); pass. ṣuqi‘a to be covered with
hoarfrost (ground) II to be icy, ice-cold,
frozen
صقع ṣuq‘ pl. اصقاع aṣqā‘ area, region,
country, district, locality, land │ الأصقاع
المتجمدة الجنوبية (mutajammida, janūbīya)
the Antarctic
صقعة ṣaq‘a frost, severe cold
صقيع saqī‘ frost; ice; hoarfrost
اصقع asqa‘2 more eloquent
مصقع miṣqa‘ pl. مصاقع maṣāqi‘
eloquent; loud-voiced, having a stentorian
voice
صقل 1 ṣaqala u (ṣaql, صقال ṣiqāl) to smooth,
polish, burnish, cut ( ھ s.th.); to refine ( ھ
style, taste, and the like) VII to become
smooth
صقل ṣaqala u polishing, burnishing │
صقل الأذھان mental training
صقيل ṣaqīl polished, burnished; smooth,
shiny, glossy
صقال ṣaqqāl polisher. smoother
صيقل ṣaiqal pl. -āt مصاقل maṣāqil2
polisher, smoother
مصقلة miṣqala pl. مصاقل maṣāqil2
burnisher (tool)
مصقول maṣqūl polished, burnished; cut
(glass, and the like); acute, refined (wit)
صقالة 2 look up alphabetically
صقلب ṣaqlab pl. صقالبة ṣaqāliba Slav
صقلية ṣiqillīya Sicily
صك 2 ṣakka u (ṣakk) to beat, strike; to shut,
lock ( ھ the door) │ صكت به الآذان his ears
were tingling or ringing; صك سمعه
(sam‘ahū) to strike s.o.’s ear (noise); to
roar in s.o.’s ears VIII to knock together,
shake, tremble, (knees), chatter (teeth)
صك 2 ṣakk pl. صكوك ṣukūk, صكاك ṣikāk, اصك
aṣukk (instrunlent of) contract (Isl. Law);
legal instrument, document, deed; check,
cheque
صلة 1 see وصل
صل 2 ṣalla i ( صليل ṣalīl) to ring, clink, clank,
clatter, rattle
صل ṣill pl. اصلال aṣlāl, صلال ṣilāl a
variety of venomous adder, viper
صليل ṣalīl rattle, clatter, clash (e.g., of
weapons), jingling (of coins) 521
صلب 1 ṣaluba u ( صلابة ṣalāba) and ṣaliba a to
be or become hard, firm, solid, stiff, or
rigid, solidify, harden, set, stiffen II to
make hard, firm, solid, stiff, or rigid,
harden, solidify, stiffen, indurate ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to support, prop, shore up (A s.th.);
to harden ( ھ the heart) V = I; to show o.s.
hard or severe
صلب ṣulb hard, firm, solid, stiff, rigid;
steel; -- (pl. اصلب aṣlub, اصلاب aṣlāb)
spinal column, backbone; loins; -- text,
body (of a book, and the like) │ صلب
الرأي ṣ. ar-ra’y obstinate, stubborn,
headstrong, opinionated; صلب الرقبة ṣ. arraqaba
do.; صلب العود ṣ. al-‘ūd of robust
physique, strongly built, husky, sturdy;
stubborn, resistant, unbending, unyielding,
relentless; ھو ابن صلبه (ibn ṣulbihī) and ھو
من صلبه he is his own son, his offspring;
درامة مستخرجة من صلب الحياة (mustakraja
min ṣulbi l-ḥayāh) a drama taken from
real life; في صلبه at heart, in his innermost
صلبة ṣulba: صلبة العين ṣ. al-4ain sclera
(anat.)
صليب ṣalīb hard, firm, solid, stiff, rigid
صلابة ṣalāba hardness, callousness;
hardening, induration; firmness, solidity,
stiffness, rigidity; stubbornness, obstinacy,
unyieldingness; intolerance │ صلابة العود ṣ.
al-‘ūd sternness, severity, hardness,
obstinacy, stubbornness, inflexibility,
relentlessness
تصلب taṣallub hardness, callousness,
hardening │ تصلب الشرابين t. aš-šarābīn
arteriosclerosis
متصلب mutaṣallib unyielding,
inflexible, relentless, hard
صلب 2 ṣalaba i (ṣalb) to crucify ( ه s.o.) II = I; to
make the sign of the cross ( على over); to
cross o.s.; to cross, fold ( ھ one’s arms)
صلب ṣulb crucifixion
صليب ṣalīb pl. صلبان ṣulbān, صلب ṣulub
cross │ الصليب الجنويب (janūbī) the
Southern Cross (astron.); الصليب الأحمر the
Red Cross; صليب معقوف swastika; شارة
الصليب and اشارة الصليب sign of the cross
(Chr.); عود الصليب ‘ūd aṣ-ṣ. peony
(Paeonis; bot.)
صليبي ṣalībī: الحروب الصليبية the
crusades; الصليبيون the crusaders
صلبوت ṣalbūt (representation of the)
crucifixion, crucifix
مصلب muṣallab crossing, interjunction
(of roads)
صلت ṣaluta u ( صلوتة ṣulūta) to be glossy, be
smooth and shining IV to draw, unsheathe
السيف) as-saifa the sword); pass. uṣlita to
be drawn (sword)
صلج 1 ṣullaj (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt cocoon,
chrysalis of the silkworm
صولجان 2 look up alphabetically
صلح ṣalaḥa u a ( صلاح ṣalāḥ, صلوح
ṣulūḥ, مصلحة maṣlaḥa) and ṣaluḥa u ( صلاح
ṣalāḥ, صلاحية ṣaāḥīya) to be good, right,
proper, in order, righteous, pious, godly;
to be well, thrive; to be usable, useful,
practicable, serviceable, fitting, suitable,
or appropriate ( ل for), lend itself ( ل to),
suit, match ( ل s.th.), fit ( مع s.th. or s.o.),
apply ( مع to s.o. or s.th.); to be admissible,
permissible ( مع in, at, with); to be valid.
hold true ( ل for) II to put in order, settle,
adjust, restore, restitute ( ھ s.th.), make
amends, compensate ( ھ for); to mend,
improve, ameliorate, fix, repair ( ھ s.th.)
III to make peace, become reconciled,
make up, reach a compromise or
settlement ( ه with s.o.); to foster peace ( بين
between), reconcile ( بين people) IV to put
in order, settle, adjust ( من or ھ s.th.),
overhaul, restore, restitute, rebuild,
reconstruct; to make amends, compensate
من) or ھ 521 for); to mend, improve,
ameliorate, fix, repair ( من or ھ s.th.); to
make suitable or fitting, adjust, modify ( ھ
s.th.); to reform ( من or ھ s.th.); to remove,
remedy ( من or ھ s.th.); to make arable or
cultivable, reclaim, cultivate, till, ( ھ land);
to further, promote, encourage ( ه s.o.),
make ( ه s.o.) thrive or prosper, bring good
luck ( ه to s.o.); to make peace ( بين
between), bring together ( بين people),
bring about an agreement ( بين between),
conciliate ( بين people) VI to make peace,
make up, become reconciled with one
another VII to be put in order, be righted,
be corrected, be improved, be ameliorated
VIII = VI; to agree ( على on), accept, adopt
على) s.th.) X to deem ( ه s.th.) good, proper,
suitable, fitting, usable, useful,
practicable, or serviceable; to make
arable, cultivable, reclaim ( ھ land)
صلح ṣulḥ peace, (re)conciliation,
settlement, composition, compromise;
peace (pol.), peacemaking, conclusion of
peace │ حاكم الصلح (Syr.) justice of the
peace; قاضي الصلح do.; قضوية الصلح
qaḍawīyat aṣ-ṣ. jurisdiction of the قاضي
الصلح
صلحي ṣulḥī of peace, peace (adj.);
arbitrative, arbitrational, arbitration (in
compounds) │ لجنة صلحية (lajna)
arbitration committee
صلاح ṣalāḥ goodness, properness,
rightness; usability, practicability,
usefulness; righteousness, probity, piety,
godliness
صلاحية ṣalāḥīya suitability, fitness,
appropriateness, aptness; efficiency;
usability, practicability, usefulness, use,
worth; serviceability, proper or working
condition (e.g., of a machine);
competence; validity. applicability; (pl.
-āt) full or mandatory power. power of
attorney, also صلاحية تامة (tāmma) │ جھات
ذات صلاحية competent authorities; مطلق
الصلاحية muṭlaq aṣ-ṣ. plenipotentiary
(dipl.)
صلوحية ṣalūḥīya = صلاحية ṣalāḥīya
اصلح aṣlaḥ2 better, more proper, more
correct; more pious, godlier; fitter, more
suitable
مصلحة maṣlaḥa pl. مصالح maṣāliḥ2
matter, affair; requirement. exigency; that
which is beneficial, helpful, or promoting;
advantage, benefit, interest, good, welfare;
office, authority, department,
governmental agency, administration
(chiefly Eg.) │ مصلحة الآثار المصرية
(miṣrīya) Administration of Egyptian
Antiquities; مصالح الأمة m. al-umma the
welfare of the people; مصلحة البريد postal
administration; مصلحة الحدود administrative
agency for the territories outside the
cultivated area (Eg.); المصالح الحكومية
(ḥukūmīya) the governmental agencies;
مصلحة الصحة m. aṣ-ṣiḥḥa health office;
المصلحة العامة (‘āmma) public welfare,
commonweal; في مصلحة فلان in s.o.’s
interest; في المصلحة والمفسدة (mafsada) in
good and bad times, for better or for
worse; لمصلحة فلان in s.o.’s favor, for the
benefit of s.o., to s.o.’s advantage, on
behalf of s.o., in s.o.’s interest; خدم مصالح
فلان to serve s.o.’s interests
مصلحي maṣlaḥī administrational,
official, governmental
تصليح taṣlīḥ restoration, restitution,
mending, fixing, overhauling, repair,
improvement, amelioration
مصالحة muṣālaḥa peace, conciliation;
compromise; composition, settlement
اصلاح iṣlāḥ pl. -āt restoration,
restitution, redressing, reparation;
improvement, amelioration, betterment,
mending, correction; reconstruction;
reconditioning, repair; renovation,
refurbishing; adjustment, settling,
remedying, removal, elimination;
restoration of 522 order, establishment of
peace, happiness and order; reformation,
reform; reclamation, cultivation (of land);
(re)conciliation, settlement, compromise,
peacemaking ( بين between)
اصلاحي iṣlāḥī reformatory,
reformational, reform- (in compounds);
reformer, reformist │ معھد اصلاحي
(ma‘had) reformatory, house of correction
اصلاحية iṣlāḥīya revisionism,
reformism; (pl. -āt) reformatory, house of
correction
تصالح taṣāluḥ (re)conciliation
اصطلاح iṣṭilāḥ pl. -āt agreement,
convention, practice, usage; (colloquial,
linguistic) usage; technical term, terminus
technicus
اصطلاحي iṣṭilāḥī conventional; technical
(of a term)
استصلاح istiṣlāḥ reclamation, cultivation
صالح ṣāliḥ good, right, proper, sound;
thorough, substantial, downright, out-andout,
solid; virtuous, pious, devout, godly;
usable, useful, practicable, serviceable,
fitting, suitable, appropriate ( ل for); (pl.
صوالح ṣawāliḥ) advantage, benefit,
interest, good, welfare │ السلف الصالح
(salaf) the worthy ancestors, the venerable
forefathers; صالح السير (sair) passable,
practicable (road); صالح للعمل (‘amal) fit
for action, ready for use, serviceable,
practicable; valid ( ل for), applicable ( ل to);
الصالح العام (‘āmm) public welfare,
commonweal; في صالح (with foll. genit.) in
favor of, for the benefit of, to the
advantage of, in the interest of s.o. or s.th.;
لصالح do.; كان من صالحه it was in his
interest; صوالح شخصية (šakṣīya) personal
interests
الصالحات aṣ-ṣāliḥāt the good works, the
good deeds
مصالح muṣāliḥ peacemaker, conciliator
مصلح muṣliḥ peacemaker, conciliator;
reformer, reformist; salt
مصطلح muṣṭalaḥ and مصطلح عليه
generally accepted, universally followed,
commonly established, conventional,
customary; (pl. -āt technical term,
terminus techniques
صلد ṣalada ( صلادة ṣalāda, صلودة ṣulūda) to be
or become hard, firm, solid, compact
(ground) IV = I
صلد ṣald pl. اصلاد aṣlād hard, firm,
solid, dry, barren, arid (ground); rigid,
lifeless, inert
صلودة ṣulūda hardness, firmness,
solidity (of the ground)
صلصة (It. salsa) ṣalṣa pl. -āt and صلص sauce
│ صلصة مايونيز mayonnaise
صلصل ṣalṣala to ring, clink, clank; to clatter,
rattle, II taṣalṣala do.
صلصلة ṣalṣala clank(ing), clatter(ing),
clash, rattle
صلصال ṣalsāl dry clay, argillaceous
earth
مصلطح muṣalṭaḥ = مسلطح shallow, shoal, flat
صلع ṣali‘a a (ṣala‘) to be bald
صلع ṣala‘ baldness
صلعة ṣul‘a, ṣala‘a bald pate, bald head
اصلع aṣla‘ صلعاء , 2 ṣal‘ā’2, pl. صلع ṣul‘,
صلعان ṣul‘ān bald(-headed)
صلعم abbreviation of the eulogy following the
name of the Prophet Mohammed: صلى لله
عليه وسلم (ṣallā, ṣallam) God bless him and
grant him salvation!
صلف ṣalifa a (ṣalaf) to boast, brag, bluster,
swagger V = I
صلف ṣalaf vainglory, bragging,
boasting, conceit, arrogance, pomposity,
self-importance 523
صلف ṣalif pl. صلفاء ṣulafā’2
vainglorious, bragging, boastful, showing
off, pompous, blustering, swagering;
braggart, boaster, show-off, swaggerer,
fourflusher
تصلف taṣalluf vainglory, bragging,
boasting, conceit, arrogance, pomposity,
self-importance
متصلف mutaṣallif vainglorious,
bragging, boastful, showing off, pompous,
blustering, swagering
صلو II to perform the salat ( صلوة see below),
pray, worship │ صلى بالناس to lead people
in prayer; صلى على to pray for; (of God) to
bless s.o.: صلى لله عليه وسلم (sallam) God
bless him and grant him salvation! (eulogy
after the name of the Prophet Mohammed)
صلوة، صلاة ṣalāh pl. صلوات ṣalawāt
salat, the official Islamic prayer ritual;
intercession, intercessory prayer,
benediction; blessing, grace (of God) │
الصلاة الربانية (rabbānīyra) the Lord’s
prayer; صلاة التراويح a prayer performed
during the nights of Ramadan; صلاة الستار
vesper prayer (Chr.)
مصل muṣallin prayer, worshiper
مصلى muṣallan place of prayer, oratory
صلون ṣalūn salon, parlor, reception room
صلى ṣallā i (ṣaly) to roast, broil, fry ( ھ s.th.);
-- ṣaliya a (ṣalan, ṣulīy, صلاء ṣilā’) to burn
(intr.; ب or ھ in); to be exposed to the
blaze of ( ب or ھ ) II to warm, heat ( ب ھ
s.th. with or on) IV = II ( ھ ھ s.th. on or
with); to make ( ه s.o.) burn ( ھ in. esp. النار
in the fire) │ اصلاه نارا من الغيرة (gaira) to
make s.o. undergo the most excruciating
pangs of jealousy; اصلاه نارا to set s.th. on
fire; to fire at s.o. or s.th. (mil.) V to warm
o.s., seek warmth ( ب at, by, بالنار by the
fire) VIII = V│ لا يصطلى بناره (yuṣṯalā binārihī)
invincible, a great hero
مصطلى muṣṯalan fireplace
صم ṣamma (1st pers. perf. ṣamimtu) a (ṣamm,
صمم ṣamam) to be or become deaf; --
ṣamma (1st pers. perf. ṣamamtu) u (ṣamm)
to close, plug, cork, stopper ( ھ s.th., e.g.,
a bottle) II to deafen ( ه s.o.); to make up
one’s mind ( على to do s.o.); to make up
one’s mind ( على to do s.th.), determine (
على upon, to do s.th.), resolve, be
determined ( على to do s.th.), decide ( على
on, to do s.th.); to persist ( على in); to
deoign ( ھ s.th.); to plan ( ھ s.th.), design (
ھ ل s.th. for) IV to be or become deaf; to
deafen ( ه s.o.), make (. s.o.) deaf ( ھ, عن to
s.th.) VI to give a deaf ear ( عن to)
صمة ṣimma plug, cork, stopper
صمم deafness │ كان في صمم عن to be deaf
to s.th.
صمام ṣimām pl. -āt plug, cork, stopper;
valve, tube (radio) │ صمام الأمان (الأمن ) s.
al-amān (al-amn) safety valve; O صمام
التقويم rectifier tube; رفع الصمام عن to let s.th.
take its course, give free rein to s.th. (also
to a feeling)
O صمامة ṣammāma embolism (med.)
صميم ṣamīm innermost, heart; core,
essence, marrow, pith; true, sincere,
genuine │ من صميم القلب (ṣ. il-qalb) from
the bottom of the heart, wholeheartedly,
most sincerely; في صميم ... amid, in; ضربه
في الصميم to affect s.o. to the very core,
touch s.o. most deeply
صميمي cordial, hearty
اصم aṣamm2, f. صماء ṣammā’2, pl. صم
ṣumm, صمان ṣummān deaf; hard and solid,
massive (rock); الأصم the deaf one, epithet
of the month of Rajab │ فعل اصم (fi‘l)
triliteral verb with identical second and
third radical, verbum mediae geminatae
(gram.); اصم اصلخ (aṣlak) stone-deaf; جذر
اصم (jadr) irrational or surd root (math.),
آلة صماء willing tool
تصميم taṣmīm determination ( على for, to
do s.th.), resolution, decision; resolute 524
action; tenacious pursuit (of a plan);
planning, projecting; design, designing
(e.g., of a dress); (pl. –āt, تصاميم taṣāmīm2)
plan; design; sketch│ من تصميم فلان
designed by so-and so
مصمم muṣammim determined ( على to do
s.th.)│ مصمم الازياء fashion creator,
designer
صمت ṣamata u (ṣamt, صموت ṣumūt) to be
silent, be taciturn, hold one’s tongue, hush
up, be or become quiet or still II to silence
ه) s.o.) IV = II
صمت ṣamt silence │ في صمت silently,
quietly
صموت ṣumūt silence; pl. of act.
participle صامت
صموت ṣamūt silent, taciturn
صامت ṣāmit pl. صموت ṣumūt silent │
سينما صامتة silent film
مصمت muṣammat uniform (color);
plain, unpatterned, blank (wall); uniform
in texture, made of a single material;
massive, solid, not hollow, compact
صماخ ṣimàk pl. اصمخة aṣmika auditory meatus
صمد ṣamada u (ṣamd) to betake o.s., repair, go
ھ, ه) or ل or الى to, into, toward), to turn,
apply o.s. ( ھ or ل or الى to s.th.); -- ( صمود
ṣumūd) to defy, hrave, withstand ( في وجھه
fī wajhihī or ل s.o., s.th.), to stand up ( في
وجھه or ل against s.o. or s.th.), resist,
oppose ( في وجھه or الى s.o. or s.th.); to hold
out ( في وجھه or ل against); -- i to close,
plug, cork, stopper ( ھ s.th., e.g., a bottle)
II to betake o.s., repair, go ( ه to s.o., ھ to,
toward), to close, plug, cork, stopper ( ھ
s.th., e.g., a bottle), to save, lay by
(money) III to come to blows, fight ( ه with
s.o.)
صمد ṣamad lord; eternal, everlasting
(epithet of God)
صمدانى ṣamadānī eternal, everlasting
صمادة ṣimāda (ir.) headcloth (worn by
men)
صمصم ṣamṣama to persist ( فى in)
صومعة ṣauma‘a pl. صوامع ṣawāmi‘2 monk’s
cell, hermitage; silo (for grain storage);
(mor.) minaret
صمغ II to gum ( ھ s.th.); to paste, glue ( ھ s.th.)
IV to exude gum (tree)
صمغ samg pl. صموغ ṣumūg gum, resin
│ صمغ سائل mucilage; صمغ عربي (‘arabī)
gum arabic; صمغ اللك s. al-lakk shellac;
صمغ مرن (marin) rubber, caoutchouc; صمغ
ھندي (hindī) do.; شجر الصمغ šajar aṣ-ṣ.
rubber trees
صمغي ṣamgī gummy, gummiferous,
gumlike, mucilaginous
تصميغ taṣmīg gumming; resinification
صمل 1 ṣamala u (ṣaml) to be firm, be hard, hold
one’s ground, stand firm, hold out, last,
endure
صمل ṣaml rigidity, stiffness, │ صمل
جيفي (jīfī) rigor mortis
صمولة 2 ṣamūla pl. صوامل ṣawāmil2,
صامولة ṣāmūla pl. صواميل ṣawāmīl2 nut (of
a bolt), rivet
صملاخ ṣimlāk pl. صماليخ ṣamālīk2 earwax,
cerumen
صمى IV to deal ( ه s.o.) a fatal blow, to hit ( ھ, ه
s.o., s.th.) fatally │ رمى فاصمى ramā faaṣmā
to shoot and hit, shoot dead on the
spot
صن ṣann basket
صنة ṣinna odor emanating from the
armpit
صنان ṣunān odor emanating from the
armpit
صنارة ṣinnāra pl. صنانير ṣanānīr2 hook,
fishhook 525
صنبور ṣanbūr pl. صنابير ṣanābīr2 (water)
faucet, tap
صنبر look up alphabetically
صنتيم ṣantīm pl. -āt centime (1/100 franc)
صنج 1 ṣanj pl. صنوج ṣunūj cymbal (mus.)
صنجة 2 ṣinja = سنجة 1
صنجات 3 ṣanajāt castanets
صنجقية ṣanjaqīya see سنجق
صنديد ṣindīd pl. صناديد ṣanādīd leader, notable;
brave, valiant
صندوق ṣundūq, ṣandūq pl. صناديق ṣanādīq2
crate, box; chest; trunk, suitcase; case,
cabinet; money box; till, coffer; pay
office, treasurer’s office; any public
institution where funds are deposited and
disbursed for a special purpose (e.g., sick
fund, health insurance, etc.) │ صندوق البريد
post-office box; صندوق المكاتب mailbox;
صندوق النقد الدولي ṣ. an-naqd ad-duwalī
International Monetary Fund; صندوق التوفير
savings bank; ابو الصندوق (eg.) hunchback;
امين الصندوق treasurer; دفتر الصندوق daftar
aṣ-ṣ. cashbook
صندل ṣandal sandalwood; sandals; (pl. صنادل
ṣanādil2) (freight) barge; lighter, barge
صنارة look up alphabetically
صنع 1 ṣana‘a a (ṣan‘, ṣun‘, صنيع ṣanī‘) to do,
make ( ھ s.th.); to arrange, stage, put on ( ھ
s.th.); to produce, build, manufacture,
fabricate, design ( ھ s.th.); to work, treat,
process ( ھ s.th.) │ صنع اليه معروفا to do s.o.
a favor; صنع معه جميلا do.; صنع به ھ to do
s.th. to s.o.; صنع به صنيعا قبيحا to do s.o. a
dirty trick II to industrialize ( ھ s.th.) ill to
cooperate, go along ( ھ، ه with); to flatter,
cajole ( ه s.o.); to bribe ( ب ه s.o. with) V to
pretend, feign, stimulate, fake, sham,
affect ( ھ s.th.); to speak or write in an
artificial, affected, stilted, or mannered
way; to use means for enhancing her
beauty (woman) VIII to order,
commission ( ھ s.th.); to create ( ھ s.th.)
synthetically; to produce, manufacture,
make, fabricate ( ھ s.th.); to pretend, feign,
fake, assume falsely ( ھ s.th.); to invent ( ھ
s.th.); to make ( ل ه s.th. into), take, use ( ل
ھ s.th. for); to commit, bind ( ل ه s.o. to) X
to have ( ه s.o.) make ( ھ s.th.)
صنع ṣan‘, ṣan‘ production,
manufacture, fabrication, making, design,
make, workmanship │ صنع اليد ṣ. al-yad
handwork; بديع الصنع badī‘ aṣ-ṣan‘ of
wonderful workmanship
صنعي ṣan‘ī artificial, synthetic
صنع ṣun‘ benefit, favor
صنعة ṣan‘a work, workmanship,
making, manufacture, fabrication; art;
technical skill, artistic skill; work, craft,
trade, business, occupation, vocation,
profession │ صاحب الصنعة artisan,
craftsman; expert, specialist
صناع ṣanā‘: صناع اليد ṣ. al-yad skillful,
skilled, dexterous, deft
صناعة ṣinā‘a pl. -āt, صنائع ṣanā’i‘2 art,
skill; occupation, vocation, calling,
business, profession; handicraft; trade,
craft; industry; pl. branches of industry,
industries │ صناعة شريفة honorable,
respectable trade; ارباب الصناعات the
artisans, craftsmen; رجل الصناعة rajul aṣ-ṣ.
industrialist; اصحاب الصنائع والحرف (ḥiraf)
artisans and tradesmen
صنائعي ṣanā’i‘ī artificial, synthetic,
imitation; workmanlike, handicraft, trade
(adj.); industrial; artisan, craftsman
صناعي ṣinā‘ī artificial, synthetic,
imitation; workmanlike, handicraft, trade
(adj.); industrial │ سر صناعي (sirr)
industrial secret; الفن الصناعي (fann) applied
arts, artistic handicraft 526
صنيع ṣanī‘ action, acting, doing; act,
deed; fact; good deed, benefit, favor;
charge, protégé; creature, willing tool;
meal, repast, banquet
صنيعة ṣanī‘a pl. صنائع ṣanā’i‘2 action,
deed; good deed, good turn, benefit, favor;
charge, protégé; creature, willing tool
مصنع maṣna‘ pl. مصانع maṣāni‘2 factory,
plant, mill, works; establishment, firm;
مصانع also: large structures, installations,
man-made works │ ارباب ( اصحاب) المصانع
manufacturers, industrialists
مصنعية maṣna‘īya wages, pay
تصنيع taṣnī‘ industrialization
تصنع taṣannu‘ hypocrisy, dissimulation,
dissemblement; affectedness affectation,
mannerism
اصطناع iṣṭinā‘ production, making
اصطناعي iṣṭinā‘ī artificial, synthetic,
imitation
صانع ṣāni‘ pl. صناع ṣunnā‘ maker,
producer, manufacturer, creator; artisan,
craftsman; worker, workman, laborer;
servant
مصنوع product, produce; pl. مصنوعات
(industrial) products, produce, articles,
manufactured goods
متصنع mutaṣanni‘ subtilizing,
overrefining; affected, stilted, mannered
مصطنع muṣṭana‘ artificial, synthetic;
affected, simulated, imitated, sham,
bogus, phony │ مفتاح مصطنع (miftāḥ)
duplicate key, masterkey
صنعاء 2 ṣan‘ā’ San‘a (capital of Yemen)
صنف II to sort, assort, classify, categorize ( ھ
s.th.); to compile, compose, write ( ھ a
book)
صنف ṣanf, ṣinf pl. اصناف aṣnāf, صنوف
ṣunūf kind, sort, specimen; article (com.);
genus, species, class, category; sex; صنفا in
kind (as oppose to: in cash)
تصنيف taṣnīf classification.
Categorization, sorting, assorting;
compilation, composition, writing; (pl.
تصانيف taṣānīf2) literary work
تصنيفة taṣnīfa assortment, selection
مصنف muṣannif author, writer
مصنف muṣannaf pl. -āt literary work
صنفر ṣanfara to rub with sandpaper, to
sandpaper, to emery ( ھ s.th.)
صنفر ṣanfar and صنفرة ṣanfara emery
صنم ṣanam pl. اصنام aṣnām idol, image
صنو ṣinw pl. صنوان ṣinwān, اصناء aṣnā’ one of
two, twin brother
صنوبر ṣanaubar stone pine (Pinus pinea; bot.)
│ حب الصنوبر ḥabb aṣ-ṣ. pine nut, pinon
صنوبري ṣanaubarī pine (adj.). piny,
pine-like; pineal │ الغدة الصنوبرية (gudda)
pineal gland
صه ṣah pst! hush! quiet!
صھب IX and XI iṣhābba to be or become
reddish, red-brown
اصھب aṣhab2, f. صھباء ṣahhbā’2, pl.
صھب ṣuhb reddish; الصھباء wine
صھد ṣahada a (ṣahd) to scorch, parch, burn ( ھ
ه s.o., s.th., esp. of the sun)
صھد ṣahd beat
صھيد ṣahīd scorching beat, blaze
صھود ṣuhūd scorching heat, blaze
صھر ṣahara a (ṣahr) to melt, fuse, smelt ( ھ
s.th.) III to become related by marriage ( في
or ه to s.o.) IV to become related by
marriage ( الى or ب to s.o.) VI to be related
by marriage VII to melt, fuse; to melt
away, vanish, break (intr.) 527
صھر ṣihr relationship by marriage; --
(pl. اصھار aṣhār) husband of one’s
daughter, son-in-law; husband of one’s
sister, brother-in-law
صھير ṣahīr molten, in fusion
مصاھر maṣāhir2 (pl.) smelting furnaces;
blast furnaces
O مصھر miṣhar pl. -āt fuse (el.)
مصاھرة muṣāhara relationship by
marriage; O affinity
انصھار inṣihār melting process │ O سلك
الانصھار الواقى silk al-ins. al-wāqī fuse (el.)
صھريج ṣihrīj, ṣahrīj صھاريج ṣahārīj2 cistern;
large (water) container, tank
صھل ṣahala a i ( صھيل ṣahīil) to whinny, neigh
(horse)
صھيل ṣahīl whinny(ing), neighing
صھوة ṣahwa pl. ṣahawāt, صھاء ṣihā’ back (of a
horse)
صھيون ṣahyūn2, also ṣihyaun2 Zion
صھيوني ṣahyūnī, ṣihyaunī Zionistic,
Zionist
صھيونية ṣahyūnīya, ṣihyaunīya Zionism
صاب (صوب 1 ) ṣāba u (ṣaub, صيبوبة ṣaibūba) to
hit ( ھ s.th., the target); to be right, hold
true, be to the point, hit the mark, be
pertinent, be apposite (opinion) │ صاب ام
اقلع (am aqla‘a) by all means, under all
circumstances II to direct, fix ( الى ھ s.th.,
also, e.g., the glance on, to), aim, point,
train ( الى ھ s.th. at or on); to agree ( ه with
s.o.), concur ( ھ، ه with s.o., in s.th.),
consent, assent ( ھ to s.th.), approve ( ھ of
s.th.), sanction ( ھ s.th.) IV to hit ( ھ a
target); to attain, reach, achieve ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., end, purpose); to reach out ( ھ for
s.th., of the hand); to get, obtain, win, gain
ھ) e.g., a fortune), acquire ( ھ s.th. ه e.g. ه a
certain amount of knowledge); to have,
eat ( ھ a snack); to take ( ھ a meal); to
befall ( ه s.o.), fall ( ه upon s.o.), happen ( ه
to s.o.); to allot ( ب ه to s.o. s.th.), bestow (
ب ه upon s.o. s.th.), make ( ب s.th.) fall to
s.o.’s ( ه) lot; to cause losses ( من to s.o.); to
be right, be in the right; to do the right
thing, hit the mark; to do right, properly ( ه
s.th., expressed by a verbal noun); to say
the right word; pass اصيب uṣība to be
stricken, attacked, afflicted ( ب by a
disease, and the like); to be killed │ اصاب
اصابات (iṣābāt) to score, make goals (in
sports); اصاب في عمله (‘amalihī) to do right,
act properly; اصيب بجراح to incur multiple
wounds; اصيب بخسارة (bi-kasāratin) to
suffer a loss; اصيب اصابة شديدة (iṣābatan) to
be hard hit, be grievously afflioted X
استوصب istauṣaba to approve ( ه of s.th.),
sanction ( ھ s.th.)
صوب ṣaub direction, quarter; that
which is right, proper, or correct; ṣauba
(prep.) in the direction of, toward, to │ من
كل حدب وصوب (ḥadabin) or من كل صوب
وحدب or من كل فج وحدب (fajjin) from all
sides, from all directions, from all
quarters, from everywhere; في كل صوب
وحدب every place, everywhere, all over, in
all quarters
صيب ṣayyib rain cloud
صابة ṣāba pl. -āt harvest (tun.)
صواب ṣawāb that which is right, proper,
or correct; right, proper, or correct;
rightness, correctness, properness; reason,
intellect, mind, consciousness; صوابا
ṣawāban rightly, justly │ ھو على الصواب he
is right; سلك طريق الصواب والحق (ḥaqq) to
act in exactly the right manner, pursue the
right course; رجع (فاء) الى صوابه to regain
one’s reason, get back to one’s senses,
become reasonable again; اضاع صوابه، فقد
صوابه to lose one’s mind; غاب عن صوابه to
lose consciousness; غائب عن صوابه
unconscious, senseless 528
اصوب aṣwab2 more pertinent, more
apropos, more apposite, more proper,
more correct
اصوبية aṣwabīya advisability,
expediency
تصويب taṣwīb aiming; turning, pointing;
(pl. -āt) correction, rectification
اصابة isāba pl. -āt hit; goal, score (in
sports); injury, wound; state or process of
being afflicted (by a disease), (attack of)
illness, sickness; accident │ اصابة العمل i.
al-‘amal industrial accident; محل الاصابة
maḥall al-i. scene of the accident
استصواب istiṣwāb approval
صائب ṣā’ib pertinent, apropos, apposite,
right, correct; suited, appropriate
مصيب muṣīb pertinent, apropos,
apposite, right, correct; suited, appropriate
مصيبة muṣība pl. -āt, مصائب maṣā’ib2
misfortune, calamity, disaster
مصاب muṣāb stricken, befallen,
attacked, afflicted ( ب by); injured,
wounded, sick, ill; wounded person,
casualty; victim of an accident;
misfortune, calamity, disaster │ مصاب اليم
grievous misfortune, mournful event,
death
صوبة 2 (Turk. soba) ṣōbe stove (syr.)
صات (صوت ) ṣāta u a (ṣāut) to ring, sound,
make a noise or sound; to raise one’s
voice, about II = I; to vote, cast ballots (at
an election)
صوت ṣaut pl. اصوات aṣwāt sound (also
phon.); voice; tone, strain; melody, tune;
noise; fame, renown; vote; pl.
interjections (gram.) │ بعد الصوت bu‘d aṣ-
ṣ. fame, celebrity; رجع الصوت raj‘ aṣ-ṣ.
echo, reverberation; علم الأصوات ‘ilm al-a.
phonetics; قوة الصوت qūwat aṣ-ṣ. volume,
intensity (radio); بصوت مسموع audibly;
بصوت عال aloud; بصوت واطئ (wāṭi’) softly,
in a low voice, under one’s breath
صوتي ṣautī sonant, sound- (in
compounds), vocal, sonic, acoustic;
resounding, resonant, sonorous; phonetic
صوتيات ṣautīyāt phonetics
صوات ṣuwāt crying, shouting, clamor
صيت ṣīt (good) repute, standing,
prestige; fame, renown; celebrity,
famousness │ بعد الصوت bu‘d as.-ṣ. fame,
celebrity; ذائع الصيت famous, celebrated,
well-known
صيت sayyit loud-voiced, having a
stentorian voice; O loud-speaker (Syr.)
O مصوات miṣwāt microphone
تصويت taṣwīt voting, vote, casting of
ballots, polling (election)
صائت ṣā’it sound- (in compounds) │ O
سينما صائتة sound film
مصوت muṣawwit voter; entitled to vote,
franchised
صاج look up alphabetically
صوح II to dry ( ھ s.th.)
مصوح muṣawwaḥ withered, dried (herb,
etc.)
صاخ (صوخ 1 ) ṣāka u = ساخ sāka u
صوخ 2 IV to listen, lend one’s ear ( الى or ل to
s.o., to s.th.)
صاد name of the letter ص
صودا soda │ صودا كاوية (kāwiya) caustic soda,
sodium hydroxide; نترات الصودا (nitrāt)
sodium nitrate
صوديوم (Lat. sodium) sodium
صور II to form, shape, mold, fashion, create (
ھ s.th.); to paint, draw, sketch ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to illustrate (with drawings or
pictures, ھ s.th.); to make a picture ( ھ، ه
of s.o., of s.th.); to photograph ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to represent, portray ( ھ s.th., fig.) │
صور له (ṣuwwira) it appeared to him,
seemed to him 529 V = pass. of II; to
imagine, fancy, conceive ( ھ s.th.); to think
ھ، ه) s.o., s.th.) to be s.o. or s.th. ( ھ، ه ); to
seem, appear, look ( ل to s.o.) │ لا يتصور
العقل (‘aqlu) unimaginable, inconceivable,
unthinkable
صور ṣūr horn, bugle; see also below
صورة ṣūra pl. صور ṣuwar form, shape;
pictorial representation, illustration;
image, likeness, picture; figure, statue;
replica; copy, carbon copy, duplicate;
manner, mode; ṣūratan formally │ صورة
جامعة total picture, overall picture; صورة
متحركة (mutaḥarrika) motion picture, film;
دار الصور المتحركة , motion-picture theater,
cinema; صورة شمسية (šamsīya) photograph;
صورة طبق الأصل (ṭibqa l-aṣl) true copy;
exact replica (fig.); undistorted picture;
صورة مكبرة (mukabbara) enlargement,
blowup (phot.); في صورة الآدميين in human
shape; بصورة جلية (jalīya) obviously,
evidently; بصورة محسوسة perceptibly,
tangibly, palpably; بصورة خاصة (kāṣṣa)
especially, particularly; بصورة عامة
(‘āmma) generally, in general; بصورة مكبرة
(mukabbara) increasingly, on a larger
scale, to an increasing degree; بصورة
ملحوظة noticeably, markedly; على صورة
كيميائية (kīmiyā’īya) chemically, by
chemical means; في صورة ما اذا in case
that ..., if; في صورة مصغرة (muṣaggara) on
a reduced scale, in miniature
صوري ṣūrī, ṣūwarī formal; superficial;
false, sham, deceptive, fallacious;
artificial, fictitious, seeming, fancied,
imaginary
تصوير taṣwīr drawing, sketching;
representation, portrayal, depiction;
illustration; painting; photography, also
التصوير الشمسي (šamsī); take (in motion
picture taking) │ آلة التصوير camera
تصويرة taṣwīra pl. تصاوير taṣāwīr2
pictorial representation, image, picture,
illustration
تصور taṣawwur pl. -āt imagination
(also philos.), fancy, fantacy, idea;
conception, concept (philos.)
تصوري taṣawwurī existing in
imagination only, imaginary, fancied,
fictitious │ O الذھب التصوري (madhab)
idealism (as a philosophical school)
مصور muṣawwir pl. -āt former, shaper,
fashioner, creator; painter; photographer;
cameraman (motion pictures); draftsman,
commercial artist, illustrator │ مصور
الكائنات the Creator of the Universe; المصور
الكھربائي للقلب (kahrabā’ī, qalb)
electrocardiograph
مصورة muṣawwira camera
مصور muṣawwar illustrated; -- (pl. -āt)
photographer’s studio; motion-picture
studio │ مصور الجغرافيا m. al-jugrāfiyā
atlas
صور 2 ṣūr2 Tyre (town in S Lebanon)
صوص 1 ṣūṣ pl. صيصان ṣīṣān chicken, chick
(syr.)
صوصي 2 ṣauṣī (eg.) to peep, cheep, squeak
صوع VII to turn on one’s heel; to obey, yield,
give in, submit ( ل to s.o. to s.th.)
صاع ṣā‘ pl. اصوع aṣwu‘, اصواع aṣwā‘,
صيعان ṣī‘ān saa, a cubic measure of
varying magnitude │ بصاع صاعا tit for tat;
رد له الصاع صاعين (radda, ṣā‘ain) or to pay
s.o. back
twofold, bring double retaliation on s.o.
صاعة ṣā‘a salon, parlor, reception room
صاغ (صوغ 1 ) ṣāga u (ṣaug, ṣiyāga) to form,
shape, mold, fashion, create ( ھ s.th.); to
formulate ( ھ s.th.); to coin ( ھ a word); to
fabricate, invent, make up ( ھ a lie) │ صاغ
الذھب والفضة (dahab, fiḍḍa) to work in gold
and silver, practice the art of goldsmithing
صوغ ṣaug forming, shaping, molding,
fashioning, creating 530
صيغة sīga forming, shaping, molding,
fashioning, creating; -- (pl. صيغ ṣiyag)
shape, form; external form; wording, text,
version (e.g., of a letter, of a treaty);
formula (in general, also math., chem.);
jewelry, gold and silver articles; (gram.)
form │ صيغة الفاعل the active (gram.); صيغة
المفعول the passive (gram.); بصيغة حاسمة in a
decided form, in no uncertain terms
صياغة ṣiyāga composing, drafting,
wording, forming, formulation,
fashioning, molding, shaping;
goldsmithery, goldsmithing
مصاغ maṣāg jewelry, jewels, gold and
silver articles
صائغ ṣā’ig pl. صياغ ṣuyyāg, صاغة ṣāga,
صواغ ṣuwwāg goldsmith, jeweler
مصوغات maṣūgāt gold and silver
jewelry, goldsmithery, jewelry
صاغ 2 look up alphabetically
صوف ṣūf pl. اصواف aṣwāf wool
صوفي ṣūfī of wool, woolen; Islamic
mystic, Sufi
صوفية ṣūfiya Sufi way of life; الصوفية
Sufism (Islamic mysticism)
صوفان ṣūfān tinder, touchwood, punk
صوفانة ṣūfāna tinder, touchwood, punk
صواف ṣawwāf wool merchant
التصوف at-taṣawwuf Sufism (Islamic
mysticism), the Sufi way of life;
mysticism
المتصوفة al-mutaṣawwifa the Sufis,
members of Sufi communities, mystics
صوفيا ṣōfiyā Sofia (capital of Bulgaria)
صال ( صول 1 )ṣāla u (ṣaul, صولة ṣaula, صيال
ṣiyāl) to spring, jump, leap ( على on),
attack, assault ( على s.o.) II to pan, wash
out ( ھ grain, gold) III to vie, compete ( ھ
with s.o.)
صولة ṣaula pl. -āt attack, assault; force,
tyranny, despotism, arbitrariness
صول 2 (Turk. sol) approx.: sergeant major,
technical sergeant (Eg.) │ صول التعليم
approx.: master sergeant; صول التعيين
approx.: quartermaster sergeant (mil.)
صولجان ṣaulajān pl. صوالجة ṣawāllija staff with
a curved end; polo mallet; scepter, mace
صام (صوم ) ṣāma u (ṣaum, صيام ṣiyām) to
abstain ( عن from s.th.); to abstain from
food, drink, and sexual intercourse; to fast
صوم ṣaum abstention, abstinence,
abstemiousness; fasting, fast; الصوم fasting
during the month of Ramadan, one of the
five principal duties of the Muslim │
الصوم الكبير the Great Fast = Lent (Chr.);
عيد صوم الغفران ‘īd ṣ. al-gufrān Yom
Kippur, Day of Atonement (Jud.)
صيام ṣiyām fasting, fast
صيامي ṣiyāmī Lenten fare
صائم ṣā’im pl. -ūn, صوم ṣuwwam, صيم
ṣuyyam, صيام ṣiyām fasting (adj.); faster,
one who fasts
الصومال aṣ-ṣomāl Somaliland
صومالي ṣomalī Somali (adj. and n.)
صومعة ṣauma‘a see صمع
صان (صون ) ṣāna I (ṣaun, صيانة ṣiyāna) to
preserve, conserve, keep, retain, maintain,
sustain, uphold ( ھ s.th.); to maintain ( ھ
e.g., a machine, an automobile); to
protect, guard, safeguard, keep, save ( عن
ھ ه s.o., s.th. from); to defend ( عن ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th. against) V to uphold one’s honor, live
chastely, virtuously (woman); to shut o.s.
off; seclude o.s. protect o.s.
صون ṣaun, preservation, conservation,
guarding, keeping; susten(ta)tion,
upholding; maintenance, upkeep, care;
531 protection, safeguard(ing), securing,
defense; chastity, respectability │ صاحبة
الصون honorary title or ladies of high
social standing
صوان ṣiwān, ṣuwān pl. اصونة aṣwina
cupboard, case
صوان ṣawwan (coll.; n. un. ة) flint;
granite
صواني ṣawwānī: ادوات صوانية (adawāt)
flint implements
صيانة ṣiyāna = صون ṣaun │ ملك الصيانة
malak aṣ-ṣ. guardian angel (Chr.)
صائن ṣā’in preserver, sustainer,
maintainer, keeper, guardian, protector;
protective
مصون maṣūn well-protected, well-kept,
guarded, sheltered; chaste, virtuous
(woman); also an epithet for women
صوة ṣūwa pl. صوى ṣuwan stone landmark, trail
mark
صوى ṣawā i (ṣuwīy) and ṣawiya a (ṣawan) and
II to dry up, wither, wilt; -- ṣawā to peep,
cheep, squeak, chirp, screech
صيت see صوت
صاح (صيح ) ṣāḥa i (ṣaiḥ, صياح ṣiyāḥ) to cry,
yell, shout; to scream, screech; to crow; to
utter, let out ( صيحة ṣaiḥatan a cry); to call
out ( ب to s.o.), shout, bellow, bawl ( في or
على at s.o.) II to cry out (loud), roar,
bellow, bawl VI to shout at one another,
call out to one another; to clamor, raise a
din
صيح ṣaiḥ crying, clamor
صيحة ṣaiḥa (n. vic.) pl. -āt cry, outcry,
shout │ صيحة الحرب ṣ. al-ḥarb battle cry,
war cry; ارسل صيحات (arsala) to utter cries;
صاح صيحة to utter a cry; على صيحة within
shouting distance; ذھب صيحة في واد
(ṣaiḥatan) to die unheard (call)
صياح ṣiyāḥ crying, clamor, cry, outcry;
cry of a bird
صياح ṣayyāḥ crier, loud-mouthed
person; noisy, clamorous, vociferous,
crying
تصايح taṣāyuḥ crying, clamor, roar,
bellow(ing)
صاد (صيد 1 ) ṣāda i (ṣaid) to catch (in a trap),
trap ( ھ game); to hunt ( ھ game); to hunt
down ( ھ game); to catch ( ھ fish) V to
hunt for prey; to hunt down (s.th.); to
catch ( ھ s.th.); VIII = I │ اصطاد في الماء
العكر (‘akir) to fish in troubled waters
صيد ṣaid hunting, hunt; angling, fishing
(also صيد السمك ṣ. as-samak); game,
venison, prey, quarry │ من صيد خياله (ṣ.
kayālihī) dreamed up by him, a product of
his fantasy (of a story)
صياد ṣayyād pl. -āt hunter; fisher │ صياد
السمك ṣ. as-samak fisher, fisherman;
kingfisher (zool.)
صيداء ṣaidā’ Sidon (city in Lebanon)
مصيدة miṣyada pl. مصايد maṣāyid2 trap,
snare; net; hunting or fishing implement
مصيدة maṣyada pl. مصايد maṣāyid2
fishery, fishing grounds (also (مصيد الأسماك
صاد 2 ṣād name or the letter ص
صيدلية ṣaidalīya apothecary’s trade; pharmacy,
pharmacology
صيدلي ṣaidalī pl. صيادلة ṣayādila
pharmacist, druggist, apothecary
صيدلاني ṣaidalānī pharmacist, druggist,
apothecary
صيدلية ṣaidalīya pl. -āt pharmacy;
drugstore
صيدليات ṣaidalīyāt drugs, pharmaceutics
صار (صير ) ṣāra i (ṣair, صيرورة ṣairūra, مصير
maṣīr) to become ( ھ s.th.); (with foll.
imperf.) to begin, commence, start to ...,
come to ..., get to ..., get into a situation
where ..., get to the point where ...; to set
in, occur, happen, come to pass, 532 take
place; to fall to s.o.’s ( ل) lot, befall ( ل
s.o.); to betake o.s., come, get ( عند or الى
to); to arrive ( الى at); to end, wind up ( الى
with), result ( الى in); صار به الى to lead,
bring s.o. or s.th. to; يصار الى (yuṣāru) one
proceeds to ..., one will eventually..., one
will wind up with ... II to induce ( ه s.o.) to
become ( ھ s.th.), make ( ھ ه s.o. into s.th.,
out of s.o. s.th.)
صير ṣīr crack (of the door); small salted
fish
صيرورة ṣairūra (act or process of)
becoming, development; end, outcome,
upshot, result
مصير maṣīr development, progress
(e.g., of work); -- (pl. مصاير maṣāyir2)
place at which one arrives; end, outcome,
upshot, issue, result; fate, destiny, lot; life;
see also under تقرير المصير │ مصر selfdetermination
(pol.); مصير كل حي m. kull
ḥayyin the way of all flesh
تصيير taṣyīr cession, transfer (jur.)
صيصية ṣīṣiya pl. صياص ṣayāṣin spur of the
rooster
صيغة see صوغ
صاف (صيف ) ṣāfa i (ṣaif) to be summery; to
spend the summer, estivate ( ھ or ب in) │
صاف الزمان ام شتا (zamānu am šatā) at all
times, under all circumstances II, V, VIII
= I
صيف ṣaif pl. اصياف aṣyāf summer
صيفي ṣaifī summery, estival, summer
(adj.) │ توقيت صيفي daylight-saving time
مصيف maṣīf pl. مصايف maṣāyif2
summer residence, summer resort; rest
center, holiday camp
اصتياف iṣtiyāf summering, summer
vacationing
صائفة ṣā’ifa summer(time)
مصطاف muṣṭāf summer resort; (pl. -ūn)
vacationist, summer visitor
الصين aṣ-ṣīn China; the Chinese │ بلاد الصين
China
صيني Chinese (adj. and n.); porcelain,
china
صينية ṣīnīya (syr. ṣēnīya, leb. ṣainīya)
pl. صواني ṣawānī a large, round metal plate
with raised brim, esp. one made of copper,
used as baking tin, serving tray and table
top; turntable, صينية متحركة (mutaḥarrika);
pl. chinaware, porcelain vessels
صيوان ṣīwān pl. -āt, صواوين ṣawāwīn2 (large)
tent, pavilion, marquce
ض
ضاد ḍād name of the letter ض; a sound
peculiar to Arabic, hence: اھل الضاد ahl aḍ-
ḍ. the Arabic-speaking peoples, the Arabs;
ابناء الضاد do.; اقطار الضاد the Arabicspeaking
countries; لغة الضاد lugat aḍ-ḍ.
the Arabic language
ضؤل ḍa’ula u ( ضآلة ḍa’āla, ضؤولة ḍa’ūla) to be
small, tiny, little, scanty, meager, slight,
sparse, feeble, faint, thin; to diminish,
dwindle, wane, decline, shrink, decrease
VI = I
ضآلة ḍa’āla ( ضئالة ḍi’āla) smallness,
littleness, tininess; minuteness, scantiness,
meagerness, slightness, sparsity, paucity,
feebleness, faintness, thinness; waning,
dwindling, diminution, decrease;
shrinking, shrinkage; small number
ضؤولة ḍa’ūla = ضآلة ḍa’ālah
ضئيل ḍa’īl pl. ضئال ḍi’āl, ضؤلاء ḍu’alā’2
small, tiny, minute, little, scanty, slight,
meager, sparse, feeble, faint, thin
تضاؤل taḍā’ul = ضآلة ḍa’āla
ضامة ḍāma checkers
ضأن ḍa’n sheep (coll.)
ضأن ḍa’nī, ḍānī mutton (meat)
ضائن ḍā’in sheep
ضب ḍabba i (ḍabb) to take hold ( على of s.th.);
to keep under lock, put in safekeeping,
guard carefully ( على s.th.) II = I; to bolt ( ھ
the door) IV to be foggy (day)
ضب ḍabb pl. ضباب ḍabāb, اضب aḍubb,
ضبان ḍubbān lizard
ضب ḍabb (eg.) front teeth
ضبة ḍabba pl. -āt, ضباب ḍibāb door
bolt, latch; wooden lock
ضباب ḍadāb fog, mist
ضبر ḍabara u to gather, collect, assemble
ضبارة ḍabāra, ḍubāra and اضبارة iḍbāra
pl. اضابر aḍābir2 file, dossier
اضبور uḍbūr file, dossier
ضبح ḍabaḥa a (ḍabḥ) to blacken ( ھ s.th., said
of fire); to snort (horse)
ضبط ḍabaṭa u (ḍabṭ) to grab, grasp, seize,
catch, apprehend, arrest, detain ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), take hold ( ھ، ه of s.o., of s.th.); to
keep, hold, retain ( ھ s.th.); to tackle
resolutely, master, overcome ( ھ s.th.),
cope (a with s.th.); to have ( ھ s.th.) under
control, have command ( ھ over s.th.); to
restrain, hold back, keep down, subdue,
check, curb, control ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
seize, distrain, impound, confiscate (a
s.th.); to do ( ھ s.th.) accurately, precisely,
meticulously, or well; to render precise,
define precisely ( ھ s.th.); to regulate,
adjust ( ھ s.th., e.g., techn.); to determine
precisely ( كلمة kalimatan the spelling and
pronunciation of a word), vowel(ize) ( ھ a
word); to observe strictly, keep exactly (a
time); to regulate, settle, put or keep in
order ( ھ s.th.); to correct (a s.th.); to enter,
book, record, register ( ھ s.th.); to measure
off exactly, measure out ( ھ s.th.), take
exactly the right amount, the right
proportion ( ھ of) VII to be detained, be
held back, be held up; to be regulated, be
kept in order, be disciplined; to be
determined, be established, etc. (pass. of
ḍabaṭa)
ضبط ḍabṭ capture, apprehension,
arrest(ing), detention; restraint,
suppression, subdual, curb(ing),
check(ing); control; seizure, impoundage,
distraint, confiscation; accuracy,
correctness, exactitude, precision;
vowelization; correction, amendment,
settlement; regulation, adjustment of an
apparatus (techn.); (pl. ضبوط ḍubūṭ)
protocol, minutes, procès-verbal; entering,
entry, record, registry; ضبطا ḍabṭan
accurately, exactly, precisely, punctually
│ بالضبط = ضبطا ḍabṭan; ضبط الأراضي ḍ. alarāḍī
cadastral survey; ضبط الحسابات
bookkeeping; ضبط الشھوة ḍ. aš-šahwa
abstemiousness, continence; ضبط الأملاك
العقارية (‘aqārīya) cadastral survey; ضبط
النفس self-control, self-command; جھاز
الضبط jahāz aḍ-ḍ. control apparatus,
controlling device;
عار عن الضبط (‘ārin) unvowel(iz)ed
ضبطية ḍabṭīya police station; police
مضبطة maḍbaṭa pl. مضابط maḍābiṯ2
protocol, minutes, procès-verbal
انضباط inḍibāṭ discipline │ لجنة الانضباط
lajnat al-inḍ disciplinary board
ضابط ḍābiṭ controlling device, control,
governor, regulator (techn.); prepositor
534 entrusted with discipline (in Eg.
schools); (pl. ضباط ḍubbāṭ) officer; (pl.
ضوابط ḍawābiṭ2) general rule, canon,
(moral) precept or order │ ضابط آمر senior
officer; ضابط مأمور subaltern officer; ضابط
الصف ḍ. aṣ-ṣaff pl. ضباط الصف
noncommissioned officer; ضابط الصوت
ḍābiṭ aṣ-ṣ􀀀aut volume control (radio);
صف ضابط ṣaff ḍ. pl. صف ضباط
noncommissioned officer; بغير ضابط ولا
رادع (gair) completely unrestrained, out of
all control
ضابطة ḍābiṭa police; (pl. ضوابط
ḍawābiṭ2) curbing force, order
مضبوط maḍbūṭ accurate, exact, correct,
right, precise
ضبع ḍab‘, ḍabu‘ f. pl. ضبع ḍibā‘, اضبع aḍbu‘
hyena
ضبن VIII to take under one’s arm
ضبن ḍibn armpit
ضج ḍajja i (ḍajj, ضجيج ḍajīj) to be noisy,
boisterous; to clamor, about, raise a hue
and cry IV = I
ضجة ḍajja cry, yell, outcry; clamor,
noise, din, row, hubbub, tumult
ضجيج ḍajīj cry, yell, outcry; clamor,
noise, din, row, hubbub, tumult
ضجوج ḍajūj roaring, bellowing,
screaming, crying
ضجاج ḍajjāj violently roaring,
bellowing, screaming, crying, boisterous,
uproarious
ضجر ḍajira a (ḍajar) to be angry, annoyed,
irritated, exasperated ( من or ب at, about);
to be dissatisfied, discontent, displeased (
من or ب with); to sorrow, be worried,
uneasy ( من or ب about), be disquieted,
grieved, troubled ( من or ب by, over) IV to
anger, vex, irritate, trouble, torment ( ه
s.o.), disquiet, discomfit, aggrieve ( ه s.o.)
V = I
ضجر ḍajar annoyance, irritation,
vexation, anger; dissatisfaction;
discontent, displeasure; sorrow, worry,
grief
ضجر ḍajir annoyed, irritated, angry,
vexed; morose, sullen; dissatisfied,
discontent, displeased, uneasy, restless;
worried, grieved, troubled
مضجر muḍjir annoying, irritating,
exasperating, irksome, tedious
متضجر mutaḍajjir = ضجر ḍajir
ضجع ḍaja‘a a (ḍaj‘, ضجوع ḍujū‘) to lie on
one’s side, lie down; to lie, recline, be
prostrate; to sleep III to lie, have sexual
intercourse ( ھا with a woman) VII = I
VIII ( اضطجع and اضجع aḍja‘a) = I
ضجعة ḍaj‘a (n. vic.) lying position,
lying, recumbency; slumber
ضجع ḍuja‘a, ḍuj‘a late riser, slugabed,
sluggard, lazybones; lazy, sluggish, inert
ضجعي ḍuj‘ī late riser, slugabed,
sluggard, lazybones; lazy, sluggish, inert
ضجيع ḍajī‘ one sharing the bed;
bedfellow; comrade, companion
مضجع maḍja‘ pl. مضاجع maḍāji‘ couch,
bed │ اخذ مضجعه he lay down (to sleep);
اقض مضجعه aqaḍḍa maḍja‘ahū or اقض عليه
المضجع or اقلق مضجعه (maḍja‘ahū) to
deprive s.o. of sleep
مضاجع muḍāji‘ bedfellow
مضطجع muḍṭaji‘ couch, bed
ضحضح ḍaḥḍaḥa to vibrate, dicker (mirage); to
shatter, break, crush II to vibrate, flicker
(mirage)
ضحضاح ḍaḥḍāḥ shallow, shoal, flat
(water)
ضحك ḍaḥika a (ḍaḥk, ḍiḥk, ḍaḥik) to
laugh ( ب or من at, about, over); to jeer,
scoff, jibe ( ب or على or من at s.o., at s.th.),
deride, ridicule, mock, scorn ( ب or على or
من s.o., s.th.) │ ضحك بملء شدقيه (bi-mil’i
535 šidqaihi) or ضحك ملء شدقه (mil’a) to
grin from ear to ear; ضحك عن در منضد
(durrin munaḍḍadin) (to laugh by
showing stringed pearls, i.e., the teeth), to
show a toothy smile; to grin from ear to
ear; ضحك على ذقنه (daqanidī; pl. (على ذقونھم
(eg. syr.) to fool s.o., make a fool of s.o.,
pull s.o.’s leg, make fun of s.o., lead s.o.
around by the nose ( ب with s.th.), put on
an act for s.o.; ضحك في ذقنه (daqanihī) to
laugh in s.o.,s face II to make ( ه s.o.) laugh
III to joke, jest, banter ( ه with s.o.) IV and
X to make ( ه s.o.) laugh ( من about) │ ما
يضحك الثكلى (taklā) (that which makes a
woman who has lost her child laugh =)
irresistibly comical VI to laugh
ضحك ḍaḥk, ḍiḥk, ḍaḥik laugh(ing);
laughter
ضحكة ḍaḥka (n. vic.) pl. -āt laugh
ضحكة ḍuḥka object of ridicule,
laughingstock
ضحوك ḍaḥuk frequently, or constantly,
laughing; laugher
ضحاك ḍaḥḥāk frequently, or constantly,
laughing; laugher; joker, jester, wag,
buffoon
اضحوكة uḍḥūka pl. اضاحك aḍāhik2 object
of ridicule, laughingstock; lark, spree,
hoax, practical joke
اضحك aḍḥak2 more ridiculous, more
laughable, more ludicrous, funnier, more
comical
مضحكة maḍḥaka object of ridicule,
laughingstock
ضاحك ḍāḥik pl. ضواحك ḍawāḥik2
laughing │ ضاحك السن ḍ. as-sinn cheerful,
gay, sunny
مضحك muḍḥik ridiculous, laughable,
ludicrous, droll, funny, comical;
comedian, buffoon, jester │ قصة تمثيلية
مضحكة (qiṣṣa tamtīlīya) comedy
ضحل ḍaḥl shallow, shoal, flat; a shallow, a
shoal
ضحى ) and ضحو) ضحا ḍaḥā u (ḍaḥw, ḍuḥuw) to
become visible, appear; -- ضحى ḍaḥiya a (
ضحى ḍaḥlan) to become visible, appear; to
be struck by the sun’s rays II to sacrifice,
offer up, immolate ( ب s.th.) │ ضحى بنفسه to
sacrifice o.s.; ضحى بالنفس والنفس to sacrifice
life and property (properly: the soul and
that which is precious) IV to be, become;
with foll. imperf.: to begin, start,
commence, or set about to (do s.th.); to
come to ..., get to ..., get to the point
where ..., get into a situation where ...
ضحوة ḍaḥwa pl. ḍaḥawāt forenoon;
morning
ضحى ḍuḥan (m. and f.) forenoon │ بين
عشية وضحاھا (‘asīyatin wa-ḍuḥāhā) over
night, from one day to the next, all of a
sudden
ضحية ḍaḥīya forenoon; -- (pl. ضحايا
ḍaḥāyā) slaughter animal, blood sacrifice,
immolation; victim │ وقع ضحيته or ذھب
(ḍaḥīyatahū) to fall victim to, become a
victim of s.th. or s.o.
اضحى aḍḥan (coll.; n. un. اضحاة aḍḥāh)
slaughter animal, blood sacrifice,
immolation │ عيد الأضحى ‘īd al-a. the
Feast of Immolation, or Greater Bairam,
on the 10th of Zu’lhijja; يوم الأضحى yaum
al-a. the Day of Immolation, i.e., the 10th
of Zu’lhijja
اضحية uḍḥīya pl. اضاحى aḍāhīy2
slaughter animal, blood sacrifice,
immolation
تضحية taḍḥiya sacrificing, immolation;
(pl. -āt) sacrifice
ضاح ḍāḥin: ضاح الشمس sunlit
ضاحية ḍāḥiya pl. ضواح ḍawāḥin
surroundings, vicinity, outskirts; suburb
مضحى muḍaḥḥan place where one has
breakfast 536
ضخ ḍakka u (ḍakk) to spurt, spout, squirt ( ھ
water)
مضخة miḍakka pl. -āt squirt, spray(er);
pump │ مضخة جذابة (jaḍḍāba) suction
pump; مضخة الحرائق (الحريق ) fire engine;
مضخة رافعة suction pump
ضخم ḍakuma u ( ضخم ḍakāma) to be or become
big, large, bulky, heavy, gross,
voluminous II to inflate, blow up ( ھ s.th.)
V to swell, become inflated; to expand,
distend
ضخم ḍakm pl. ḍikām big, large, sizable,
great (also of a name, of prestige); bulky,
gross; heavy, voluminous, huge, vast,
ample, colossal; stout, corpulent, plump,
buxom; magnificent, splendid, gorgeous,
luxurious, pompous │ المدفعية الضخمة
(midfa‘īya) heavy artillery
ضخامة ḍakāma bigness, largeness,
greatness; bulkiness, grossness; heaviness;
volume, voluminosity; stoutness,
plumpness, corpulence, obesity; pomp,
splendor
تضخيم taḍkīm inflating
ضخم taḍakkum inflation; swelling,
expansion, dilation, distention; (monetary)
inflation, also ( نقدي) تضخم مالي (naqdī) │
تضخم الطحال distention of the spleen (med.)
مضخم muḍakkim pl. -āt amplifier │
مضخم الصوت m. aṣ-ṣaut loud-speaker
ضد III to be contrary, opposed, contrasting,
antagonistic, inverse; to act, set o.s. ( ھ، ه
against), antagonize ( ه s.o.), contravene,
violate ( ھ s.th.), be opposed ( ھ، ه to), be
contradictory ( ھ to s.th.), act contrary to
s.o. or s.th. ( ھ، ه ) VI to be opposed to each
other, be contradictory, contradict one
another
ضد ḍidd pl. اضداد aḍdād an opposite, a
contrary, contrast; word with two opposite
meanings; adversary, opponent; antitoxin,
antidote, anti- (in compounds); ضدة ḍidda
(prep.) against │ كان على الضد to do or
think the opposite, take an opposite stand
ضدية ḍiddiīya contrariness,
oppositeness, opposition; enmity,
hostility, animosity
مضادة muḍādda contrast, opposite,
contradiction
تضاد taḍādd contrast, opposite,
contradiction
مضاد muḍādd opposed, opposite,
contrary, counter-, contra-, anti- (in
compounds); pl. مضادات antidotes │
مضادات للحبل (ḥabal) contraceptives;
مضادات حشرية (ḥašarīya) insecticides;
مضادات للفساد (li-l-fasād) antiseptics
متضاد mutaḍādd contrary, opposite
ضر ḍarra u (ḍarr) to harm, impair, prejudice,
damage, hurt, injure ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), do
harm, be harmful, noxious or injurious (، ھ
ه to s.o., to s.th.) II to damage, harm,
prejudice III = I; IV = │ ( ب or ھ، ه ); to
force, compel, coerce, oblige ( ه على s.o.
to); to do violence ( ه to s.o.), bring
pressure to bear ( ه on); to add a second
wife to one'. household V to be damaged,
harmed, impaired, prejudiced, hurt, or
injured; to suffer damage or loss; to
complain ( من of, about) VII to be
damaged, harmed, impaired, prejudiced,
hurt, or injured; to suffer damage or loss
VIII to force, compel, coerce, oblige ( ه
s.o., الى to); -- pass. uḍṭurra to be forced,
compelled, obliged ( الى to); to be in an
emergency or predicament, be hard
pressed; to be in need ( الى of s.th.) need,
want ( الى s.th.)
ضر ḍurr, ḍarr damage, harm,
impairment, prejudice, detriment, injury,
hurt; loss, disadvantage
ضر ḍirr, ḍurr addition of a second wife
to one’s household 537
ضرة ḍarra pl. -āt, ضرائر ḍarā’ir2 wife
other than the first of a plural marriage;
udder
ضرر ḍarar pl. اضرار aḍrār harm,
damage, detriment; loss, disadvantage │ ما
الضرر what does it matter? what’s the
harm of it? اخف الضررين akaff aḍ-ḍ the
lesser of the two evils
ضراء ḍarrā’ distress, adversity │ في
السراء والضراء (sarrā’) in good and bad
days, for better or for worse
ضرير ḍarīr blind
ضرورة ḍarūra pl. -āt necessity, stress,
constraint, need; distress, plight,
emergency, want, austerity; ḍarūratan
necessarily │ بالضرورة necessarily; عند
الضرورة in case of need, if need. be, when
necessary; للضرورة القصوى (quṣwā) in case
of dire necessity, if worst comes to worst;
للضرورة احكام and الضرورة تبيح المحظورات
(tubīḥu) necessity knows no laws
ضروري ḍarūrī necessary, imperative,
requisite, indispensable, inevitable; pl.
ضروريات ḍarūrīyāt necessaries, necessities
│ كان من الضروري to be necessary;
ضروريات الحياة ḍ. al-ḥayāh necessities of
life; ضروريات الأحوال exigencies,
requirements of the situation
مضرة maḍarra pl. -āt, مضار maḍārr2
harm, damage, detriment, loss,
disadvantage على for)
اضطرار iḍtirār compulsion, coercion;
necessity, exigency, requirement; plight,
predicament, emergency │ عند الاضطرار in
case of emergency
اضطرارى iḍṭirārī coercive, compulsory,
inevitable, necessary, obligatory
ضار ḍārr harmful, injurious,
detrimental, noxious, disadvantageous
مضر muḍirr harmful, injurious,
detrimental, noxious, disadvantageous ( ب
to, for)
مضطر muḍṭarr forced, compelled,
obliged ( الى to); poor, destitute; wanting (
الى s.th.), in need ( الى of s.th.)
ضرب ḍaraba i (ḍarb) to boat, strike, hit
ه) s.o., ھ s.th., ب with; على ب with s.th. on;
على ه s.o. on); to shoot, fire ( ھ، ه at s.o., at
s.th.), shell, bombard ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
play ( ھ، على a musical instrument); to
make music; to type (on a typewriter); to
sting (scorpion); to separate, part ( بين
people); to impose ( ھ على on s.o. s.th.);
ضرب عن to turn away from, leave, forsake,
abandon, avoid, or shun s.o. or s.th.; --
(ḍarb, ضربان ḍarabān) to pulsate,
palpitate, throb, boat (vein, heart); to ache
(violently), hurt (wound, tooth); to move,
stir; to rove, roam about, travel ( في in,
through), loiter, stroll (in streets); to cruise
(ship); to migrate (bird); to incline ( الى to a
color), shade ( الى into a color); -- ( ضراب
ḍirāb) to cover, mount ( ھا the camel mare)
│ ضرب له اجلا (ajalan) to fix a date for
s.o.; ضرب الأرز (aruzza) to hull rice; ضرب
في الأرض (arḍ) to travel; ضرب بوية على
(bōya) to paint or daub s.th.; ضرب الباب to
knock on the door; ضرب الجرس (jaras) to
ring the bell; ضرب حقنا (ḥaqnan) to
administer a syringe, give an injection;
ضرب خطا (kaṭṭan) to draw a line; ضرب
أخماسا لأسداس (li-asdāsin) and ضرب اخماسه
في اسداسه to brood, rack one’s brain in
order to find a way out; to be at one’s
wit’s end; to intrigue, scheme; to build air
castles; to daydream; ضرب خيمة
(kaimatan) to pitch a tent; ضرب الرقم القياسي
(raqma, qiyāsīya) to break a record; ضرب
السلام (salām) to give a military salute;
ضرب ضريبة to impose a tax ( على on s.o.);
ضرب اطنابه في (aṭnābahū) to take root,
prevail (at a place); ضرب اطنابه على to
settle down, take up permanent residence
in a place; ضرب طوبا (ṭūban) to make
brick; ضرب عددا في آخر (‘adadan fī ākara)
to multiply a number 538 by another;
ضرب عنقه ‘unuqahū) to behead, decapitate
s.o., have s.o.’s head cut off; ضرب قالبه
(qāllabahū) to imitate s.th.; ضرب كفا
(kaffan) to slap s.o.’s face; ضرب مثلا ل
(matalan) to apply a proverb to; ضرب له
مثلا (matalan) to give s.o. an example,
point out a model for s.o.; ضرب مثلا to
give an example; to quote as an example (
ھ ل or ب على s.th. for); ضرب الأمثال to
impart words of wisdom, point out
morals; ضرب نقودا to mint money; ضرب
موعدا (mau‘idan) to agree on time or place
of a meeting, make an appointment; ضرب
الى الحمرة (الى الصفرة ) (ḥumra, ṣafra) to
shade into red (into yellow); ضرب به الأرض
(arḍ) to throw s.o. or s.th. to the ground;
ضرب في الخيال (kayāl) to be in the clouds,
be unrealistic; to want the impossible;
ضرب برأسه على صدره (bi-ra’sihī ‘alā
ṣadrihī) to let one’s head sink to the chest;
ضرب بسھم مصيب في (bi-sahmin muṣībin) to
take an active part in; ضرب بسھم ونصيب في
(wa-naṣībin) to participate in, share s.th.;
ضرب فيه بعرق (bi-‘irq) do.; ضرب به عرض
الحائط (‘urda l-ḥ.) not to give a hoot for
s.th.; to disdain, despise, reject s.th.; to
throw s.th. overboard, jettison s.th.; ضرب
بنظره الى (naẓarihī) to turn one’s glance to;
ضرب بوجه صاحبه (bi-wajhihī ṣāḥibihī) to
boomerang, fall back on the originator;
ضرب على كلمة (kalima) to efface, strike, or
erase, a word; ضرب عنه صفحا (ṣafḥan) to
turn away s.o. or s.th.; to disregard, ignore
s.o. or s.th., pay no attention to, pass over
s.o. or s.th.; ضرب في حديد بريد to take futile
steps; to beat the air; ضرب لنفسه سبعة ايام
(sab’ata ayyamin) he decided to stay
seven days; ضرب بين وبينه الأيام (ayyām) fate
separated me from him,
drew us apart II to mix, blend ( ھ ب
s.th. with); to sow dissension, cause
trouble ( بين among); to quilt ( ھ a fabric)
III to contend, vie, fight ( ھ with s.o.); to
speculate IV to turn away ( عن from),
leave, abandon, forsake, desert, avoid,
shun ( عن s.o., s.th.); to remain, stay, abide
في) in) │ اضرب جأشا ل (ja’šan) to be
prepared for s.th., make up one’s mind to
take s.th. upon o.s.; اضرب صفحا عن
(ṣafḥan) to desist, abstain from; اضرب عن
العمل (‘amal) to stop work, to strike; اضرب
عن الطعام (ṭa‘ām) to go, on a hunger strike
VI to come to blows, brawl, fight, strike
one another; to be divided, differ, conflict,
clash, be contradictory (opinions, and the
like) VIII to clash, surge, lap (waves); to
be set, or get, into a state of unrest,
turmoil, excitement, commotion, tumult,
agitation, be or become agitated, troubled;
to be in a lively stir, move about, bustle,
hustle, romp; to sway, reel, waver; to be
or become disturbed, unsettled,
disorganized, disarranged, disordered,
confused, entangled, upset, restless,
uneasy, or anxious; to tremble, shake
ضرب ḍarb beating, striking, hitting,
rapping; shooting, shelling, gunning,
bombing, bombardment; multiplication;
coining, formation; minting (of money); --
(pl. ضروب ḍurūb) kind, sort, specimen,
species, variety; last foot of the second
hemistich; (pl. اضراب aḍrāb) similar, like
│ ضربخانة and دار الضرب (money) mint;
ضرب الرمل ḍ. ar-raml geomancy; ضرب النار
shooting, tiring, shelling, gunning,
bombardment; وضع السلاح تحت الضرب to
level a weapon, bold a weapon ready to
fire; ھو واضرابه he and the likes of him
ضربة ḍarba (n. vic.) pl. ḍarabāt blow,
knock, punch; thrust, push, jolt, shock;
stroke, lash; shot; plague, affliction, trial,
tribulation, punishment │ ضربة الشمس ḍ.
aš-šams sunstroke, heatstroke; ضربة قاضية
(qāḍiya) fatal blow, deathblow ( على for);
ضربة جزاء ḍ. jazā’ penalty kick (in soccer)
539
ضراب ḍirāb copulation (of a female
animal)
ضريب ḍarīb beaten, struck, smitten, bit;
similar, like │ ضريب للشيخ فلان one of the
caliber of Sheik So-and-So
ضريبة ḍarība pl. ضرائب ḍarāib2
imposition, impost; levy, tax, duty;
character, nature │ ضريبة الدخل ḍ. ad-dakl
income tax; ضريبة كسب العمل ḍ. kasb
al-‘amal wage tax; ضريبة الملاھى ḍ. almalāhī
admission tax, entertainment tax
مضرب maḍrib pl. مضارب madārib2
camp site; camp; place, spot, locality;
way, path; large tent, marquee │ كان
مضرب المثل (الأمثال ) (m. al-maṭal) to be
proverbial, be exemplary, be unique, be
cited as an example; مضارب ارز m. aruzz
rice-hulling facilities
مضرب miḍrab pl. مضارب maḍārib2
large tent, marquee, pavilion; bat, mallet;
racket (tennis, etc.); whisk, beater (e.g.,
for eggs); swatter, flyswatter; piano
مضراب miḍrāb bat, mallet, racket (ball
games, tennis)
مضاربة muḍāraba pl. -āt speculation
(stock exchange); silent partnership (Isl.
Law), limited partnership, partnership in
commendam
اضراب iḍrāb pl. -āt strike
تضارب taḍārub opposition,
contradiction, inconsistency, discrepancy,
incompatibility, conflict, clash (of
opinions, and the like)
ضرب idṭirāb pl. -āt disturbance,
disorder, disarray; confusion, muddle,
perturbation; disorganization, disruption,
upset, derangement; trouble, commotion,
unrest, riot (also pol.); restlessness,
restiveness │ اضطرابات عصبية (‘aṣabīya)
nervous disorders
ضوارب ḍawārib2 pl. of ضارب ḍārib
besting, striking, etc. │ العروق الضوارب the
arteries; طير ضوارب (ṭair) migratory birds
مضروب maḍrūb appointed, agreed
upon, fixed, determined (time, date,
place); multiplicand (math.) │ مضروب فيه
multiplier (math.)
مضربة muḍarraba quilt, comforter
مضارب muḍārib pl. -ūn speculator
متضارب mutaḍārib conflicting,
irreconcilable, incompatible, divided
(opinions, and the like); contradictory,
discrepant, inconsistent
مضطرب muḍṭarib disturbed, disordered,
disarrayed, unsettled; confused, muddled,
perturbed; upset, disrupted, disorganized,
deranged; uneasy, restive, agitated,
excited, anxious; weak, insufficiently
supported (tradition)
مضطرب muḍtarab playground (fig.)
ضربخان see ضرب ḍarb
ضرج ḍaraja u (ḍarj) to spot, stain, befleck,
smear ( ھ بالدم s.th. with blood) II = I V to
redden, be or become red
مضرج muḍaraj: مضرج اليدين m. alyadain
with bloodstained hands; (caught)
red-handed, in the act
ضريح ḍarīḥ pl. ضرائح darā’iḥ اضرحة , 2 aḍriḥa
grave, tomb; mausoleum
ضرس ḍarasa i (ḍars) to bite firmly or fiercely
ھ) s.th.); -- darisa a (daras) to be dull (
الأسنان the teeth from acid food and drink)
ضرس ḍirs pl. اضراس aḍrās, ضروس
ḍurūs molar tooth │ ضرس العقل ḍ. al-‘aql
wisdom tooth 540
حرب ضروس ḥarb ḍarūs fierce,
murderous war
تضاريس taḍārīs تضاريس الأرض : 2 t. al-arḍ
elevations, undulations of the ground;
تضاريس الوجه t. al-wajh wrinkles of the face
ضرط ḍaraṭ i (ḍarṭ, ضريط ḍarīṭ, ضراط ḍurāṭ) to
break wind
ضرط ḍarṭ (n. un ة) wind, fart
ضراط ḍurāṭ wind, fart
ضرع ḍara‘a a, ḍaru‘a u ( ضرعة ḍarā‘a) and
ḍarā‘a a (ḍarā‘a) to be humble,
submissive ( الى toward s.o.), humiliate
o.s., abase o.s. ( الى before); to implore,
beg, beseech, entreat ( الى s.o.) III to be
similar, be equal ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.), be
like s.o. or s.th. ( ھ، ه ), resemble ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.) V and VIII to humiliate o.s., abase
o.s. ( الى before); to implore, beg, beseech,
entreat ( الى s.o.)
ضرع ḍar‘ pl. ضروع ḍurū‘, ضراع ḍirā‘
udder, teat │ الزرع والضرع (zar‘)
agriculture and stock farming
ضرع ḍir‘ like, alike, similar
ضراعة ḍarā‘a submissiveness,
humbleness; imploring, begging, entreaty,
supplication
مضارعة muḍāra‘a likeness, similarity,
resemblance
تضرع taḍarru‘ imploring, begging,
entreaty, supplication
ضارع ḍāri‘ frail (of a person)
مضارع muḍāri‘ like, alike, similar;
(gram.) imperfect
ضرغم ḍargam pl. ضراغم ḍarāgim2 lion
ضرغام ḍirgām pl. ضراغمة ḍarāgima lion
ضرم ḍarama a (ḍaram) to catch fire, be on
fire, burn, flare, blaze; to break out, flare
up (war) II to kindle, light ( ھ fire) │ ضرم
النار في to set s.th. on fire, set fire to s.th.
IV = II; V to burn, flare, flame, be ablaze
(also of emotions, of passion) VIII = I
ضرام ḍirām burning, blaze, flare; fire,
conflagration
اضطرام iḍṭirām burning, flare, blaze;
fire, conflagration
مضطرم muḍṭarim burning, flaming, on
fire
ضرو II to set ( ھ ب a dog on game); to provoke
ه) s.o.) to a fight ( ب with)
ضرو ḍirw pl. اضر aḍrin, ضراء ḍirā’
hound, hunting dog
ضراوة ḍarāwa greed, voracity
ضار ḍārin voracious, ferocious, savage,
rapacious; (pl. ضوار ḍawārin) beast of
prey, predatory animal
ضعضع ḍa‘ḍa‘a to tear down, demolish, raze,
ruin, undermine, weaken ( ھ s.th.) II
taḍa‘ḍa‘a to decline, decay, become
dilapidated, perish; to become weak or
weaker, wane; to dissolve, fall apart
(organization)
ضعضعة ḍa‘ḍa‘a demolition, razing;
sapping, undermining; debility, frailty,
feebleness │ ضعضعة الكبر ḍ. al-kibar
senility, dotage
متضعضع mutaḍa‘ḍi‘ dilapidated,
decayed; weakened, debilitated; weak,
frail, feeble; submissive, humble
ضعف ḍa‘ufa u (ḍu‘f) to be or become
weak, weakly, feeble, frail, delicate,
debilitated, impotent, languid, flabby, or
slack; to become weaker, wane, decrease,
diminish, abate, be attenuated; to be too
weak ( عن for s.th.) IV to weaken,
enfeeble, debilitate ( من or ھ, ه s.o., s.th.) X
to deem ( ه s.o.) weak; to behave
arrogantly ( ه toward s.o.) 541
ضعف ḍ‘uf, ḍa‘f weakness, feebleness,
frailty; weakening, enfeeblement,
debilitation │ ضعف الإرادة weakness of
will; الضعف العصبي (‘aṣabī) neurasthenia,
nervous debility; ضعف التناسل ḍ. at-tanāsul
sexual impotence
ضعيف ḍa‘īf pl. m. ضعفاء ḍu‘afā’ ضعاف , 2
ḍi‘āf, ضعفة ḍa‘afa, pl. f. ضعائف ḍa‘ā’if2
weak, feeble; frail, weakly, delicate,
debilitated, impotent, languid, flabby,
slack; deficient (as a school-report mark)
│ ضعيف الإرادة weak-willed; ضعيف العقل ḍ.
al-‘aql dim-witted, feeble-minded; ضعيف
القلب ḍ. al-qalb weak-spirited,
pusillanimous, meek, faint-hearted,
despondent, cowardly; ھذا الضعيف my own
insignificant self, I (as an expression of
modesty)
اضعاف iḍ‘āf weakening, enfeeblement,
debilitation; impairment
مستضعف mustaḍ‘af deemed weak;
weak; oppressed, miserable
ضعف 2 II to double, redouble ( ھ s.th.); to
multiply, compound ( ھ s.th.) III do. ( من or
ھ s.th.) VI to be doubled, be compounded,
be multiplied
ضعف pl. ḍi‘f pl. اضعاف aḍ‘āf double,
that which is twice as much; a multiple,
that which is several times as much, (after
numerals) -fold; fold of a garment; pl.
interstice, space │ مئة ضعفه mi’atu ḍi‘fihī a
hundred times as much, the hundredfold
of it; ثلاثة اضعافه talātatu aḍ‘āfihī thrice as
much, the threefold of it; اضعاف اضعافه a.
aḍ‘āfihī many times as much, e.g. فاق ھذا
المبلغ مرتبه اضعاف اضعافه )mablagu
murattabahū aḍ‘āfa a.) this amount was
many times as much as his salary; اضعافا
مضاعفة aḍ‘āfan muḍā‘afatan many times,
a hundred-fold
تضاعيف taḍā‘īf2 contents, text (of a
piece of writing); folds; space between the
lines; (as an expletive after في) في تضاعيفه
within it, therein contained
مضاعفة muḍā‘afa doubling,
compounding, multiplying; pl. -āt
complications (of a disease)
تضاعف taḍā‘uf doubling, multiplying
مضعف muḍa‘‘af twofold, double;
multiplied, compounded, increased many
times
مضاعف muḍā‘af twofold, double;
multiplied, compounded, increased many
times; see also ḍi‘f
ضعة ḍa‘a, ḍi‘a see وضع
ضغث ḍagata a (ḍagt) to confuse, muddle, mix
up ( ھ a story)
ضغث lIiM pl. اضغاث aḍgāt bunch,
bouquet; mixture, muddle, jumble, maze
│ اضغاث الأحلام confused dreams; زاد ضغثا
على ابالة (ibāla) to make a thing worse
ضغط ḍagaṭa a (ḍagṭ) to press, squeeze ( ھ, ه
s.o., s.th.); to compress ( ھ air); to exert
pressure ( على on); to oppress, suppress (
على s.o., s.th.), beer down heavily ( على
upon) VII to be pressed, be squeezed, be
compressed
ضغط ḍagṭ pressure; emphasis, stress;
oppression, suppression; voltage, tension
(el.) │ الضغط الجوي (jawwī) atmospheric
pressure; ضغط الدم ḍ. ad-dam and الضغط
الدموي (damawī) blood pressure; ضغط الھواء
ḍ. al-hawā’ air pressure; تحت ضغط الرأي
العام (ḍ. ar-ra’y al-‘āmm) under the
pressure of public opinion
ضغطة ḍagṭa (n. vic.) pressure
O ضغوطية ḍugūṭīya (wind) pressure
ضاغوط ḍāgūṭ nightmare
O مضاغط madāgiṭ مضاغط ھوائية : 2
(hawā’īya) compressors
تضاغط taḍāguṭ compression (phys.; as
opposed to تخلخل takalkul) 542
انضغاط inḍigāṭ compressibility
ضاغط ḍāgiṭ: آلة ضاغطة compressor
مضغوط madgūṭ: ھواء مضغوط (hawā’)
compressed air
ضغن ḍagina a (ḍagan) to bear a grudge,
harbor (secret) hatred ( على against), recent
على) s.o.) VI to harbor a grudge against
one another
ضغن ḍ􀀀ign pl. اضغان aḍgān rancor,
spite, grudge, malice, malevolence, ill
will, (secret) hatred
ضغن ḍagin malicious, malevolent,
rancorous, spiteful, resentful
ضغينة ḍagīna pl. ضغائن ḍagā’in2 rancor,
spite, grudge, malice, malevolence, illwill,
(secret) hatred
ضفة ḍiffa crowd, throng, jam (of people)
ضفة ḍiffa, ḍaffa pl. ضفاف ḍifāf bank,
share; coast
ضفف ḍafaf poverty, destitution
ضفدع ḍifdi‘, ḍafda‘ pl. ضفادع ḍafādi‘2 frog │ O
ضفدع بشري (bašarī) frogman (mil.)
ضفر ḍafara i (ḍafr) to braid, plait ( ھ hair),
interweave, interlace, intertwine ( ھ s.th.);
to twine ( ھ a rope) II = I; III to help,
assist, aid ( ه s.o.) VI to help one another (
على to do s.th.); to be tightly interwoven,
be tied up, be closely connected ( مع with);
to be connected (evidence)
ضفر ḍafr pl. ضفور ḍufūr (saddle) girth
ضفار ḍafār pl. ضفر ḍufur (saddle) girth
ضفيرة ḍafīra pl. اضفار ḍafā’ir2 plait;
braid, tress, pigtail; plaitwork, wickerwork;
galloon, lace; strand, hank, skein;
plexus (anat.)
ضفا (ضفو ) dafā u (ḍafw) to be abundant,
copious; to flow over IV to allot
generouely ( على ھ s.th. to); to grant, award
على ھ) s.th. to); to let s.o. or s.th. ( (على
have ( ھ s.th.); to fill ( ھ على s.th. with); to
wrap, envelope ( على s.th., ھ with), spread
على ھ) s.th. over)
ضفوة ḍafwa: ضفوة العيش ḍ. al-‘aiš an
easy, comfortable life
ضاف ḍāfin abundant, copious, ample;
detailed, elaborate, extensive
ضل ḍalla i ( ضلال ḍalāl, ضلالة ḍalāla) to lose
one’s way, go astray; to stray ( عن or ھ
from the way); to err │ ضل سعيه (sa‘yuhū)
his effort was in vain II to mislead, lead
astray, misguide ( ه s.o.); to delude,
deceive ( ه s.o.) │ ضل نفسه to delude o.s. IV
= II; to make ( ه s.o.) lose his way ( ھ ); to
let ( ھ ) s.th. get lost
ضل ḍull error
ضلال ḍalāl a straying from the right
path or from truth; error │ O ضلال الألوان
color blindness, dichromatism
ضلالة ḍalāla error
اضلولة uḍlūla pl. اضاليل aḍālīl2 error
مضلة maḍalla occasion, or possibility,
of going astray
تضليل taḍlīl misleading, misguidance,
delusion, deception
اضلال iḍlāl misleading, misguidance,
delusion, deception
ضال ḍāll pl. ضوال ḍawāll straying,
roaming, wandering; astray, lost;
erroneous, false
ضالة ḍālla goal of persistent search,
object of a long-cherished wish │ ضالة
منشودة do.
مضلل muḍallil misleading, misguiding,
deceptive, delusive, fallacious
مضل muḍill misleading, misguiding,
deceptive, delusive, fallacious
ضلع ḍala‘a a (ḍal‘) with مع : to aide with s.o.,
make common cause with s.o.; -- ḍalu‘a u
ضلاعة) ḍalā‘a) to be otrong, sturdy, 543
robust; -- ḍalī‘a a (ḍala‘) to be crooked,
bent, curved, to curve II to crook, bend,
curve ( ھ s.th.) V to be jammed, crammed
من) with); to be versed, skilled, proficient,
knowledgeable ( من in), be conversant, be
thoroughly familiar or acquainted ( من
with), be at home ( من in a field of
knowledge) VIII to be versed, skilled,
proficient ( ب in), be thoroughly familiar
or acquainted, be conversant ( ب with); to
assume, take over, take upon o.s. ( ب s.th.,
a task, financial expenses, a job, and the
like) X to be versed, skilled, proficient ( من
in), be thoroughly familiar or acquainted,
be conversant ( من with)
ضلع ḍal‘ affection, attachment │ ضلعه
معه he sympathized with him, he is on his
aide
ضلع ḍil‘, ḍilā‘ pl. ضلوع ḍulū‘, اضلاع
aḍlā‘, اضلع aḍlu‘ rib; cutlet, chop; side (of
a triangle); الأضلاع the chest, the breast │
ضلع البرميل ḍ. al-birmīl barrel stave; متساوى
الأضلاع mutasāwī l-a. equilateral (geom.);
كان له ضلع في الأمر he had s.th. to do with
the matter, he had a hand in it, he played a
role in the affair
ضليع ḍalī‘ strong, sturdy;
knowledgeable, experienced, skilled
ضلاعة ḍalā‘a strength, sturdiness,
robustness (of the body)
مضلع muḍalla‘ ribbed; polygonal; (pl.
-āt polygon │ صاج مضلع corrugated iron
متضلع mutaḍalli‘ versed, skilled,
proficient ( من in), thoroughly familiar,
conversant ( من with); expert ( من in)
ضلمه (Turk. dolma) ḍolma stuffed food
(e.g., eggplants stuffed with meat and
rice)
ضم ḍamma u (ḍamm) to bring together, join,
draw together, contract ( ھ s.th.); to add
(up), sum up ( ھ s.th.); to gather, collect,
reap, harvest ( ھ s.th.); to unite, bring
together ( ھم persons); to embrace, hug ( ه
s.o.); to join, subjoin, annex ( الى ھ s.th.
to), add, attach ( الى ھ, ه s.o., s.th. to), unite
الى ھ, ه) s.o. , s.th. with); to combine
(within o.s. different things); to close,
compress ( ھ the lips); to grasp, grip, grab,
seize ( على s.o., s.th.); to get ( ه s.o.) into a
predicament (said of fate); to pronounce
with the vowel u ( ھ a consonant; gram.) │
ضم الصفوف to close the ranks; ضمه الى صدره
(ṣadrihī) to press s.o. to one’s bosom,
embrace s.o.; ضم اليه زوجته (zaujatahū) he
embraced his wife VI to unite, rally, join
forces VII to close, draw or crowd
together, be closely packed; to be joined,
united, or combined ( الى with), unite, join
forces ( الى with); to be added, be annexed
الى) to); to associate, affiliate ( الى with); to
enter, join ( الى an organization, and the
like); to comprise, include, encompass,
embrace, contain ( على s.th.)
ضم ḍamm addition, subjunction;
gathering, collecting, rallying, joining,
uniting, amalgamation, fusion; admission,
enrollment; the vowel u (gram.)
ضم ḍamma the vowel point for u; (pl.
-āt) embrace, hug
ضميمة ḍamīma pl. ضمائم ḍamā’im2
addition, supplement; increase, raise (of
salary)
تضام taḍāmm: تضاما مع together with,
jointly with
انضمام inḍimām annexation ( الى to),
joining ( الى of), union, association,
affiliation ( الى with); entry, enrollment ( الى
into an organization, and the like),
accession ( الى to)
مضموم maḍmūm closed, tight,
compressed (mouth)
منضم munḍamm: نظام منضم close order
(mil.)
O منضمة munḍamma accessory,
attachment (techn.) 544
اضمحل iḍmiḥlāl to disappear, vanish, dwindle,
fade away, molt away; to decrease,
become less
اضمحلال iḍmiḥlāl disappearance,
vanishing, evanescence; fading
مضمحل muḍmaḥill vanishing,
evanescent, fading; damped (oscillations,
waves; phys.)
ضمخ ḍamaka u (ḍamk) and II to oil, anoint,
rub, perfume ( ھ ب, ه s.o., s.th. with)
ضمد ḍamada u i (ḍamd, ضماد ḍimād) and II to
dress, bandage ( ھ s.th., esp. a wound)
ضماد ḍimād bandaging (of a wound);
bandage, band, ligature; carrying on of
several love affairs (of a woman)
ضمادة ḍimāda dressing (of a wound),
bandage
مضمد muḍammid (ir.) male nurse
مضمدة muḍammida o compress; (ir.)
nurse
ضمر ḍamara, ḍamura u (ḍumr, ضمور
ḍumūr) to be or become lean, emaciated,
skinny, thin, slim, slander; to contract,
shrink II to emaciate, make lean, thin, or
slender ( ھ s.th.) IV = II; to secrete,
conceal, hide, keep secret ( ھ في نفسه s.th.
in one’s heart), keep ( ھ s.th.) to o.s. ( في
نفسه ); to harbor, entertain ( ھ ل a feeling
toward, against) │ اضمر له الشر (šarra) to
boar s.o. a grudge, harbor ill will against
s.o. V to become lean, emaciated VII to
dry up, wither, wilt, shrivel
ضمر ḍumr emaciation; leanness,
skinniness, thinness, slenderness, slimness
ضمور ḍumūr emaciation; loanness,
skinniness, thinness, slenderness,
slimness; atrophy (med.)
ضمار ḍimār: دين ضمار (ḍain) bad debt
(i.e., a debt deemed uncollectible)
ضمير ḍamīr pl. ضمائر ḍamā’ir2 heart;
mind; innermost; conscience;
(independent or suffixed) personal
pronoun (gram.) │ تأنيث الضمير
compunctions, contrition, repentance; حي
الضمير ḥayy aḍ-ḍ. conscientious,
scrupulous; مرتاح الضمير murtāḥ aḍ-ḍ. of
peaceful mind; فاقد الضمير unscrupulous
مضمار miḍmār pl. مضامير maḍāmīr2 race
course, race track; arena; field of activity,
field, domain
اضمار iḍmār concealment (of a
thought), mental reservation; ellipsis
(rhet.)
ضامر ḍāmir loan, skinny, thin; slander,
slim, svelte
مضمر muḍmar secret, hidden, covert;
(independent or suffixed) personal
pronoun, also اسم مضمر (ism; gram.)
ضمن ḍamina a ( ضمان ḍamān) to be or
become responsible or liable, be guaranty,
give security or guaranty, vouch ( ب or ھ
for), warrant, ensure, safeguard, guarantee
ھ ل) to s.o. s.th.); to insure ( من ھ s.th.
against) │ ضمن لنفسه شيئا to be absolutely
certain of s.th. II to have ( ھ s.th.) insured (
من against); to insert, include, enclose ( ھ
ھ s.th. in s.th. else) V to comprise,
include, comprehend, imply, embrace,
contain ( ھ s.th.) VI to be jointly liable,
have joint responsibility ( ھ for s.th.); to be
solidary, be in accord, stick together
ضمن ḍimn inside, interior; ḍimna
(prep.) in, within, inside of, among; ضمنا
ḍimnan (adv.) inclusively, implicitly,
tacitly │ مفھوم ضمنا tacitly comprised,
implicit; من ضمن min ḍimni (with foll.
genit.) included in, implied in, belonging
to, falling under; من ضمنھم among them;
مباشرة وضمنا (mubāšaratan) directly and
indirectly
ضمني ḍimnī included, implied; hidden,
implicit, tacit 545
ضمن ḍamān responsibility, guaranty,
warrant, surety, security, liability,
assurance, saveguard; insurance │ ضمان
جماعي (jamā‘ī) collective security; الضمان
المشترك (muštarak) do.; محدود الضمان of
limited liability, Ltd.; شركة الضمان širkat
aḍ-ḍ. insurance company
ضمين ḍamīn pl. ضمناء ḍumanā’2
responsible, answerable, liable ( ب for);
warrantor, bail(sman), bondsma, surety,
guarantor ( ب for)
ضمانة ḍamāna guaranty, surety,
warrant(y), collateral, security, bail
اضمن aḍman2 offering better guaranty
تضامن taḍāmun mutuality, reciprocity;
joint liability; solidarity │ شركة التضامن
širkat at-t. commercial company of joint
liability
ضامن ḍāmin responsible, answerable,
liable; warrantor, bail(sman), bondsman,
surety, guarantor
مضمون maḍmūn guaranteed, ensured,
warranted; insured (object); (pl. مضامين
maḍāmīn) content, purport, meaning (of a
letter, and the like) │ مضمون الوصول
registered (letter); دين مضمون (dain)
bonded, or funded, debt (fin.)
مضمن muḍamman included, implied
ضمن mutaḍāmin mutual, reciprocal;
solidary, united in solidarity
ضن ḍanna (1st pers. perf. ḍanintu) a and
ḍanna (1st pers. perf. ḍanantu) i (ḍann) to
keep back ( ب s.th.), be sparing or stingy (
ب على toward s.o. with), withhold ( ب على
from s.o. s.th.), (be)grudge ( على s.o. ب
s.th.) │ ما ضن بمشقة على (bi-mašaqqatin) to
shun no effort for the sake of
ضن ḍann: ضنا ب (ḍannan) in order to
spare s.th., in due consideration of
ضنين ḍanīn niggardly, avaricious,
stingy; sparing, thrifty, economical,
scanty, meager, poor, insufficient
ضنك ḍanuka u (ḍank, ضناكة ḍanāka) to
be straitened, cramped, confined
(circumstances); to be weak, be exhausted
ضنك ḍank poverty, distress, straits │
عيش ضنك (‘ail) a hard, wretched life
مضانك maḍānik2 straits, hardships
مضنك muḍnik weak, exhausted
ضنو ḍanw, ḍinw children
ضنى ḍaniya a (ḍanan) to become or be lean,
emaciated, gaunt, enervated, or worn out;
to pine away, be consumed (with grief) IV
to emaciate, debilitate, weaken, enervate (.
s.o.); to exhaust, wear out ( ه s.o.); to
undermine, sap ( ه the health); to consume
ه) s.o.; of anxiety, and the like)
ضن ḍanin, lean, emaciated, gaunt,
languished, wasted, worn out, enervated;
exhausted; consumed with grief, careworn
ضنى ḍanan weakness feebleness,
debility, exhaustion, emaciation; grief
مضنى muḍnan lean, emaciated, gaunt,
languished, wasted, worn out, enervated;
exhausted; pining away, wasting away
ضھد ḍahada a (ḍah) to suppress, oppress, treat
unjustly, persecute ( ه s.o.) VIII = I
اضطھاد iḍṭihād pl. -āt suppression,
repression, oppression, maltreatment,
persecution, enslavement
مضطھد muṭahid oppressor, tyrant,
persecutor
ضھر ḍahr pl. ضھور ḍuhūr summit, top (of a
mountain)
ضھى III to be similar, alike, or corresponding;
to resemble ( ه s.o. ھ s.th.), be like s.o. or
s.th. ( ھ، ه ), correspond ( ه to s.o., ھ to
s.th.); to compare ( على, ب ھ s.th. with; بين
وبين -- two things); to imitate ( ب s.o., s.th.)
ضھى ḍahān O menopause, climacteric
546
ضھى ḍaīy similar, (a)like,
corresponding, analogous
مضاھاة muḍāhāh similarity,
resemblance, likeness, correspondence,
analogy; comparison ( على with)
مضاه muḍāh similar, (a)like,
corresponding, analogous
ضاء (ضوء ) ḍā’a u (ḍau’) to gleam,
beam, radiate, shine II to light ( ھ s.th., a
lamp), to illumine, illuminate ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., a house) IV = I; to shed light, out
light ( على upon, over); to light, illumine,
illuminate ( ھ s.th.); to enlighten ( ھ s.th.,
the mind) V = I; X to be illumined, be lit,
to seek light, to seek (to obtain)
enlightenment or insight ( ب by, through,
in, with), to let o.s. be enlightened or
guided ( ب by)
ضوء ḍau’ pl. اضواء light; brightness,
glow │ ضوء الشمس ḍ. aš-šams sunlight,
sunshine; ضوء القمر ḍ. al-qamar
moonlight; ضوء كاشف searchlight; ضوء
النھار ḍ. an-nahār daylight; على ضوء (with
foll. genit.) in the light of, under the
circumstances of, as seen from ...;
according to
ضوئي ḍau’ī luminary, light- (in
compounds) │ سنة ضوئية (sana) light-year
ضياء ḍiyā’ light, brightness, glow
اضاءة iḍā’a lighting, illumination │
الإضاءة المقيدة (muqayyada) restricted
illumination = dim-out; مصباح الإضاءة
miṣbāḥ al-i. incandescent lamp
مضيء muḍī’ shining, luminous, bright
ضاد ḍād name of the letter ض
ضار (ضور ) ḍāra u (ḍaur) to harm, injure,
damage, prejudice ( ھ، ه ه s.o., s.th.), inflict
damage ( ھ، ه upon); to suffer violent
hunger, starve to death V to writhe with
pain; to writhe, wince, be convulsed ( ھ
with pain. with hunger)
ضور ḍaur violent hunger
ضوضاء ḍauḍā noise, din, uproar
ضوضى ḍauḍan noise, din, uproar
ضاع (ضوع ) ḍā‘a u (ḍau’) to spread, diffuse,
emanate (fragrance); to be fragrant,
exhmale fragrance V = I
ضامة look up alphabetically
ضوى ḍawā i to resort, have recourse ( الى to); --
ḍawiya a to be lean, thin, spare, slight,
scrawny IV اضوى to weaken, debilitate (, ھ
ه s.o. s.th.), to harm, injure, damage,
prejudice ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.) VII to join,
follow ( الى s.o.), attach o.s. ( الى to s.o.), to
rally, flock ( الى around, تحت لوائه ) around
or under s.o.’s banner)
ضاو ḍāwin thin, lean, spare, slight,
scrawny
ضار (ضير ) ḍāra i (ḍair) to harm, injure,
damage, prejudice ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.), inflict
damage ( ھ, ه upon)
ضير ḍair harm, damage, injury,
prejudice; wrong, iniquity, offense
قسمة ضيزى qisma ḍīzā unjust division
ضاع (ضيع ) ḍā‘a i (ḍai‘, ضياع ḍayā‘) to get lost,
be lost ( على for s.o.), to lose itself,
disappear; to perish II and IV to ruin, let
perish, thwart, frustrate, mar, destroy ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to lose. forfeit ( ھ s.th.), be
deprived ( ھ of s.th.); to waste, squander,
sped uselessly ( ه s.th.); to neglect, omit ( ھ
s.th.); to miss, let go by ( ھ s.th.), let slip (
ھ s.th., e.g., an opportunity) │ ضيع حقه
(ḥaqqahū) to forfeit one’s right; الصيف
ضيعت اللبن aṣ-ṣaifa ḍayya‘ti l-labana
(invar.) approx.: you have let the
opportunity go by, you milled your
chance; اضاع صوابه (ṣawābahū) to lose
one’s mind; اضاع عليه فرصة (furṣa) to make
s.o. miss an opportunity; اضاع الوقت (waqt)
to waste time
ضيع ḍai‘ loss 547
ضيعة ḍai‘a pl. ضياع ḍiyā‘ landed estate,
country estate, domain; small village,
hamlet
ضياع ḍayā‘ loss; ruin, destruction,
perdition │ ضياع الوقت ḍ. al-waqt loss of
time
يا ضيعانة yā ḍī‘āna what a loss!
مضياع miḍyā‘ prodigal, squandering,
wasteful; squanderer, wastrel, spend-thrift
تضييع taḍyī‘ waste, squandering,
dissipation; neglect, omission
اضاعة iḍā‘a waste, squandering,
dissipation; neglect, omission │ اضاعة
الوقت i. al-waqt waste of time
ضائع ḍā’i‘ pl. ضيع ḍuyya‘, ضياع ḍiyā‘
(getting) lost; poor, wretched, miserable
مضيعة maḍī‘a ruin, destruction,
perdition, lost; -- muḍī‘a, مضيعة للوقت (li-lwaqt)
waste of time, loss of time
مضيع muḍayyi‘ prodigal, squandering,
wasteful
ضاف (ضيف ) ḍāfa i ( ضيافة ḍiyāfa) to stop or
stay as a guest II to take in as a guest,
receive hospltably, entertain ( ه s.o.) IV =
II; to add, subjoin, annex, attach ( ھ الى
s.th. to); to admix ( الى ھ s.th. to); to
connect, bring in relation ( الى ھ s.th. with);
to ascribe, attribute, assign ( ھ الى s.th. to
s.o.) │ اضاف اسما الى اسم (isman) to annex a
noun (the first member of a genitive
construction) to another (the second
member; gram.); اضف الى ذلك ان (aḍif)
what’s more ..., moreover..., furthermore
…, VII to be added, be annexed, be
subjoined, be attached ( الى to) X to invite
s.o, ( ه) to be one’s guest
ضيف ḍaif pl. ضيوف ḍuyūf, اضياف aḍyāf,
ضيفان ḍīfān guest; visitor
ضيافة ḍiyāfa hospltable reception,
entertainment as guest, accommodation;
hospltality │ انت في ضيافتي you are my
guest
مضياف miḍyāf hospltable; hospltable
host
مضافة muḍāfa hostel, guesthouse, inn
مضيفة mayafa guest room; guesthouse
اضافة iḍāfa addition, apposition;
subjunction, annexation, appending,
attachment, augmentation,
supplementation; assignment, allocation;
ascription, attribution ( الى to); genitive
construction (gram.) │ اضافة الى اجل (ajal)
limitation (of a legal transaction; Isl.
Law); بالاضافة الى in comparison with, in
relation to; with respect to, regarding ...;
with regard to, in consideration of; in
addition to, beside; بالاضافة الى ذلك
moreover, furthermore, besides
اضافي iḍāfī additional, supplementary,
auxiliary, contributory, extra; secondary,
subsidiary, tributary, accessory,
incidental, side-, by- (in compounds);
relative (philos.)
اضافية iḍāfīya relativity (philos.)
مضيف muḍīf host
مضيفة muḍīfa hostess; air hostess,
stewardess
مضاف muḍāf added, subjoined,
adjoined, apposed; construct state (gram.)
│ المضاف اليه the second, or governed,
noun of a genitive construction (gram.);
مضافا الى ذلك moreover, furthermore,
besides
ضيق (ضاق ) ḍāqa i (ḍaiq) to be or
become narrow, straitened, cramped,
confined; to become too narrow, too
confined ( ب for); to be anguished, uneasy,
depressed, dejected ( ب because of, by, at,
about); to become or be tired, weary ( ب of
s.o., of s.th.) │ ضاقت به الأرض (arḍu) to be
at a loss, be at one’s wit’s end; ضاق به الحياة
(ḥayātu) life depressed him, 548 he had a
bad time, he was bad off; ضاقت به السبل
(subulu) to be at a loss, be at the end of
one’s tether, be at one’s wit’s end; ضاق به
ذرعا ب (dar‘an) not to be up to s.th.. be
unable to do or accomplish s.th.; not to be
able to stand or bear s.th., be fed up with,
be tired of, feel uneasy about, be
oppressed by; ضاق عنه ذرعا do.; ضاق صدره
(ṣadruhū) to be annoyed, angry; ضاقت يده
عن (yaduhū) to be incapable of; to be too
poor to … II to make narrow or narrower,
narrow (down), straiten, cramp, tighten,
confine, constrain, restrain, restrict,
contract ( ھ s.th.); to pull tight ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., a dress); to harass, oppress, beset,
besiege, beleaguer ( على s.o.); to keep ( على
s.o.) short ( في in s.th.) │ ضيق الحصار to
tighten the blockade; ضيق على نفسه to
restrain o.s., take restrictions upon o.s. III
to vex, annoy, anger ( ه s.o.); to harass,
oppress, beset ( ه s.o.); to trouble, bother,
inconvenience, disturb, hinder, hamper,
impede, affect gravely ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.),
bear down heavily ( ھ، ه upon); to cause
trouble ( ه to s.o.) VI to be or become
narrow, to narrow; to become annoyed,
become irritated; to be angry ( من at, about)
ضيق ḍīq narrowness; tightness,
closeness; confinement, restriction,
limitation, constraint; shortage, scarcity;
oppression, anguish; dejectedness,
depression, distress; lack, want, paucity,
poverty; care, worry, anxiety; anger,
annoyance, irritation, exasperation;
weariness, ennui │ ضيق ذات اليد ḍ. dāt alyad
poverty, destitution; ضيق المقام ḍ. almaqām
crampedness lack of space; ضيق
النطاق do.; small range, limited extent,
narrow scope; ضيق اليد ḍ. al-yad poverty,
destitution
ضيق ḍayyiq narrow; tight; cramped;
short, scarce; confined, limited, restricted
│ ضيق الخلق ḍ. al-kalq illiberal,
ungenerous; impatient, annoyed; ضيق
الصدر ḍ. aṣ-ṣadr vexed, annoyed ( ب over,
at, by), angry ( ب at, with); upset,
depressed, downcast, dejected; ضيق العقل
ḍ. al-‘aql narrow-minded, hidebound,
dull-witted; ضيق النطاق small-range; of
narrow scope, limited in extent; confined,
limited, restricted
ضيقة ḍaiqa, ḍīqa straitened
circumstances, poverty; anguish
اضيق aḍyaq2 narrower, tighter
مضيق maḍīq pl. مضايق maḍāyiq مضائق , 2
strait(s); defile, (mountain) pass;
narrow(s), stricture
تضييق taḍyīq narrowing, tightening;
restriction, limitation; oppression │ تضييق
الحصار tightening of the blockade; تضييق
الخناق (tightening of the rope =) strangling,
suppression
مضايقة muḍāyaqa pl. -āt affliction,
distress, grievance, embarrassment;
obstruction, impediment. disturbance,
harassment, molestation; depressing state;
anger, annoyance, vexation, irritation;
inconvenience, difficulty, trouble,
nuisance
ضائقة ḍā’iqa pl. ضوائق ḍawā’iq2
predicament, straits, difficulty; critical
situation, crisis │ ضائقة العيش ḍ. al-‘aiš
straitened circumstances; ضائقة مالية
(mālīya) financial straits
مضايق muḍāyiq troublesome, irksome,
wearisome, disturbing, annoying;
nuisance (person)
متضايق mutaḍāyiq annoyed, vexed,
irritated, exasperated, hungry; hard
pressed
ضام (ضيم 1 ) ḍāma i (ḍaim) to wrong, harm ( ه
s.o.), inflict damage ( ه upon s.o.); to treat
unjustly ( ه s.o.) X = I
ضيم ḍaim pl. ضيوم ḍuyūm wrong,
inequity, injustice; harm, damage,
detriment, injury
ضامة look up alphabetically
ط
ط abbreviation of قيراط qīrāṭ
طاء ṭā’ name of the letter ط
طابة ṭāba pl. -āt ball
طابور ṭābūr pl. طوابير ṭawābīr2 battalion; (eg.)
line, file, single file (of soldiers, of
persons walking one behind the other);
queue │ الطابور الخامس the fifth column
طابية ṭābiya pl. طواب ṭawābin fortress, fort;
round fortress tower; (eg.) rook, castle
(chess)
طاجن ṭājin pl. طواجن ṭawājin2 frying pan; (eg.)
shallow earthen pot
طار، طارة see طور
طارمة pl. -āt kiosk, booth, cabin, stall
طازة ṭāza fresh, tender, new
طازج ṭāza fresh, new
طاس 1 and طاسة see طوس
طاؤوس 2 ṭā’ūs and طاووس ṭāwūs pl. طواويس
ṭawāwīs2 peacock
طأطأ ṭa’ṭa’a to incline, bend, tilt, bow ( رأسه
ra’sahū one’s head; also used without
(رأسه
مطأطئ muṭa’ṭi’ with bowed head
مطأطأ muṭaṭa’: مطأطأ الرأس m. ar-ra’s
with bowed head
طاق 1 ṭāq pl. -āt, طيقان ṭīqān arch (arch.); (pl.
-āt) layer, stratum
طاقة 2 ṭāqa pl. -āt window
طاقية 3 ṭāqīya pl. □ طواقي ṭawāqī white cotton
skullcap (often worn under the tarboosh:
in Eg. = عرقية ); fatigue cap (of the Eg.
Territorial Army)
طأمن see طمأن
طاولة (It. tavola) ṭāwula table │ لعبة الطاولة
la‘bat aṭ-ṭāwila backgammon, tricktrack;
تنس الطاولة table tennis
طب ṭabba u i (ṭabb, ṭibb, tubb) to treat
medically ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), give medical
treatment ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.); to seek to
remedy, tackle ( ل s.th.) II to treat
medically ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), give medical
treatment ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.) V to
receive, or undergo, medical treatment,
submit to medical treatment; to practice
medicine, engage in the medical field X to
seek medical advice ( ه from s.o.), consult (
ه a doctor)
طب ṭibb medical treatment: medicine,
medical science │ طب الأسنان ṭ. al-asnān
dentistry, dental science; الطب البيطري
(baiṭarī) veterinary science; الطب الشرعي
(šar‘ī) forensic medicine; الطب النفساني
(nafsānī) psychiatry; علم الطب ‘ilm aṭ-ṭ.
medical science, medicine; كلية الطب
kullīyat aṭ-ṭ. medical school, medical
college, (chiefly G. B.:) faculty of
medicine
طبي ṭibbī medical, pertaining to the
medical profession or science │ لائق طبيا
(ṭibbīya) physically fit (e.g., for military
service)
طبة ṭabba pl. -āt (eg.) cushion, pad;
plug, stopper, stopple; bung
طبيب ṭabib pl. اطباء ٢، اطبة aṭibba
physician, doctor │ طبيب بيطري (baiṭarī)
veterinarian; طبيب خاص (kāṣṣ) physician in
ordinary, private physician (e.g., of a
king); طبيب ساحر medicine man, shaman;
طبيب الأسنان dental surgeon, dentist; طبيب
شرعي (šar‘ī) medical examiner (jur.); طبيب
الأمراض الجلدية (jildīya) dermatologist 550
طبيبة ṭabība female doctor, doctress
طبابة ṭibāba medical treatment; medical
profession
تطبيب taṭbīb healing art, medical
practice, medical profession
متطبب mutaṭabbib quack, quacksalver
طبخ ṭabaka a (ṭabk) to cook ( ھ s.th.) VII to be
or get cooked
طبخ ṭabk cooking, cookery; cooked
food; O celluloid
طبخة ṭabka (n. un.) (article of cooked)
food, meal, dish, course
طباخ ṭabbāk cook
طبيخ ṭabīk cooked food, fare
طباخة ṭibāka culinary art, cookery,
cuisine
مطبخ maṭbak pl. مطابخ maṭābik2 kitchen;
cookshop, eating house, luncheonette
مطبخ miṭbak pl. مطابخ maṭābik2 any
cooking apparatus (also, e.g., a hot plate),
cooking stove, kitchen range, portable
range
طبر 1 ṭabar hatchet, ax, battle-ax
طبردار ṭabardār sapper, pioneer (mil.)
طابور 2 look up alphabetically
طبرية 3 ṭabarīya2 Tiberias (city in Palestine, on
W shore of Sea of Galilee)
طبشورة ṭabšūra (syr.) chalk
طباشير ṭabāšīr2 chalk
طباشيري ṭabāšīrī chalky, cretaceous,
chalk- (in compounds)
طبطب ṭabṭaba to gurgle, purl (water); to pat,
stroke, caress ( على s.o.)
طبطابة ṭabṭāba bat, mallet, racket (for
ball games)
طبع ṭaba‘a a (ṭab‘) to provide with an imprint,
impress or impression ( ھ or على s.th.); to
impress with a stamp, seal or signet ( ھ or
على s.th.), leave or set one’s stamp, seal,
mark, or impress ( على or ھ، ه on s.o. on
s.th.); to stamp, imprint, impress ( على ه
s.th. on); to mint, coin ( ھ money); to print
ھ) s.th.); pass. ṭubi‘a to have a natural
aptitude or disposition, have a propensity,
be disposed by nature ( على for) │ طبعه
بطابعه (bi-ṭābi‘ihī) to place, set, or leave
one’s stamp, mark, or impress on s.o. or
s.th., impart one’s own character to s.o. or
s.th.; طبع عليه (ṭubi‘a) to be innate, inherent
in s.o., be native, natural to s.o. II to tame,
domesticate, break in, train ( ھ an animal)
V تطبع بطباعه (bi-ṭibā‘ihī) to take on,
assume, or receive s.o.’s peculiar
character, bear s.o.’s stamp or impress VII
to be stamped, be printed, be imprinted, be
impressed; to leave an imprint or
impression ( في on); to be disposed by
nature ( على for)
طبع ṭab‘ printing (of a book), print; (pl.
طباع ṭibā‘) impress, impression, stamp,
hallmark, peculiarity, characteristic,
nature, character, temper, (natural)
disposition │ طبع الحجر al-ḥajar
lithography; طبع الحروف typography; تحت
الطبع in (the) press, at press (typ.); مسودة
الطبع muswaddat and musawwadat aṭ-ṭ.
proof sheet, galley proof (typ.); اعادة الطبع
i‘ādat aṭ-ṭ. reprinting reprint; طبعا ṭab‘an
or بالطبع by nature, by natural disposition;
naturally! of course! certainly! to be sure!
سيئ الطبع sayyi’ aṭ-ṭ. ill-disposed, illnatured,
evil by nature; (شاذ الطبع (الطباع
šadd aṭ-ṭ. eccentric, extravagant
طبعة ṭab‘a pl. -āt printing, print;
edition, issue, impression
طباع ṭabbā‘ printer
طباعة ṭibā‘a art of printing │ آلة الطباعة
printing press
طباعي ṭibā‘ī typographic(al) 551
طبيعة ṭabī‘a pl. طبائع ṭabā’i‘2 nature;
natural disposition, constitution;
peculiarity, individuality, character;
regular, normal manner; physics; natural
science │ بطبيعة الحال by the very nature of
the case, as is (was) only natural, ipso
facto, naturally, as a matter of course; عالم
الطبيعة physicist; natural scientist; علم الطبيعة
‘ilm aṭ-ṭ. physics; natural science; فلسفة ما
وراء (بعد) الطبيعة (falsafatu) metaphysics;
فوق الطبيعة supernatural; طبائع الأشياء the
nature of things, state of affairs
طبيعي ṭabī‘ī nature’s, of nature, nature-
(in compounds), natural; inborn, innate,
inherent, native; normal, ordinary, usual,
regular; physical; physicist; natural
scientist; naturalist │ عالم طبيعي physicist;
natural scientist; الطبيعيات physics; natural
science
مطبع maṭba‘ print shop, printing office,
printing house, press
مطبعة maṭba‘a pl. مطابع maṭābi‘2 print
shop, printing office, printing house, press
│ حرية المطابع ḥurrīyat al-m. freedom of
the press
مطبعي maṭba‘ī printing, printer’s (in
compounds), typographic(al) │ خطأ مطبعي
(kaṭa’) and غلطة مطبعية (galṭa)
typographical error, misprint, erratum
مطبعجي (eg.) majba‘gī printer
مطبعة miṭba‘a pl. مطابع maṭābi‘2 printing
machine, printing press
طابع ṭābi‘ printer; -- ṭāba‘ impress,
stamp, mark, character; (pl. طوابع ṭawābi‘2)
seal, signet; stamp; imprint, print, impress,
impression; (postage,
etc.) stamp; tablet, pill │ طابع البريد and
طابع بريدي postage stamp; طابع تذكاري
(tadkārī) commemorative stamp; طابع
الأصابع fingerprint; صاحب الطابع keeper of
the seal; طبعه بطابعه to place, set, or leave,
one’s stamp, mark, or impress on s.o. or
s.th., impart one’s own character to s.o. or
s.th.
مطبوع maṭbū‘ printed, imprinted;
stereotyped; pl. -āt printed material,
prints; printed matter │ مطبوع بطابعه
bearing the stamp, mark or impress of s.o.
or s.th., being characterized by; مطبوع على
do., being by its very nature ..., having the
innate property of...; مطبوع دوري (daurī) a
periodical; قانون المطبوعات press law
طبق 1 II to cover, cover up ( ھ s.th.); to make
coincident or congruent, cause to
coincide, superpose ( بين two figures;
geom.); to fold ( ھ s.th., also, e.g., the
hands); (eg.) to shoe ( ھ a hors.); to apply (
على ھ s.th. to); to be common, universal,
widespread; to spread (also ھ throughout
s.th.), pervade ( ھ s.th.); pass. ṭubbiga to
be applied, apply, be applicable be
effective be valid │ طبقت شھرته تلآفاق
(šuhratuhū) he (it) enjoyed, or achieved,
world-wide fame; طبق صيته الخافقين (ṣītuhū,
kāfiqain) do., his (its) fame spread
throughout the world III to bring to
coincidence, make coincident or
congruent, cause to coincide ( بين -- وبين
s.th. with), correlate, compare, contrast (
بين -- وبين s.th. with); to adapt, adjust, tally,
trim into shape ( ھ s.th.); to suit, fit, match
ھ، ه) s.o., s.th.), go, tally ( ھ، ه with), adapt
o.s., adjust o.s. ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.); to
correspond ( ھ to s.th.), concur, agree,
conform, be in keeping ( ھ، ه with s.o.,
with s.th.), fit ( ھ into s.th.) IV to close,
shut ( ھ s.th., e.g., the eyes, mouth, etc.);
to cover, cover up ( ھ، على s.th., also ھ
with one’s hand على s.th.); to surround,
encircle, encompass ( على s.o.); to be
agreed, agree, come to an agreement ( على
on, about) │ اطبق على يدي (yadī) he pressed
my hand V to get or be covered or closed
VII = V; to be applicable, apply ( على to),
fit, suit ( على s.o., s.th.), hold good ( على
for), be true ( على of); to 552 be in
conformity, be consistent, be compatible,
be in keeping, conform, agree ( على with),
correspond ( على to s.th.)
طبق ṭibqa (prep.) according to,
corresponding to, in accordance with, in
conformity with │ طبقا ل (ṭibqan) do.;
صورة طبق الأصل (ṣūra, aṣl) true copy; exact
replica
طبق ṭabaq pl. اطباق aṭbāq lid, cover,
plate; dish, shallow bowl; (round) tray,
salver; ash tray; (pl. اطباق , also طباق ṭibāq)
layer, tier; stratum (of the air); pl. طباق
(with foll. genit.) superposed masses,
layered formations, piles, large quantities
of ... │ اطباق طائرة flying saucers
يد طبقة yad ṭabiqa closed hand
طبقة ṭabaqa pl. -āt layer; stratum (of
earth, air, society, etc.); floor, story (of a
building); class, category; generation │ O
الطبقة الطخرورية (ṭukrūrīya) stratosphere;
الطبقات النجسة (najisa) the impure castes, the
pariahs; الطبقة المتوسطة (mutawassiṭa) the
middle class(es); حرب الطبقات ḥarb aṭ-ṭ.
class struggle; علم طبقات الأرض ‘ilm ṭ. alarḍ
geology; معدود في الطبقات الثالثة regarded
as third-rate
طابق ṭābaq, ṭābiq pl. طوابق ṭawābiq2
large bricks; floor, story (of a building) │ ا
لطابق الأرضي (arḍī) ground floor
طاباق ṭābāq pl. طوابيق ṭawābīq2 large
bricks
طباق ṭibāq (with foll. genit. or suffix)
that which is in agreement, in keeping, or
in conformity with ..., corresponding,
analogous (to s.th.), in accordance (with),
conformable (to), consistent (with),
compatible (with); antithesis,
juxtaposition of contrasting ideas (rhet.)
طبيق ṭabīq (with foll. genit. or suffix)
sth. in agreement, in keeping, or in
conformity with ..., corresponding,
analogous (to s.th.), in accordance (with),
consistent (with), compatible (with)
تطبيق taṭbīq adaptation,
accommodation, adjustment; application
تطبيقي taṭbīqī applied; practical, serving
practical ends │ علوم تطبيقية applied
sciences
مطابقة muṭābaqa agreement,
conformity, congruity, correspondence
تطابق taṭābuq congruence (geom.)
مطابق muṭābiq corresponding,
congruous, conformable, in agreement or
conformity (with) │ مطابق للحقيقة true,
truthful, veracious, agreeing with the
facts, true to nature, lifelike
مطبق muṭbiq entire, complete, utter,
absolute, total; -- mutbaq pressed; coated,
incrusted ( بالذھب with gold); subterranean
dungeon, oubliette, underground chamber
│ الحروف المطبقة (muṭbaqa) (phon.) the
sounds ṣ, ḍ, ṭ, ẓ
طباق 2 ṭabāq, ṭubāq (eg.) tobacco
طبل ṭabala u (ṭabl) to beat a drum; to drum II =
I; to beat the drum ( ل for s.o., i.e., to
campaign, make propaganda for s.o.)
طبل ṭabl drumming, drumbeat; (pl. طبول
ṭubūl, اطبال aṭbāl) drum; bass drum (of the
Western orchestra)
طبلة ṭabla drum │ طبلة الأذن ṭ. al-udun
eardrum, tympanic membrane
طبلة ṭabla pl. -āt, طبل ṭubal (eg.) look,
padlock
طبلي ṭablī drum-shaped
طبال ṭabbāl pl. -ūn, drummer
مطبل muṭabbal moist, damp (ground)
طبلة 2 ṭabla pl. -āt table
طبلة ṭablīya pl. -āt, □ طبالي ṭabālī a low,
round table; turntable; tray, wooden salver
طبن 1 ṭabina a to be bright, intelligent
طبن ṭabin bright, intelligent 553
طابونة 2 ṭābūna ( طبونة ṭābūna) pl. -āt a small,
jar-shaped oven, sunk in the ground, open
on top, used for baking bread; bakery;
(pal., eg.) (baker’s) oven
طبن 3 ṭabbān pl. -āt (wheel) tire
طبنجة ṭabanja pl. -āt pistol
طابية ṭābiya pl. طواب look up alphabetically
طاجن ṭājin pl. طواجن ṭawājin2 frying pan; (eg.)
shallow earthen pot
طحطح ṭaḥṭaḥā to break, shatter, smash ( ھ s.th.)
طحل (ṭuḥl) sediment, dregs, less
طحال (ṭiḥāl pl. -āt, طحل ṭuḥul spleen,
milt
طحالي ṭiḥālī splenic
طحال ṭuḥal inflammation of the spleen,
splenitis
مطحول maṭḥūl having a diseased spleen,
splenetic
طحلب ṭuḥlub (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. طحالب ṭaḥālib2
water moss
طحن ṭaḥana a (ṭaḥn) to grind, mill, bray,
pulverize ( ھ , s.th., esp. grain); to crush,
ruin, destroy ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to wear out,
wear down ( ه s.o.), exact as heavy toll ( ه of
s.o.; age, yean) VI to quarrel, wrangle, be
antagonistic, be in conflict (with one
another), to conflict
طحن ṭiḥn flour, meal
طحين ṭaḥīn flour, meal
طحيني ṭaḥīnī mealy, farinaceous
طحينية ṭaḥīnīya (eg.) a sweet made of
sesame-seed, meal and sugar
طحينة ṭaḥīna (eg., syr.) a thick sauce
made of sesame oil, and served with
salads, vegetables, etc.
طحان ṭaḥḥān miller
طاحون ṭāḥūn and طاحونة ṭāhūna pl.
طواحن ṭawāḥīn2 mill, grinder │ طاحونة الھواء
ṭ. al-hawā’ windmill
مطحنة miṭḥana pl. مطاحن maṭāḥin2 mill,
grinder
مطحنة maṭḥana pl. مطحنة maṭḥana2 mill;
flour mill
طاحن ṭāḥin molar tooth, grinder
طاحنة ṭāḥina pl. طواحن ṭawāḥin2 molar
tooth, grinder
O الطبقة الطحرورية aṭ-ṭabaqa aṭ-ṭukrūrīya the
stratosphere
طر ṭarra u (ṭarr, طرور ṭurūr) to sharpen, hone,
whet ( ھ s.th.); to grow; to sprout, come
out (mustache, hair)
طرا ṭurran altogether, all without
exception, one and all
طرة ṭurra pl. طرر ṭurar forelock;
knotted cloth or kerchief
طرار ṭarrār pl. طرارة ṭarrara (magr.)
tambourine player; rogue, scoundrel
طرأ ṭara’a a (ṭar’, طروء ṭurū’) to descend,
break in, come ( على upon), overtake, befall
على) s.o.), happen unexpectedly ( على to
s.o.); to occur ( على or ل to s.o., of an idea)
│ ماذا طرأ عليه what’s got into him all of a
sudden? what’s the matter with him all of
a sudden? طرأت عليه فكرة (fikratun) an idea
occurred to him, he had an idea; لم يطرأ على
الحالة تبدل يذكر (tabaddulun yudkaru) (no
change worth mentioning came over the
situation, i.e.) the situation remained
substantially unchanged IV to praiae,
laud, extol ( ه s.o.)
طريء ṭarī’ fresh, new
طارئ ṭāri’ foreign, extraneous,
extrinsic, unusual; accidental, incidental,
casual, unforeseen, unexpected,
contingent; a new factor or development
intervening suddenly, a contingent; 554
unexpected visitor; sudden stirring,
sudden impulses ( من e.g., of joy)
طارئة ṭāri’a pl. طوارئ ṭawāri’
unforeseen event, unexpected case, a
contingent; new factor or development;
incident, accident │ حالة الطوارئ state of
emergency
طرآني ṭur’ānī of unknown origin, wild
طرابلس ṭarābulus طرابلس الشام : 2 Tripoli (in
Lebanon); طرابلس الغرب ṭ. al-garb Tripoli
(in Libya)
طرب ṭriba a (ṭarab) to be moved (with joy or
grief); to be delighted, be overjoyed, be
transported with joy II to delight, fill with
delight, enrapture, please, gratify ( ه s.o.);
to sing, vocalize, chant IV to delight, fill
with delight, enrapture, please, gratify ( ه
s.o.); to make music; to sing, vocalize,
chant: to play music ( ه for s.o.), sing ( ه to
s.o.)
طرب ṭarab pl. اطراب aṭrāb joy,
pleasure, delight, rapture; amusement,
entertainment (with music and the like);
music │ آلة الطرب musical instrument
طرب ṭarib pl. طراب ṭarib moved (with
joy or grief), touched, affected; delighted,
enraptured, transported, pleased, charmed
طروب ṭarūb gay, merry, lively
اطرب aṭrab2 more delightful; making
better music, being a batter musician;
more melodious
اطراب iṭrāb delight, delectation,
diversion
مطرب muṭrib delightful, ravishing,
charming, amusing, entertaining;
melodious; musician; singer, vocalist,
chansonnier
مطربة muṭriba singer, songstress,
vocalist, chanteuse
طربيزة ṭarābēza (eg.) table
طرابلس look up alphabetically
طربوش ṭarbūš pl. طرابيش ṭarābīš tarboosh, fez
طرابيشي ṭarābīšī tarboooh merchant
مطربش muṭarbaš wearing a tarboosh,
tarbooshed
متطربش mitaṭarbiš wearing a tarboosh,
tarbooshed; hence, in Eg., a member of
the white-collar class, of the educated
middle class
طرح ṭaraḥa a (ṭarḥ) to throw, cast, fling, toss (
على ب or ھ s.th. onto or upon); to throw,
toss, or fling away, throw off, discard,
dump ( ب or ھ s.th.); to remove, drive
away, expel, reject, disown, repudiate ( ب
or ھ، ه s.o., s.th.): to throw or put ( على ھ a
garment on or over s.o.); to present,
submit ( ه على s.th. to s.o.); to teach ( ه على a
tune to s.o.); to cede, surrender, yield ( ھ ل
s.th. to s.o.); to miscarry, have a
miscarriage; to deduct, subtract, discount (
ھ من s.th. from) │ طرحه في المناقصة العامة
(munāqaṣa, ‘āmma) to invite tenders, or
bide, publicly for s.th. (e.g., the
government for some project); طرح عليه
سؤالا (suālan) to put a question to s.o.; طرح
مسألة على بساط البحث (mas’alatan, b. il-baḥt)
to broach or raise a question, present a
problem for consideration II to cause a
miscarriage ( ھا to a woman); طرح ھ اطراحا
(iṭṭirāḥan) to throw s.th. far away, fling
s.th. off or away III to exchange ( ه ھ with
s.o. s.th.) │ طارحه الكلام (kalām) to
converse with s.o., have a talk with s.o.;
طارحه الحديث to chat with s.o., have a
conversation with s.o.; طارحه الأسئلة (as’ila)
to exchange questions with s.o. V to drop,
fall, or tumble to the ground VI to
exchange with one another ( ھ e.g.,
thoughts) VII to be flung, be tossed, be
thrown, be rejected, be expelled, be
disowned, be repudiated; to throw o.s.
down, prostrate 555 o.s. (e.g., على الأرض
on the ground); to be thrown down, be
dropped VIII to throw far away, fling off
or away ( ھ s.th.); to discard, throw away (
ھ s.th.)
طرح ṭarḥ expulsion, rejection,
repulsion, banishment, repudiation;
miscarriage, abortion; subtraction,
deduction, discount │ طرح البحر ṭ. al-baḥr
(eg.) alleviation, alluvial deposits
طرح ṭarḥ miscarried foetus
طرحة ṭarḥa pl. طرح ṭuraḥ veil
(sometimes embroidered) worn by Arab
women as a headcloth; headcloth, head
veil
طريح ṭarīḥ pl. طرحى ṭarḥā thrown
down, cast down, dumped; thrown to the
ground, felled, prostrate; expelled,
banished, rejected, disowned, repudiated
│ طريح الفراش bedridden, confined to bed
طريحة ṭarīḥa assignment, task │ شغل
بالطريحة (šugl) job work, piecework (eg.)
طراحة ṭarrāḥa pl. طراريح ṭarārīḥ2
mattress; hassock, ottoman
اطروحة uṭrūḥa dissertation, thesis (Syr.)
مطرح maṭraḥ pl. مطارح maṭāriḥ2 place
where s.th. is thrown or at which s.th. is
discarded, a dump; place, spot, location,
locality; seat (in an auditorium)
اطراح iṭrāḥ rejection, repudiation
مطروح maṭrūḥ thrown down, out down,
damped, thrown off, discarded; lying on
the ground, prostrate; subtrahend (math.)
│ المطروح منه minuend (math.)
منطرح munṭariḥ thrown down, out
down, dumped, thrown off, discarded;
expelled, banished, rejected, disowned,
repudiated
طرخون ṭarkūn tarragon (Artemisia
dracunculus; bot.)
طرد ṭarada u (ṭard) to drive away, chase away,
push away, shove away, reject, repel,
banish, exile, dismiss, drive out, expel,
evict ( ھ من، ه s.o., s.th. from); to chase,
hunt, hound ( ھ، ه s.o. s.th.) │ طرده من
منصبه (manṣibihī) to relieve s.o. of his
office, dismiss s.o. II = I; III to assault,
attack ( ھ، ه s.o.), launch an attack ( ھ، ه
on); to stalk ( ھ an animal, game); to
pursue, follow ( ھ، ه s.o. s.th.), run after
s.o. or s.th. ( ھ، ه ), give chase ( ھ، ه to) VIII
to drive away as booty ( ھ animals); to be
consecutive, be continuous, form an
uninterrupted sequence, succeed one
another continuously; to sow
uninterruptedly, carry water perennially
(river); to progress or get on at a rapid
pace, make good headway (undertaking)
X to proceed (in one’s speech), go on to
say, continue ( ھ s.th., e.g., one’s speech);
to change, pass on (in speech) ( من – ل
from -- to); to digress (in speaking), make
an excursus │ استطرد من ذلك الى قوله
(qaulihī) thereupon he proceeded to speak
about ..., then he broached the subject
of ..., after that he went on to say that ...
طرد ṭard driving away, chasing away,
repulsion, expulsion, eviction, dismissal,
banishment, expatriation; pursuit, chase,
hunt; swarm (of bees); (pl. طرد ṭurūd)
parcel, package │ بحث مسألة طردا وعكسا
(mas’alata ṭardan wa-‘aksan) to study a
problem from all sides, in all its aspects
طرد ṭardī parcel-, package- (in
compounds), like a parcel or package
طردة ṭarda (n. vic.) a driving away,
chasing away, repulsion, expulsion,
eviction, banishment
طريد ṭarīd expelled, evicted, ousted,
outcast, outlawed, banished, exiled,
expatriate(d); fugitive, fleeing, on the 556
run; expellee; outcast, outlaw; الطريدان aṭ-
ṭarīdān night and day
طريدة ṭarīda pl. طرائد ṭarā’id2 game
animal, game beast; game
طراد ṭarrād cruiser (warship); (eg.)
dike, embankment, dam, levee (esp. of the
Nile)
طرادة ṭarrāda cruiser (warship)
طراد ṯirād pursuit, chase
مطارد muṭārada repulsion, expulsion,
banishment; pursuit, chase; hunt │ طائرة
المطاردة fighter plane, pursuit plane,
interceptor
اطراد iṭṭirād uninterrupted or regular
sequence, continuity
استطراد istiṭrād pl. -āt digression,
divagation; excursus
مطارد muṭārid pursuer; hunter │ طائرة
مطاردة fighter plane, pursuit plane,
interceptor
مطرد muṭṭarid incessant, uninterrupted,
continuous, continual, unvarying, steady,
constant; general │ قاعدة مطردة general
rule; مطرد النسق m. an-nasaq uniform
(adj.); مطرد النغم m. an-nagm monotonous
(song)
طرز II to embroider ( ھ s.th.); to embellish ( ھ a
story); to garnish ( ھ ب s.th., e.g., a dish
with)
طرز ṭarz pl. طروز ṭurūz type, model,
make, brand, sort, kind; fashion, style
طرزي ṭarzī fashion- (in compounds)
طراز ṭirāz pl. طرز ṭuruz, اطرزة aṭriza
type, model, class, make, brand, sort,
kind, variety, species; fashion, style;
architectural style; embroidery │ من الطراز
القديم old-fashioned, outmoded; قديم الطراز
do.; مسلح بأقدم الطراز musallaḥ bi-aḥdat ṭ.
equipped with the latest arms; من الطراز
الأول (awwal) first-class, first-rate
تطريز taṭrīz embroidering, embroidery
طرس ṭirs pl. اطرس aṭrās, طروس ṭurūs sheet (of
paper); paper
طرش ṭariša a (ṭaraš) to be or become deaf; --
ṭaraša u to vomit, throw up, disgorge II to
deafen ( ه s.o.)
طرش ṭarš whitewashing
طرش ṭarš pl. طروش ṭurūš (syr.) hard (of
cattle), flock (of sheep)
طرش ṭaraš deafness
طرشة ṭrša deafness
اطرش aṭraiš2, f. طرشاء ṭaršā’2, pl. طرش
ṭurš deaf اطرش اسك (ašakk2) stone-deaf
مطرش muṭarriš vomitive; emetic
طرشي 2 ṭuršī mixed pickles
طرطر ṭarṭara to brag, boast, swagger, show off
طرطور ṭurṭūr pl. طراطير ṭarāṭīr2 high,
conical cap (of dervisheo, clowns, etc.)
طرطور ṭarṯūr and طراطور ṭarāṭūr (eg.,
syr.) a sort of mayonnaise (made of
ṭaḥīna, parsley, lemon, oil, milk, garlic
and nuts)
طرطش ṭarṯaša to splash, bespatter, splatter ( ه
s.o.); to roughcast ( ھ a building, a wall)
طرطوفة ṭarṭūfa end, tip, point; Jerusalem
artichoke (Helianthus tuberosus L.; bot.);
truffle
طرطير ṭarṭīr tartar, wine stone
طرف ṭarafa, (ṭarf) to blink, twinkle,
wink, squint (also بعينيه bi-‘ainaihi); --
ṭarufa u ( طرفة ṭarāfa) to be newly
acquired, be a recent acquisition IV to
feature or tell s.th. new or novel, say s.th.
new or original, introduce a novel angle or
idea; to present ( ه s.o. ب with s.th. new or
novel), give ( ه to s.o. ب s.th. new or novel)
V to be on the extreme 557 side, hold an
extreme viewpoint or position, go to
extremes, be radical, have radical views
طرف ṭarf eye; glance, look │ ما اشار
بطرف (ašāra) he didn’t bat an eye; من طرف
خفي (kafīy) secretly, furtively, discreetly;
كارتداد الطرف ka-rtidādi ṭ-ṭ. in the twinkling
of an eye, instantly
طرف ṭaraf pl. اطراف aṭrāf utmost part,
outermost point, extremity, end, tip, point,
edge, fringe, limit, border; side; region,
area, section; طرف من part of, a bit of,
some; party (as, to a dispute, of a contract,
etc.); ṭarafa (prep.) with, at, on the part or
side of; pl. اطراف limbs, extremities; (with
foll. genit.) sections of, parts of │ طرفي
النھار tarafayi n-nahār in the morning and
in the evening, mornings and evenings;
كانوا على طرفي النقيض (ṭarafai naqīḍ) they
were at variance, they carried on a feud;
كان واياه على طرفي نقيض (wa-iyyāhu) they
held diametrically opposed views or
positions; اطراف البدن a. al-badan the
extremities of the bod, the limbs; اطراف
الأصابع fingertips; على اطراف قدميه (a.
qadamaihi) on tiptoe; اطراف المدينة a. almadīna
the outskirts of the city; الأطراف
المتعاقدة (muta‘āqida) the contracting
parties; بطرف with, at, on the part or side
of; من طرف on the part of; من طرف الى طرف
from one end to the other; احزاب طرف اليمين
the right-wing parties; جاذي اطراف الحديث
jādaba aṭrāfa l-ḥ. to talk, converse, have a
conversation; جمع البراعة من اطرافھا
(barā‘ata) to be a highly efficient man, be
highly qualified; جمع اطراف الشيء to give a
survey or outline of s.th., summarize, sum
up s.th.; قص عليه طرفا (اطرافا) من حياته to tell
s.o. an episode (episodes) of one’s life
طرفة ṭarfa: بطرفة عين bi-ṭ. ‘ainin and في
طرفة عين in the twinkling of an eye,
instantly; ما -- طرفة عين (ṭarfata) not one
moment
طرفة ṭurfa pl. طرف ṭuraf novelty, rarity,
curiosity, curio, rare object, choice item;
exquisite present; masterpiece, chefd’oeuvre;
hit, high light, pièce de
résistance
طرفاء ṭarfā’2 (coll.; n. un. ة) tamarisk
(bot.)
طريف ṭarīf curious, strange, odd; novel,
exquisite, singular, rare, uncommon
طريفة ṭarīfa pl. طريفة tarīfa rare,
exquisite thing; uncommon object or piece
(e.g., of art); pl. طرائف curiosities,
oddities, uncommon qualities
طرافة ṭarāfa novelty, uncommonness,
peculiarity, oddness, strangeness,
curiosity, originality
مطرف miṭraf, muṭraf shawl
تطرف taṭarruf excess, excessiveness,
immoderation, extravagance, extremism,
extreme standpoint or position, radical
attitude, radicalism
طارف ṭārif newly acquired
متطرف mutaṭarrif utmost, outmost,
farthest outward, located at the outermost
point; extreme, extremistic; radical; an
extremist, a radical │ جھة متطرفة (jiha)
outlying district, outskirt(s)
طرق taraqa u (ṭarq) to knock, rap, bang ( ھ at,
on, esp. at a door); to hammer, strike with
a hammer, forge ( ھ s.th. esp. metal); to
come over s.o. ( ھ ), befall ( ب s.o.; of a
feeling); to come ( ه، ھ to, upon; also of
events); to reach ( ھ s.th.), get to s.th. ( ,(ھ
get as far as s.th. ( ھ ); to come by night │
طرق اذنه (udunahū) to strike s.o.’s ear,
reach s.o.’s ear; طرق بباله (bi-bālihī) to
occur to s.o., come to s.o.’s mind; طرق في
ذھنه (dihnihī) do.; طرق سمعه (sam‘ahū) and
طرق مسامعه to reach s.o.’s ear, come to
s.o.’s knowledge or attention; طرق طريقا to
tread, travel, follow, take, or use a road;
طرق موضوعا to treat of a subject, discuss a
558 topic; to broach a subject, touch on a
theme II to hammer, strike with a
hammer, forge, extend ( ھ s.th., esp. metal)
IV to bow one's head in silence │ اطرق
رأسه (ra’sahū) or برأسه to bow one’s head
V to seek to gain access ( الى to); to
penetrate ( الى s.th. or into s.th.) to get ( الى
to), reach ( الى s.th.), arrive ( الى at); (in a
speech, and the like) to touch ( الى on a
subject), go into s.th. ( الى ), treat of s.th. (
لا يتطرق اليه شك │ ( الى (šakkun) not open to
doubt, admitting no doubt
طرقة ṭarqa (n. vic.) pl. ṭaraqāt knock,
rap(ping), bang(ing) (e.g., at a door);
blow; one time (= مرة )، طرقتين , ṭarqatain
twice
طرقة ṭurqa way, road; passage,
passageway, alleyway, corridor
طريق ṭarīq m. and f., pl. طرق ṭuruq,
طرقات ṭuruqāt way; road, highway; trail,
track, path; method │ طريق الجو ṭ. al-jaww
air route; طريق البحر ṭ. al-baḥr sea route;
طريق رئيسي (ra’īsī) main road; طريق عام
(‘āmm) public road, highway,
thoroughfare; طريق عمومية (‘umūmīya) do.;
عن طريق by way of, via; by means of,
through; عن طريق الجو (ṭ. il-jaww) by air;
من طريق by means of, through; عابر الطريق
wanderer, wayfarer; قاطع الطريق pl. قطاع
الطريق quṭṭā‘ aṭ-ṭ. highwayman, wayfarer,
brigand; قاطع الطريق to commit highway
robbery; كان في طريقه to have sense, be
sensible or normal
طريقة ṭarīqa pl. طرائق ṭarā’iq طرق , 2
ṭuruq manner, mode, means; way,
method, procedure; system; creed, faith,
religion; (pl. -āt, طرق ṭuruq) religious
brotherhood, dervish order │ طريقة
الاستعمال directions for use
طرقي ṭuruqī pl. -ūn adherent of a
religious brotherhood
مطرق miṭraq and مطرقة miṭraqa pl.
مطارق maṭāriq2 hammer
مطراق miṭrāq versatile, many-sided, of
varied skills or talents
اطراقة iṭrāqa (n. vic.) a bowing of the
head
استطراق istiṭrāq transit permission, free
passage or entry
طارق ṭāriq pl. طراق ṭurrāq knocking,
rapping, banging, striking, beating;
nocturnal visitor
طارقة ṭāriqa pl. طوارق ṭawāriq2
misfortune, disaster, calamity
مطروق maṭrūq much-frequented,
muchtraveled, well-trodden (road, trail,
path) │ موضوع مطروق a much-discussed,
frequently treated subject
مطرق muṭriq and مطرق الرأس with
bowed head
طرقع ṭarqa‘a (eg.) to crack (intr., also trans.: ب
or ھ s.th., e.g., a whip); to crack, crunch (
ھ s.th.)
طارمة ṭārima pl. -āt kiosk, booth, cabin, stall
طرمبة ṭurumba pl. -āt pump
طرو ) and طرو (طرى ṭaruwa u, طري ṭariya a (
طراوة ṭarāwa) to be or become fresh,
succulent, moist, tender, soft, mild II to
make fresh, succulent, moist, tender, soft,
mild ( ھ s.th.); to moisten, wet ( ھ s.th.); to
perfume, scent ( ھ s.th.) IV to praise
(highly), extol, laud ( ه s.o.), lavish praise (
ه on s.o.)
طري ṭarīy fresh, succulent, new; moist;
tender, soft, mild
طراوة ṭarāwa freshness, succulence,
moistness; tenderness, softness, mildness
│ طراوة الخلق ṭ. al-kulq gentleness; softness
of character
اطرية iṭriya vermicelli
اطراء iṭrā’ (high) commendation,
praise, laudation, extolment 559
طروادة ṭirwāda2 (from Fr. Troade) Troy
طازج ṭāzaj look up alphabetically
طزلق (Turk. tozluk) ṭuzluq pl. طزالق ṭazāliq2
gaiter(s), legging(s)
طازة ṭāza look up alphabetically
طزينة (It. dozzina) pl. طزازن ṭazāzin2 dozen
طست ṭast, ṭist pl. طسوت ṭusūt basin; washbasin,
washbowl
طشت ṭašt, ṭišt pl. طشوت ṭušūt basin; washbasin,
washbowl
طشقند ṭašqand Tashkent (capital of Uzbek
S.S.R.)
طصلق ṭaṣlaqa (eg.) to do inaccurately, perform
sloppily, bungle, botch, scamp ( ھ a job,
work)
طصلقة ṭaṣlaqa inaccurate, sloppy, or
slipsbod work
طعم ṭa‘ima a (ṭa‘m) to eat ( ھ s.th.); to taste ( ھ
s.th.); to relish, enjoy, savor (A s.th.) II to
graft, engraft ( ھ s.th.); to inoculate,
vaccinate ( ب ه s.o. with); to inlay ( ب ھ
s.th. with, e.g., wood with ivory) IV to
feed, give to eat ( ھ ه s.o. s.th.), nourish ( ھ
ه s.o. with), serve food or drink ( ھ ) to s.o.
اطعمه من جوع) │ ( ه (jū‘) to appease s.o.’s
hunger V to taste ( ھ s.th.) X = V; to ask
for food
طعم ṭa‘m pl. طعوم ṭu‘ūm taste, flavor,
savor; pleasing flavor, relish
طعمية ṭa‘mīya (eg.) patty made of beans,
and seasoned with onion, garlic and
parsley
طعم ṭu‘m graft, cion; bait, lure, decoy;
(pl. طعوم ṭu‘ūm) vaccine
طعم ṭa‘im tasty, savory, delicious
طعمة ṭu‘ma pl. طعم ṭu‘am food; bait;
quarry, catch, bag │ اصبح طعمة النيران
aṣbaḥa ṭu‘mata n-nīrān to be destroyed by
fire; طعمة لمدافع الحرب (li-madāfi‘i l-ḥarb)
cannon fodder
طعام ṭa‘ām pl. اطعمة aṭ‘ima, food,
nourishment, nutriment, fare, diet; meal,
repast │ اضرب عن الطعام (aḍraba) to go on
a hunger strike
مطعم maṭ‘am pl. مطاعم maṭā‘im2 eating
house, restaurant; dining room; mess,
messhall (on a ship); food │ مطعم الشعب m.
aš-ša‘b and مطعم شعبي soup kitchen
تطعيم taṭ‘īm inoculation, vaccination;
inlay work │ تطعيم القرنية t. al-qarnīya
transplantation of the cornea (med.)
اطعام iṭ‘ām feeding
مطعوم maṭ‘ūm tasted; already known
طعن ṭa‘ana u a (ṭa‘n) to thrust, pierce, transfix
ب ھ، ه) s.o., s.th. with); to stab ( ه s.o.); to
defame, discredit, hurt (with words; على or
في s.o., s.th.), speak evil ( على or في of); to
contest, challenge, impeach ( في حكم a
judgment), appeal ( في حكم against a
judgment); to refute. disprove ( في s.th.); to
penetrate, enter ( في s.th. or into s.th.) │
طعن في السن (sinn) to be advanced in years,
be old; طعن في القول (qaul) to refute a
(theological) doctrine VI to thrust each
other; to attack each other, battle one
another
طعن ṭa‘n piercing, transfixion;
slandering, calumniation, defamation;
appeal ( في against; jur.), challenge,
contestation, impeachment ( في of; jur.); pl.
طعون ṭu‘ūn calumnies, defamations;
attacks
طعنة ṭa‘na (n. vic.) pl. ṭa‘anāt stab,
thrust; attack; calumny, defamation,
vilification
طاعون ṭā‘ūn pl. طواعين ṭawā‘īn2 plague,
pestilence │ الطاعون الدملي (dummalī)
bubonic plague; الطاعون البقري (baqarī) and
طاعون الماشية ṭ. al-māšiya rinderpest, cattle
plague, steppe murrain 560
مطاعن maṭā‘in2 (pl.) invectives, abuses (
في against s.o.)
طاعن ṭā‘in and طاعن في السن (sinn) aged,
old, advanced in years │ رسالة طاعنة
lampoon
مطعون maṭ‘ūn plague-infected, plaguestricken
طغار 1 an Iraqi weight equaling 2000 kg, in
Basra 1537 kg
طغراء 2 ṭugrā’ pl. -āt tughra, calligraphically
intricate signature of the Ottoman Sultan,
interwoven with his father’s name and his
own honorific, customarily used on
written decrees, state documents and coins
طغرى ṭugrā = طغراء ṭugrā’2
طغام ṭagām common people, populace; lowly,
insignificant
طغمة ṭugma, ṭagma pl. -āt band, troop,
group
طغو) and طغي) طغا ṭagā u and طغى ṭagā a (ṭagy)
and ṭagiya a ( طغى ṭagan, طغيان ṭugyān) to
exceed proper bounds, overstep the
bounds, be excessive; to be rough,
tumultuous, rage (sea); to overflow, leave
its banks (river); to flood, overflow,
inundate, deluge ( على s.th.); to overcome,
seize, grip, befall ( على s.o.); to be
tyrannical or cruel ( على against s.o.),
tyrannize, oppress, terrorize ( على s.o.), ride
roughshod ( على over s.o.); -- طغى ṭagā a to
predominate, prevail, preponderate ( على
in, at), dominate, outweigh, outbalance (
على s.th.), be preponderant ( على over, in
comparison with s.th.)
طغوان ṭugwān flood, inundation, deluge
طغيان ṭugyān flood, inundation, deluge;
tyranny, oppression, suppression,
repression, terrorization
طاغ ṭāgin pl. طغاة ṭugāh tyrant,
oppressor, despot
طاغ ṭāgiya tyrant, oppressor, despot;
bully, brute, gorilla
طاغوت ṭāgūt an idol, a false god; seducer,
tempter (to error)
طف II to make deficient or scanty ( ھ s.th.); to
be niggardly, stingy ( على toward s.o.), stint
على) s.o.)
طفيف ṭafīf deficient; small, little, slight,
trivial, trifling, insignificant,
inconsiderable
تطفيف taṭfīf stinting, scrimping,
niggardliness, stinginess, parsimony
طفئ ṭafi’a a ( طفوء ṭufū’) to go out, die
down, be extinguished (fire, light); to be
out, have gone out (fire, lamp) IV to put
out, extinguish, smother, stifle ( ھ a fire),
turn off, switch off ( ھ light); to quench ( ھ
fire, thirst), slake ( ھ thirst, also lime) │
اطفأ جذوة يومه واحرق فحمة ليله في العمل
(jadwata yaumihi wa-aḥraqa faḥmata
lailihi fī l-‘amal) to work day and night
VII = طفئ ṭafi’a
□ طفاية ṭaffāya fire-extinguishing device
مطفأة miṭfa’a pl. مطافئ maṭāfi’
firefighting equipment, fire extinguisher,
fire engine │ رجال المطافئ the fire
department, the firemen
اطفاء iṭfā’ putting out, quenching,
extinguishing, extinction, fire fighting │
جھاز اطفاء الحريق jahāz i. al-ḥarīq
firefighting equipment رجال الإطفاء the fire
department, the firemen; عمليات الإطفاء
‘amalīyāt al-i. fire-fighting operations
اطفائي iṭfā’ī fireman
اطفائية iṭfā’īya fire department
مطفأ muṭfa’ extinguished, gone out, out;
mat, dull, flat, lusterless 561
طفح ṭafaḥa a (ṭafḥ, طفوح ṭufūḥ) to flow over,
run over, overflow ( ب with, also, e.g., the
heart with generosity, etc.); to cause to
overflow ( ب e.g., the milk) II to fill to
overflowing, fill to the brim ( ھ a vessel);
to overfill ( ھ s.th.) IV = II
طفح ṭafḥ superabundance, repletion;
skin eruption, rash, exanthema (med.)
طفحة ṭafḥa skin eruption, rash,
exanthema (med.)
طفحي ṭafḥī eruptive, exanthematic
(med.)
طفوح ṭufūḥ superabundance, repletion
طفاحة ṭufāḥa skimmings, foam, froth
طفحان ṭafḥān2, f. طفحى ṭafḥā flowing
over, running over, brimful, replete,
overfull, filled to overflowing
مطفحة miṭfaḥa skimmer, skimming ladle
طفح ṭāfiḥ flowing over, running over,
brimful, replete, overfull, filled to
overflowing
طفر ṭafara i (ṭafr) to jump, leap, bounce │
طفرت جوانحھا approx.: her bosom heaved
violently (with joyous agitation)
طفرة ṭafra jump, leap, bounce, bound;
impulsive motion, impetuosity; upswing,
rise, upturn, successful step; ṭafratan in
one leap
طفران ṭafrān pauper, have-not
2□ طفر ṭafar (= ثفر ) crupper (of the saddle)
طفش ṭafaša i (ṭafš) to run away, flee, escape
(eg.)
طفق ṭafiqa a (ṭafaq) with foll. imperf.: to
begin, set out to do s.th.; to do s.th.
suddenly
على II to intrude, obtrude, impose o.s. ( على
upon); to sponge ( على on s.o., على مائدته at
s.o.’s table), live at other people’s expense
V = II; to arrive uninvited or at an
inconvenient time, disturb, intrude; to be
obtrusive
طفل ṭafl tender, soft; potter’s clay, argil
طفل ṭifl pl. اطفال aṭfāl infant, baby, child
طفلة ṭifla little girl
طفلي ṭiflī child (adj.), baby (adj.),
children’s, of or pertaining to childhood or
infancy; infantile, childlike, childish │
الطب الطفلي (ṭibb) pediatrics
طفل ṭafal infancy, babyhood, early
childhood; childhood, childhood stage
طفل ṭafla potter’s clay, argil
طفال ṭufāl potter’s clay; argil; clay, loam
طفالة ṭafāla infancy, babyhood, early
childhood; childhood, childhood stage;
initial stage, beginnings, dawn, early
period
طفولة tufūla infancy, babyhood, early
childhood; childhood, childhood stage;
children
طفولية ṭufūlīya infancy, babyhood, early
childhood; childhood, childhood stage
طفولي ṭufūlī child (adj.), baby (adj.),
children’s, of or pertaining to childhood or
infancy; infantile, childlike, childish
طفيلي ṭufailī uninvited guest, intruder,
obtruder, sponger, hanger-on, parasite,
sycophant; pl. طفيليات parasites (med.,
biol.) │ علم الطفيليات ‘ilm aṭ. parasitology
متطفل mutaṭaffil parasitic(al); parasite,
sponger, uninvited guest
طفا (طفو ) ṭafā u ( طفو ṭafw, ṭufūw) to
float, drift; to emerge, rise to the surface │
طفا به الى السطح (saṭḥ) to bring s.th. to the
surface 562
طفاءة ṭufā’a anything drifting or
floating, driftage, floatage, flotsam; halo
(around the sun or moon)
طاف ṭāfin superficial
طافية ṭāfiya floating iceberg
□ طفاية ṭaffāya see طفئ
طق ṭaqqa u (ṭaqq) to crack, pop; to clack,
smack, flap; to burst, explode
طقس II to introduce into one of the
orders of the ministry (Chr.) V to perform
a rite, follow a ritual
طقس ṭaqs weather; climate; -- (pl. طقوس
ṭuqūs) rite, ritual; religious custom; order
of the ministry, clerical rank (Chr.)
طقسي ṭaqsī liturgical; liturgist (Chr.);
الطقسيات aṭ-ṭaqsīyāt the liturgical books
(Chr.)
طقطق ṭaqṭaqa to crack, snap, rattle,
clatter, chug, pop, crash; to crackle,
(de)crepitate, rustle
طقطوقة ṭaqṭūqa crash, bang; clap, thud, crack,
pop; (pl. طقاطيق ṭaqāṭīq) ditty, gay, popular
song
طقم II to harness, bridle ( ھ a horse)
طقم ṭaqm pl. طقوم ṭuqūm, طقومة ṭuqūma,
اطقم aṭqum a number of complementary
objects or things; series; suit (of clothes);
set (of tools, and the like); harness (of a
horse); service (e.g., of china, etc.) │ طقم
الأسنان denture, set of teeth
طاقم tāqim = ṭaqm; crew (of a ship) │
طاقم الأسنان denture, set of teeth
طل ṭalla u (ṭall) to bespray, besprinkle,
bedrizzle, bedew ( ھ s.th., esp. the sky --
the earth); -- ṭalla u to emerge, rise, loom
up, come into view, appear, show IV to
look down ( على upon), tower ( على above),
command a view of s.th. ( على ), overlook,
survey ( على s.th.); to command, dominate,
overtop ( على s.th., e.g., the surrounding
area); (of a room, window, etc.) to open (
على upon, to, toward), give ( على on), face (
على toward); to look out, peek out, peep
out ( من of s.th.); to appear, show
طل ṭall pl. اطلال ṭilāl dew; fine rain,
drizzle
طلل ṭalal pl. اطلال aṭlāl, طلول ṭulūl, used
chiefly in the pl.: remains, ruins (of
houses); remains, or traces, of an
abandoned encampment
مطلول maṭlūl: دم مطلول (dam) unavenged
blood
طلب ṭalaba u (ṭalab, مطلب maṭlab) to look,
search ( ھ، ه for s.o., for s.th.); to set out ( ھ
for a place). get on one’s way ( ھ to), go to
see ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to request ( ھ s.th.),
apply ( ھ for); to seek, try to obtain, claim
من ھ) s.th. from), ask, beg ( ھ من s.o. for);
to demand, exact, require ( ھ الى of s.o.
s.th.); to want, wish ( من ھ s.th. from; الى
s.o. ان to do s.th.); to call ( الى upon s.o.),
appeal ( الى to s.o.), invite, request, entreat,
beseech ( الى s.o.); to order, demand ( ھ من
s.th. from), call ( ھ for s.th., من from), call
in ( ھ s.th., من from); to be after s.o. or s.th.
ھ، ه) ); to study III to demand back,
reclaim ( ب or ھ ه from s.o. s.th.), call for
the return or restitution of s.th. ( ب or ,(ھ
demand, claim ( ب or ھ ه from s.o. s.th.); to
demand, claim ( ب s.th.) V to require,
necessitate, make necessary or requisite (
ھ s.th.) VII pass. of I
طلب ṭalab search, quest, pursuit; -- (pl.
-āt) demand, claim, call (for), invitation
(to), solicitation, wish, desire, request,
entreaty j application, petition; order,
commission; demand (com.); study │ تحت
طلبه at s.o.’s disposal; عند الطلب and لدى
الطلب on demand, by request, if desired, on
application; O لحين الطلب li-ḥīn ṭ-ṭalab at
sight (com.); العرض والطلب (‘arḍ) supply
and demand; طلب العلم ٥٦٣ ṭ. al-‘ilm quest
of knowledge, craving for knowledge,
studiousness; طلب عدم الثقة ṭ. ‘adam at-tiqa
motion of “no confidence” (parl.)
طلبة ṭalba litany, prayer (Chr.)
طلبة ṭaliba, ṭilba desire, wish, request,
demand; application
طلبية ṭalabīya pl. -āt order, commission
(com.)
طلاب ṭallāb exacting, persistently
claiming or demanding
مطلب maṭlab search, quest, pursuit; --
(pl. .,.Jll.. m< الى dlib') demand, oall (for);
request, wish; claim; problem, issue; pl.
مطالب (claims of the government =) taxes
مطالبة muṭālaba demand; cell, appeal
(with genit. or ب for); claim (with genit. or
ب to)
طالب ṭālib pl. طلاب ṭullāb, طلبة ṭalaba
seeker, pursuer; claimer, claimant;
applicant, petitioner; candidate; student,
scholar, also طالب العلم ṭ. al-‘ilm; pupil; a
naval rank, approx.: midshipman (Eg.
1939) │ طالب ممتاز (mumtāz) a naval rank,
approx.: ensign (Eg. طلاب الحاجات ;( 1939
petitioners; طالب الزواج ṭ. az-zawāj suitor
طالبي ṭālibī student’s, student- (in
compounds), of or pertaining to studies or
students
مطلوب maṭlūb wanted (in classified
ads); due, owed (money); unknown (of a
quantity; math.); (pl. مطالب maṭālib2) wish,
desire; pl. طلب liabilities, debts; pl. مطاليب
claims
مطالب muṭālib claimer, claimant; --
muṭālab one of whom s.th. or s.o. ( ب) is
demanded, one accountable ( ب for), held
answerable ( ب for)
متطلبات mutaṭallabāt requirements
طلح ṭalaḥa u ( طلاح ṭalāḥ) to be or become bad,
evil, wioked, vicioUi. depraved
طلح ṭalḥ (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. طلوح ṭulūḥ a
variety of accacia (Acacia gummifera);
banana tree; banana
طلحية ṭalḥīya pl. طلاحى ṭalāḥīy sheet of
paper
طليحة ṭalīḥa (syr.) ream of paper
طالح ṭāliḥ bed, evil, wicked, vicious,
depraved, villainous
طلس 1 ṭalasa i (ṭals) to efface, obliterate, blot
out ( ھ s.th., esp. writing)
طلس ṭals effacement, obliteration
طلس ṭils effaced, obliterated, blotted out
(inscription); illegible
اطلس 2 aṭlas2 satin; (pl. اطالس aṭālis 2) atlas,
volume of geographical maps
طلسانة 1 ṭalasāna (eg.) coping (arch.)
طيلسان 2 ṭailasān pl. طيالسة ṭayālisa look up
alphabetically
طلسم ṭilasm, ṭilasm pl. -āt, طلاسم ṭalāsim2
talisman, a seal, or the like, inscribed with
mysterious words or characters; charm,
magical combination of words; pl. طلاسم
cryptic characters
طلع ṭala‘a u ( طلوع ṭulū‘, مطلع maṭla‘) to rise,
ascend, come up (esp. of celestial bodies);
to come into view, appear, show, become
visible; to erupt (tooth), come up, sprout,
break forth (plant); to go out, get out,
come out, emerge ( من from); to come
suddenly ( على upon s.o. or s.th.), overtake
على) s.o., s.th.); طلع عليه ب to take or bring
to s.o. s.th.; -- ṭala‘a a u ( طلوع ṭulū‘) and
ṭali‘a a to mount, ascend, climb, scale ( ھ
s.th.); to get ( ھ on top of s.th., aboard
s.th., into an automobile, on a train, etc.),
board ( ھ a train, etc.) III to read, peruse (
ھ s.th.); to study ( ھ s.th.); to look ( ھ at
s.th.), 564 inspect, view ( ھ s.th.); to
acquaint ( ھ s.o. ب with), make clear,
elucidate, explain, expound, disclose ( ب ه
to s.o. s.th.), give an insight ( ب ه to s.o.
into), let s.o. ( ه) in on s.th. ( ب); to shine ( ھ
on s.th.; of the sun) IV to erupt (tooth),
come up, sprout, break forth (plant); to
acquaint ( على ه s.o. with); to inform ( ه s.o.
من or على of or about), apprise, notify ( عن
or على ه s.o. of), let s.o. ( ه) know ( على s.th.
or about s.th.), tell ( على ه s.o. about); to
demonstrate, point out, disclose, reveal,
show ( على ه to s.o. s.th.); to give an insight
على ه) to s.o. into), let s.o. ( ه) in on s.th. (
على ) V to have an eye on s.th. ( الى ), wait,
look out ( الى for); to watch ( الى for); to
strive, be out ( الى for), be bent ( الى on); to
look ( الى at s.o.), regard ( الى s.o.); to look
attentively or closely, gaze, stare ( ب or في
at) VIII to look; to see, behold, view ( على
s.th.); to study, come to know ( على s.th.),
become acquainted ( على with), become
aware or cognizant ( على of), obtain
information ( على about), be informed ( على
of); to inspect, examine ( على s.th.), look
into s.th. ( على ); to know ( على s.th. or of
s.th.), be aware, be cognizant ( على of); to
be (well) informed ( على about), have
(inside) information ( على of), be
(thoroughly) acquainted ( على with), be
privy ( على to), be in on s.th. ( على ); to find
out, discover, detect ( على s.th.) X to seek
to discover, explore, scout, reconnoiter ( ھ
s.th.); to inquire ( ھ about s.th.); to arouse
curiosity ( ه in s.o.) │ استطلعه رأيه (ra’yahū)
to consult s.o.) ask s.o.’s advice or
opinion; استطلع خبره (kabarahū) to seek
information about s.o. or s.th.
طلع ṭal‘ (also coll.) spadix or
inflorescence of the palm tree; pollen
طلعة ṭal‘a look(s), appearance, aspect,
outward appearance, guise
طلعة ṭula‘a inquisitive, nosy, curious
طلاع ṭallā‘ striving, aspiring │ طلاع
الثنايا والأنجد (tanāyā, anjud) efficient,
energetic, vigorous; طلاع الى التعرف
(ta‘arruf) curious, eager for news
طلوع ṭulū‘ rising, going up, ascending,
ascension; rise (esp. of celestial bodies);
appearance; climbing, ascent (of a
mountain)
طليعة ṭalī‘a pl. مطالع maṭāli‘ front row,
foremost rank, vanguard, avant-garde; pl.
harbingers, precursors, presages, portents,
first indications, symptoms; beginnings │
في الطليعة in front, at the head, in the lead
مطلع maṭla‘ pl. مطالع maṭāli‘ rise, time
of rising (of celestial bodies); point of
ascent; starting point, point, of departure;
break (e.g., of day), dawn (e.g., of an era);
onset, outset, start, beginning;
introduction, preface, proem; opening
verses (of a poem); prelude; lookout;
ladder, steps, stairs
مطالعة muṭāla‘a reading, perusal, study;
(pl. -āt) (official) announcement │ قاعة
المطالعة reading room, study hall
تطلع taṭallu‘ striving, aspiration,
endeavor, aim; inquisitiveness, curiosity
اطلاع iṭṭilā‘ pl. -āt study, examination,
inspection; perusal; information,
intelligence, knowledge; notice,
cognizance; acquaintance, conversance,
familiarity
استطلاع istiṭlā‘ study, research,
investigation, probing; scouting,
reconnoitering, reconnaissance;
exploration; suspense (in anticipation of
s.th.) │ حب الاستطلاع ḥubb al-ist.
inquisitiveness, curiosity;
حبا في الاستطلاع (ḥubban) out of
curiosity; طائرة الاستطلاع reconnaissance
plane
استطلاعي istiṭlā‘ī research-, study- (in
compounds), explorational, exploratory,
fact-finding; scout-, reconnaissance- (in
compounds) 565
طالع ṭāli‘ pl. طوالع ṭawāli‘2 rising,
ascending (esp. a celestial body); star of
destiny; ascendant, nativity │ حسن الطالع
ḥusn aṭ-ṭ. good fortune, lucky star, good
luck; لحسن طالعي luckily for me,
fortunately; سيء الطالع sayyi’ aṭ-ṭ. illstarred,
ill-fated, unfortunate, unlucky;
hapless person; ساء طالعه (ṭāli‘uhū) he fell
on evil days, he met with ill fortune
طالعة ṭāli‘a out-set, beginning, start
مطالع muṭāli‘ reader
متطلع mutaṭalli‘ curious, eager, waiting
الى) for)
مطلع muṭṭali‘ viewer, observer;
informed ( على about, of), acquainted,
familiar ( على with), cognizant ( على of),
privy ( على to)
طلق țaluqa u ( طلاقة ṭalāqa) to he
cheerful, jovial, happy (face,
countenance); -- ṭalaqāt u, ṭaluqat u ( طلاق
ṭalāq) to be divorced, get a. divorce (said
of a woman); -- pass ṭuliqat ( طلق ṭalq) to
be in labor II to set loose, release, set free,
let go ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to leave, forsake (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to repudiate, divorce ( زوجته
zaujatahū one’s wife); to grant a divorce
decree ( على against a woman; said of the
judge) │ طلقت نفسھا (nafsahā) she
dissolved her marriage, got a divorce; طلقت
عليه (ṭulliqat) she was granted a divorce
from him (by judicial decree) IV to undo,
loose, disengage ( ھ s.th.); to free, set free
ھ، ه) s.o., s.th., also chem.), release, set at
liberty, let go, let off, set loose ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to send out, dispatch ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to discharge ( ھ a firearm), fire ( ھ
s.th., على at), shoot ( على at); to utter, emit (
ھ a sound); to let burst forth ( ھ laughter);
to repudiate, divorce ( زوجته zaujatahu
one’s wife); to generalize ( ھ s.th.); to
apply ( ھ s.th., e.g., an expression, a
designation, على to) │ ... اطلق عليه اسم
(isma) to name or call s.th. ..., designate
s.th. as ...; يطلق على (yuṭlaqu) it has
(absolute) validity for ..., it applies to ...;
اطلق الحبل على الغارب (ḥabla) to give free
rein, impose no restraints, let things take
their course; اطلق حربا من عقالھا (ḥarban) to
unleash a war; اطلق الدواء بطنه (dawā’u
baṭnahū) the medicine loosened his
bowels; اطلق الرصاص على (raṣāṣa) to fire,
shoot at; اطلق رجليه الى الريح (rijlaihi, rīḥ) to
run away head over heels, to beat it; اطلق
ساقيه للريح (sāqaihī) to run away head over
heels, dash off like the wind, to bolt; اطلق
الارادة to give a free hand ( ل to s.o. في in
s.th. or to do s.th.); اطلق سبيله to release
s.o., set s.o. free, let s.o. go; اطلق السبيل
لعبرته (li-‘abratihī) to let one’s tears flow
freely; اطلق سراحه (sarāḥahū) to set s.o. at
liberty, free s.o., release s.o. (from jail or
custody); اطلق العنان له to give free rein to
s.o. or s.th., give vent to s.th.; اطلق لحيته
(liḥyatahū) to let one’s beard grow; اطلق
لسانه فيه اطلاقا شنيعا to indulge in defamatory
remarks about s.o., backbite s.o.; اطلق
السنتھم ب (alsinatahum) to incite s.o., e.g., a
crowd, the mob (to boisterous
demonstrations, emotional outbursts, and
the like); اطلق النفس على سجيتھا (nafsa,
sajīyatihā) he gave free rein to his
instincts; اطلق النار على to open fire on, fire
or shoot at; اطلق النار فى to set fire to, set
s.th. on fire; اطلق يده ب (yadahū) to be
openhanded with, bestow s.th. lavishly;
اطلق يده في (ل ) to give s.o. a free hand (in,
to do s.th.), give s.o. unlimited authority
for; اطلقوا ايديھم في البلاد (aidiyahum) they
did as they pleased
with the country, they dealt high,
handedly with the country V to brightenbeam,
be radiant (with joy) │ تطلق وجھھا
بابتسامة (wajhuhū bi-btisāma) her face
broke into a radiant smile VII to be free,
be loose, be set free (also chem.); to be
emitted, emanate; to race along, sweep
along, dash along; to hurry, rush ( الى to);
to be hurled off, be flung away; 566 to be
discharged, be fired (firearm); to explode,
go off; to burst forth, burst out, ring out
(shouts, voices); to take off, start off,
decamp, depart ( من from); to start rolling,
move off, pull out (train, vehicle); to go
on, proceed on one’s way, to go away,
leave; to go by, pass, elapse, (hours,
years); to brighten, beam (face); with :ب
to utter s.th. (tongue); with foll. imperf.: to
set out to do s.th., begin or start with s.th.
│ انطلق يجري (yajrī) he set out in a hurry;
انطلق مسرعا (musri‘an) he went away
quickly, rushed away, dashed off; انطلق
لسانه (lisānuhū) to utter words against;
انطلق وجھه (wajhuhū) his face brightened,
became cheerful X استطلق بطنه (baṭnuhu)
he had a bowel movement
طلق ṭalq talc (min.); labor pains, travail;
free, open, unconfined, unrestrained,
unimpeded, uninhibited; free ( من from),
rid ( من of) │ طلق المحيا ṭalq (ṭilq, ṭulq) almuḥayyā
with a happy, cheerful face,
bright-faced; طلق الوجه ṭalq (ṭilq, ṭulq) alwajh
do.; طلق اللسان eloquent; في الھواء الطلق
(hawā’) outdoors, in the open, under the
open sky; طلق اليدين ṭ. al-yadain
openhanded, liberal, generous
طلق ṭilq permissible, admissible
طلق ṭalaq pl. اطلاق aṭlāq run, race, foot
race; (pl. -āt, اطلاق aṭlāq) shot (with a
firearm) │ سريع الطلق rapid-fire (rifle, gun)
لسان طلق lisān ṭaliq a facile, fluent
tongue
طلقة ṭalqa pl. ṭalaqāt divorce │ طلقة
بالثلاثة (talāta) definite divorce
طلقة ṭalaqa pl. -āt shot │ طلقة نارية do
طلاق ṭalāq divorce, talak │ طلاق بالثلاثة
(talāta) definite divorce; طلاق رجعي (raj‘ī)
revocable (not definite) divorce; كتاب
الطلاق bill of divorce; حلف بالطلاق to swear
by all that’s holy
طليق ṭalīq pl. طلقاء ṭulaqā’2 freed,
released, set free, free; freedman; الطلقاء
name of those Meccans who remained
heathen until the surrender of Mecca
طلاقة ṭalāqa ease, relaxedness;
unrestraint; cheerfulness │ طلاقة اللسان
fluency, eloquence; طلاقة الوجه ṭ. al-wajh
cheerfulness of the face, gaiety
طليقة ṭalīqa repudiated or divorced
woman, divorcee
طلوقة ṭalūqa pl. طلائق ṭalā’iq2 stallion
اطلاق iṭlāq freeing, liberation; setting
loose, releasing, release; dispatch(ing);
application ( على to); generalization; اطلاقا
iṭlāqan absolutely │ على الإطلاق absolutely,
unrestrictedly, without exception, in any
respect, under any circumstances; اطلاق
الرصاص على (i. ar-raṣāṣ) the firing at s.th.,
the shooting of s.o.; اطلاق السراح i. assarāḥ
release (of s.o.); (اطلاق النار (النيران
opening of fire, shelling, gunning,
cannonade
انطلاق intilāq outburst, outbreak,
eruption, explosion, release (e.g., of
forces, of energies); unrestraint, liberty │
نقطة الانطلاق nuqṭat al-inṭ. starting point,
point of departure
طالق tāliq (of a woman) repudiated,
divorced │ ھي طالق ثلاثا (talātan) she is
irrevocably divorced
مطلق muṭlaq free; unlimited,
unrestricted, absolute; general; مطلقا
muṭlaqan absolutely, unrestrictedly,
without exception, in any respect, under
any circumstances │ الدول ذات الحكم المطلق
(duwal dāt al-ḥukm) the authoritarian
states; مطلق السراح m. as-sarāḥ free, at
large, at liberty
متطلق mutaṭalliq cheerful, jovial, happy
(face)
مطلمة miṭlama rolling pin
طلمبة ṭulumba pl. -āt pump 567
طلمس ṭalmasa to frown, scowl, glower, lower
طلو) and طلو) طلى ṭalā i (ṭaly) to paint, daub ( ب
ھ s.th. with); to coat, overlay, plate ( ب ھs.
th. with) │ طل ھ بالذھب (dahab) to gild
s.th.; طلى ھ بالكھرباء (kahrabā’) to
galvanize, electroplate s.th.; طلى ھ بالميناه
(mīnā’) to enamel s.th. VII لم تنطل عليه ھذه
الحيلة (ḥīla) he wouldn’t be deceived by
this ruse, this trick couldn’t fool him
طلاء ṭilā’ coating, overlaying, plating;
coat, covering (e.g., of sugar); (coat of)
paint; make-up, face paint │ الطلاء بالكھرباء
(kahrabā’) galvanization, electroplating
طلى ṭalīy pleasant, becoming, nice,
pretty
طلاوة ṭalāwa beauty, gracefulness,
grace, elegance
الطليان aṭ-ṭulyān the Italians
طليطلة ṭulaiṭila2 Toledo (town in Spain)
طم ṭamma u (ṭamm, طموم ṭumūm) to overflow,
flood, inundate, deluge, engulf ( ھ s.th.)
VII pass. of I
طم ṭamm large quantity, huge amount;
sea │ الطم والرم (rimm) tremendous riches
طامة ṭāmma pl. -āt (overwhelming)
calamity, disaster
طماطة ṭumāṭa tomato
طماطم ṭamāṭim2 (coll.; n. un. ة) tomatoes
طمأن ṭam’ana and طأمن ṭa’mana to calm, quiet,
pacify, appease, assuage, soothe ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), set s.o.’s mind at rest; to fill s.o. ( (ه
with confidence ( الى in), reassure ( الى ه s.o.
of or with regard to) II تطأمن taṭa’mana =
طمن VI; IV اطمأن iṭma’anna to remain
quietly ( في in a place); to come to rest; to
be or become still, quiet, calm, tranquil, at
ease, composed, or reassured, feel
assured, confident, or secure; to be sure,
be certain ( من or الى of s.th.); to have
confidence, to trust ( الى in), rely, depend (
الى on, upon); to make sure ( على of s.th.)
reassure o.s. ( على of or with regard to); to
find reassurance ( الى in), derive confidence
الى) from)
طمأنينة ṭuma’nīna calm, repose, serenity,
peace, peacefulness, tranquility;
reassurance, peace of mind, composure,
calmness, equanimity; trust, confidence
اطمئنان iṭmi’nān calm, repose, serenity,
peace, peacefulness, tranquility;
reassurance, peace of mind, composure,
calmness, equanimity; trust, confidence
مطمئن muṭma’inn (of land) low, lowlying;
calm, quiet, at ease, composed,
(re)assured, tranquil, serene, peaceable,
peaceful, safe, secure; sure, certain;
trusting, confident, of good hope
طمث ṭamata u and ṭamita a (ṭamt) to
menstruate; -- ṭamata u i (ṭamt) to
deflower ( ھا a girl)
طمث ṭamt menstruation; menses,
menstrual discharge
طمح ṭamaḥa a ( طموح ṭumūḥ) to turn, be
directed ( الى to. toward; of the eye, of
glances); to aspire ( الى to, after), be bent (
الى on), strive, crave, long, yearn ( الى for),
covet ( الى s.th.); to take away, remove ( ب
s.th.)
طموح ṭumūḥ striving, endeavor,
aspiration, desire, craving, coveting,
longing, yearning; ambition; high
aspirations, loftiness of purpose
طموح ṭamūḥ high-aiming, highaspiring,
ambitious; craving, covetous,
desirous, avid, eager
طماح ṭammāḥ high-aiming, highaspiring,
ambitious; craving, covetous,
desirous, avid, eager
مطمح maṭmaḥ pl. مطامح maṭāmiḥ object
of one’s longing or striving, (aspired)
goal, aim, ambition, burning desire 568
طامح ṭāmiḥ high-aiming, high-aspiring;
longing, yearning, craving, covetous, avid,
eager
طمر 1 ṭamara u i (ṭamr) to bury, inter, cover
with earth ( ھ s.th., esp. a corpse); ṭamara
i to cover up ( ھ a thing), fill up ( ھ a well)
طمر ṭimr pl. اطمار aṭmār old, tattered
garment, fags, tatters
طمر ṭimirr fiery steed, race horse
مطمر miṭmar plumb line
مطمور maṭmūr subterranean,
underground │ O علم المطمورات ‘ilm almaṭmūrāt
paleontology
مطمورة maṭmūra pl. مطامير maṭāmīr2
subterranean storehouse for grain,
underground granary, mattamore
طمر 2 II (eg.) to curry(comb), rub down ( ھ a
horse)
طمر ṭumār (eg.) currycomb
طومار 3 ṭūmār pl. طوامر ṭawāmir2 look up
alphabetically
طمس ṭamasa u i (ṭams, طموس ṭumūs) to be
effaced, be obliterated, be erased, be
wiped out, be blotted out, be destroyed, be
eradicated; to lose animation, become
lusterless (eye, glance); -- ṭamasa i (ṭams)
to efface, obliterate, erase, expunge, blot
out, wipe out, destroy, eradicate ( على or ھ
s.th.) VII to be effaced, be obliterated, be
wiped out, be blotted out, become extinct
طمس ṭams effacement, obliteration
انطماس inṭimās incomprehencibleness,
abstruseness
طامس ṭāmis extinct, dead; blurred,
indistinct; incomprehensible, abstruse,
recondite, obscure
طماطة ṭumāṭa tomato
طماطم ṭamāṭim2 (coll.; n. un. ة) tomatoes
طمطماني ṭumṭumānī barbarous, barbaric,
uneducated (esp. speech, pronunciation)
طمع ṭami‘a a (ṭama‘) to covet, desire ( ب or في
s.th.), wish, crave, strive ( ب or في for),
aspire ( ب or في to, after); to expect ( ب
s.th., من from); to hope ( في for); to be
ambitious; -- ṭamu‘a u ( طماعة ṭamā‘a) to
be covetous, avid, greedy, avaricious II to
make ( ه s.o.) desirous ( في of), fill ( ه s.o.)
with greed ( في for); to allure, tempt, entice
ه) s.o.); to give ( ه s.o.) hope ( في of), hold
out hopes ( ه to s.o., في of s.th.), embolden (
ه s.o.), encourage ( في ه s.o. to do s.th.) IV =
II
طمع ṭama‘ pl. اطماع aṭmā‘ greed,
greediness, avidity, covetousness;
ambitious desire, ambition; object of
desire
طماع ṭammā‘ avid, greedy, covetous,
desirous; avaricious, grasping
طماعية ṭamā‘īya avidity, greed;
cupidity, avarice
مطمع maṭma‘ pl. مطامع maṭāmi‘ coveted
object; covetousness, craving, desire;
hope, expectation; pl. ambitious designs,
ambitions, schemes, aspirations, desires
مطمعة maṭma‘a lure, enticement,
temptation
مطماع miṭmā‘ filled with greed;
obsessed by ambition, overambitious
طمن II to quiet, calm, appease, pacify, allay,
assuage, soothe ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); see also
طأمن ṭa’'mana under طمأن VI to be low; to
become low, sink, subside; to calm down,
be or become quiet, calm, still, to abate; to
be bent over, to stoop
طمان ṭamān calm, quiet, repose, peace,
peacefulness, serenity, tranquility;
reassurance, ease, calmness, peace of
mind, composure, equanimity; trust,
confidence 569
تطمين taṭmīn appeasement,
mollification, calming, assuaging,
soothing
متطامن mutaṭāmin low
طمو) and طمي) طما ṭamā u ( طمو ṭumūw), طمى
ṭamā i (ṭamy) to flow over
طمي ṭamy (eg., syr.) alluvial mud, silt,
alluvium
طن 1 ṭunn pl. اطنان aṭnān ton │ طن مسجل
(musajjal) register ton
طن 2 ṭanna i ( طنين ṭanīn) to ring, sound, peal,
jingle, tinkle (bell); to hum, buzz, drone
(insect); to ring (ears) II = I
طنين ṭanīn ring(ing), peal, jingle, tinkle,
tinkling (of a bell); buzz(ing), hum(ming),
drone (of an insect); ringing (of the ears)
طنان ṭannān ringing, sounding, pealing,
jingling, tinkling; resounding,
reverberating, echoing; humming,
buzzing, droning; whistle, buzzer (of a
kettle); famous, renowned, celebrated
طنب II to remain, abide, stay to live, settle
down ( ب in, at a place) IV to be excessive
في) in), overdo, exaggerate ( في s.th.); to
brag
طنب ṭunub pl. اطناب aṭnāb tent rope;
sinew, tendon │ شد اطنابه (šadda) to stay,
sojourn, reside; ضرب اطنابه على to settle
down, take up permanent residence in a
place; ضرب اطنابه في to take root, prevail
(at a place)
اطناب iṭnāb exaggeration; fussiness,
circumstantiality, prolixity, lengthiness,
verbosity
طنبور ṭunbūr pl. طنابير ṭanābīr2 a longnecked,
stringed instrument resembling
the mandolin; a device used to raise water
for irrigation, Archimedean screw; drum,
cylinder (techn.)
طنبوري ṭunbūrī player of the طنبور
طنبوشة ṭanbūša pl. -āt paddle box (of a paddle
steamer)
طنجة ṭanja2 Tangier
طنجي ṭanjī from Tangier; native of
Tangier, Tangerine
طنجرة ṭanjara pl. طناجر ṭanājir2 (copper)
casserole, saucepan, skillet
طنطا ṭanṭā Tanta (city in N Egypt)
طنطن ṭanṭana to ring, sound, peal, jingle, tinkle
(bell); to hum, buzz, drone (insect); to
clang, boom, roar, rumble; to blare out ( ب
s.th.)
طنطنة ṭanṭana ring(ing), peal, jingle,
tinkle, tinkling (of a bell); hum(ming),
buzz(ing), drone (of an insect); clangor,
boom, roar
طنف ṭunuf (ṭanaf, ṭunf) pl. طنوف ṭunūf, اطناف
aṭnāf top, summit, peak (of a mountain);
ledge, molding, eaves
طنفسة ṭinfisa, ṭanfasa, ṭunfusa pl. طنافس ṭanāfis2
velvet-like carpet, mockado carpet
طه a group of letters opening the 20th sura;
T􀀀āhā a Muslim masculine proper name
طھر ṭahara, ṭahura u (ṭuhr, طھارة ṭahāra) to be
clean, pure; -- ṭaharat, ṭahurat (of a
woman) to be clean (as opposed to
menstruating) II to clean, cleanse, deterge,
expurgate, purge, purify, chasten ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to disinfect, sterilize ( ھ s.th.);
to dredge ( ھ e.g., a canal); to circumcise ( ه
s.o.) III to circumcise ( ه s.o.) V to clean
o.s., cleanse o.s., perform an ablution
طھر ṭuhr cleanness, purity; chastity
طھور ṭahūr circumcision; cleansing,
purging, detergent; clean, pure
طھارة ṭahāra cleanness, cleanliness,
purity; cultic purity (Isl. Law); chastity;
holiness, sanctity, saintliness; 570
circumcision │ طھارة الذيل ṭ. ad-dail
innocence; probity, uprightness, integrity,
honesty
مطھر maṭhar purgatory (Chr.)
مطھرة maṭhara pl. مطاھر maṭāhir2 washroom,
lavatory, toilet
طھر taṭhīr cleaning, cleansing, purging,
expurgation, purification; disinfection;
purgation, use of aperients; dredging;
circumcision
تطھيري taṭhīrī cleaning, cleansing,
detergent
طاھر ṭāhir pl. اطھار aṭhār clean, pure;
chaste, modest, virtuous │ طاھر الذمة ṭ. addimma
upright, righteous, honest; طاھر
الذيل ṭ. ad-dail innocent, pure,
unblemished, blameless, upright,
righteous, honest
مطھر muṭahhir pl. -āt a detergent (esp.
anticeptic); an anticeptic, a disinfectant
مطھر muṭahhar pure, immaculate
طھران ṭihrān2 Teheran (capital of Iran)
طھق V to despise, detect, abhor, loathe ( من
s.th.)
مطھم muṭahham of perfect beauty (esp. as an
epithet of noble horses)
طھو ) and طھي) طھا ṭahā u and يطھى yaṭhā ( طھو
ṭahw, طھي ṭuhīy, ṭahy, طھاية ṭahāya) to
cook ( ھ s.th.); to stew ( ھ s.th.); to braise (
ھ s.th.); to broil, fry ( ھ s.th.); to bake ( ھ
s.th.)
طھى ṭuhan cooked dish, cooked meal
طھاية ṭihāya cook’s trade
مطھى maṭhan kitchen
طاه ṭāhin pl. طھاة ṭuhāh cook
طواشي ṭawāšī pl. طواشية ṭawāšiya eunuch
طواية ṭawwāya frying pan
طابة 1 ṭāba look up alphabetically
طوب 2 II to beatify ( ه s.o.; Chr.)
طوبى ṭūbā blessedness, beatitude;
Beatitude (title of honor of a patriarch;
Chr.)
تطويب taṭwīb beatification (Chr.)
طوب 3 ṭub (coll.; n. un. ة) brick(s) │ طوب احمر
(aḥmar) baked brick(s); طوب مفرغ
(mufarrag) hollow tile(s), air brick(s);
طوب ني (nayy) unburned, sun-dried
briek(s)
طواب ṭawwāb brick burner, brickmaker,
tile-maker
طوبجي ṭōbjī, (eg.) ṭobgī pl. -īya artillerist,
artilleryman
طوبجية ṭōbjīya artillery
طوبه ṭūba the fifth month of the Coptic
calendar
طاح (طوح ) ṭāḥa u (ṭauḥ) to perish, die; to loss
one’s way, go astray, stray, wander about;
to fall; to throw, cast, fling, hurl, toss,
carry away, sweep away ( ب s.o., s.th.) II
to cause to or let perish ( ه or ب s.o.); to
endanger, expose to peril ( ه or ب s.o.); to
throwaway, toss away, hurl away ( ب
s.th.); to throw, cast, hurl, toss, fling ( الى ب
s.o. into); to carry away, transport ( الى ب
s.o. to, into); to move, induce, tempt ( ه
s.o., الى to s.th., to do s.th.) │ طرحت به
الطوائح fate dealt him severe blows IV to
drop, discard ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), shed ( ھ
s.th.); to let s.th. ( ب) be swept away; to
carry away, tear away, rip away ( ب s.th.);
to chop off ( ھ s.th., esp. the head) V to
fall, drop, be thrown, be tossed; to stray,
wander about; to sway, reel, stagger
طوائح ṭawā’iḥ2 adversities, blows of fate
مطوحة muṭawwiḥa pl. -āt adventure
طود VII to rise in the air, soar up
طود ṭaud pl. اطواد aṭwād (high,
towering) mountain 571
منطاد munṭād pl. مناطيد manāṭīd2 balloon,
blimp; zeppelin, dirigible │ منطاد مقيد
(muqayyad) captive balloon, kite balloon;
O منطاد ھوائي ثابت (hawā’ī) barrage balloon
طور 1 II to develop, further, advance, promote (
ھ s.th.) V to develop, evolve; to change;
to race (motor)
طور ṭaur pl. اطوار aṭwār one time (= Fr.
fois; state, condition; limit, bound; stage,
degree; phase (also phys., esp. el.) │ طورا
بعد طور time and again, again and again;
طورا -- طورا or حينا -- طورا sometimes --
sometimes, at times – at times; خرج عن
طوره to lose one’s self-control, become
upset; اخرجه عن طوره (akrajahū) to upset,
discompose, disconcert s.o.; غريب الأطوار
of odd behavior, eccentric
طور ṭūr pl. اطوار aṭwār mountain │ طور
سيناء ṭ. sīnā’ and طور سينا ṭ. sīnā Mount
Sinai
طوري ṭūrī wild
طوار ṭawār sidewalk
طوراني ṭūrānī wild; Turanian
تطور taṭawwur pl. -āt development;
evolution; pl. -āt stages of development,
evolutionary phases, developments │ قابل
التطور developable, capable of
development or evolution
تطوري taṭawwurī evolutional,
evolutionary │ نظرية تطورية (naẓarīya)
theory of evolution, evolutionism
طار 2 ṭār (= اطار iṭār), طارة ṭāra hoop, ring; tire;
frame; wheel; tambourine
اطار 3 iṭār see اطر
طورية 4 ṭūrīya look up alphabetically
طوربيد ṭurbīd pl. -āt, طرابيد ṭarābīd2 torpedo
طورية ṭūrīya (eg.) pl. □ طواري ṭawārī hoe,
mattock
طوزلق (Turk. tozluk) gaiter(s), legging(s)
طوس II to adorn, decorate, deck out ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.)
طاس ṭās pl. -āt round, shallow drinking
cup made of metal, drinking vessel; finger
bowl
طاس ṭāsa pl. -āt round, shallow
drinking cup made of metal, drinking
vessel │ طاسة التحمير frying pan; O طاسة
التصادم ṭ. at-taṣādum buffer (railroad)
طاووس ṭāwūs pl. طواويس ṭawāwīs2
peacock
مطوس muṭawwas ornate, ostentatiously
made-up
طوش II to castrate, emasculate ( ه s.o.)
طواشي ṭawāšī pl. طواشية ṭawāšiya
eunuch
طاع (طوع ) ṭā‘a u (ṭau‘) to obey ( ل or ه
s.o.), be obedient ( ل or ه to s.o.) II to
render obedient, bring into subjection,
subdue, subject, subjugate ( ه s.o.) │ طوعت
له نفسه (nafsuhū) (lit.: his soul permitted
him, made it easy or feasible for him, i.e.)
he allowed himself to do s.th. ( ھ ), he had
no qualms about doing s.th. ( ھ ), he did
not hesitate to do s.th. ( ھ ) III to comply
with or accede to s.o.’s ( ھ ) wishes ( على or
في in, with regard to), yield, submit, be
obedient ( ه to s.o., على or في in), obey ( ه
s.o., على or في in); to be at s.o.’s ( (ه
command (of a faculty, skill, etc.); to
consent, assent ( في to s.th.) IV to obey,
follow ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), be obedient,
submit, yield ( ھ ه to s.o., to s.th.), comply
ھ، ه) with s.o.’s wishes, with s.th.), accede
ھ، ه) to s.o.’s wishes, to s.th.) V to do
voluntarily ( ل or ب or ھ s.th.), volunteer (
ل or ب or ھ for, in, to do s.th.); to enlist,
volunteer (mil.) │ تطوع خيرا (kairan) to
perform a good deed voluntarily VII to
obey, follow ( ل s.o., s.th.), be obedient,
submit, yield, accede ( ل to), comply ( ل
with) X to be able ( ھ to do s.th.), be in a
572 position to do, to get, to carry out, or
to take upon o.s. ( ھ s.th.), be capable ( ھ
of s.th., ان of doing s.th.)
طوع ṭau‘ obedience; voluntariness,
spontaneity (in connection with a legally
relevant action, esp. a delict; Isl. Law);
(for m. and f.) obedient, compliant,
submissive; طوعا ṭau‘an voluntarily, of
one’s own free will, of one’s own accord
│ طوعا او كرھا (karhan) willingly or
unwillingly, willy-nilly, whether I (you,
etc.) will it or not; طوع العنان tractable,
docile, amenable; طوع يده ṭau‘a yadihī
under s.o.’s thumb, at s.o.’s beck and call;
ھو طوع ايدينا (ṭau‘a aidīnā) he is at our beck
and call, he is in our power; طوع
امرك /ṭau‘a amrika at your disposal
طوعيا ṭau‘īyan voluntarily, of one’s
own free will, of one’s own accord
طيع (ṭayyi‘) obedient, compliant,
submissive
طاعة ṭā‘a obedience, compliance,
submissiveness; (pl. -āt) pious deed (Isl.
Law) │ بيت الطاعة bait aṭ-ṭ. the husband’s
house to which a woman, in case of
unlawful desertion, must return (Isl. Law);
السمع والطاعة as-sam‘ū wa-ṭ-ṭā‘atu I hear
and obey! at your service! Very well! سمعا
وطاعة sam‘an wa-ṭā‘atan do.
طواعية ṭawā‘īya obedience │ عن طواعية
voluntarily, of one’s own free will, of
one’s own accord
مطواع miṭwā‘ obedient, compliant
تطويع taṭwī‘ diploma of the Great
Mosque of Tunis
اطاعة iṭā‘a obedience
تطوع taṭawwu‘ voluntariness;
volunteering; voluntary service ( في in a
branch of the armed forces); service as an
unsalaried trainee, voluntary traineeship
استطاعة istiṭā‘a ability, capability,
faculty; possibility
طائع ṭā’i‘ obedient, compliant,
submissive │ طائعا او كارھا willingly or
unwillingly, whether I (you, etc.) will it or
not
مطوع muṭawwa‘ pl. -ūn holder of the
diploma issued by the Great Mosque of
Tunis; -- muṭṭawwi‘ volunteer (also mil.);
unsalaried trainee
مطاوع muṭāwi‘ obedient, compliant,
submissive; yielding, pliable, pliant;
المطاوع the reflexive, frequently = the
passive (gram.) │ حديد مطاوع mild steel
مطيع muṭī‘ obedient, compliant
متطوع mutaṭawwi‘ pl. ة volunteer (also
mil.); unsalaried trainee
مستطاع mustaṭā‘ possible, feasible │ قدر
المستطاع qadra l-m. as far as possible, as
far as it is feasible; بقدر (على قدر) المستطاع
do.
طاف (طوف ) ṭāfa u (ṭauf, طواف ṭawāf,
طوفان ṭawafān) to go about, walk about,
ride about, travel about, move about, rove
about, wander about, run around ( ھ in
s.th.), tour ( ھ s.th.); to go, walk, ride, run (
حول، ب around s.th.), circumambulate (
حول، ب s.th.); to make the rounds, walk
around ( على among people); to circle,
circuit, compass ( حول، ب s.th.); to roam,
rove, range ( ب s.th.); to show around,
guide ( ب s.o.); to familiarize o.s., acquaint
o.s. (y with); to become acquainted ( ب
with s.o., with s.th.), come to know ( ب
s.o., s.th.); - (ṭauf) to appear to s.o. ( ب) in
his sleep; to come ( على upon s.o.), afflict (
على s.o.); to overflow, leave its banks
(river); to swim, float, drift II to go about,
walk about, stroll about, ride about, travel
about ( في in), tour ( في s.th.); to go or walk
around s.th. ( ب), circle, circumambulate (
ب s.th.); to show around, guide ( ب or ه
s.o.); to let ( ب s.th.) roam ( ھ s.th.), let ( ب
s.th.) make the rounds ب) 573 in), let
one’s eyes ( ب) wander; to perform the
circumambulation of the Kaaba (ṭawāf) IV
to surround, encompass, encircle,
circumscribe ( ب s.th.) V to move about,
rove, roam, wander, walk about
طوف ṭauf round, circuit, beat; low wall,
enclosure; (pl. اطواف aṭwāf) patrol; raft
made of inflated waterskins tied together
طواف ṭawāf round, circuit, beat; round
trip, round-trip excursion; roundtrip flight;
circumambulation of the Kaaba (as part of
the Islamic pilgrimage ceremonies)
طواف ṭawwāf ambulant, itinerant,
migrant, roving, wandering; going the
rounds, making the circuit, walking the
beat; (pl. ة) mounted rural mail carrier
(Eg.) │ محطة الطوافة maḥaṭṭat aṭ-ṭ. (Eg.)
circuit stations which have the mail
delivered by mounted rural mail carriers
طوافة ṭawwāfa pl. -āt patrol boat,
coastal patrol vessel (employed by the
Egyptian Coast Guard)
طوفان ṭūfān flood, inundation, deluge
مطاف maṭāf riding about, traveling,
touring; round trip │ آل (انتھى) به المطاف الى
to end with, wind up with, arrive
eventually at; خاتمة المطاف the end of the
matter, the final issue, the upshot of it
تطواف taṭwāf traveling, touring,
wandering, itineration, roving life
طائف ṭā’if ambulant, itinerant, migrant,
roving, wandering; one going the rounds
or making the circuit or walking the beat;
one performing the ṭawāf │ طاف به طائف he
had a sudden impulse or urge; طاف عليه
طائف من القدر القاسي (qadar) tragedy befell
him, he met with a harsh fate
الطائف aṭ-ṭā’if Taif (town in S Hejaz)
طائفة ṭā’ifa pl. طوائف ṭawā’if2 part,
portion; number; troop, band, group;
swarm, drove, bevy, covey; people; class;
sect, denomination; confession,
communion; party, faction; religious
minority │ O الطائفة الاحساسية (iḥsāsīya) the
impressionists; ملوك الطوائف princelings,
petty kings
طائفي ṭā’ifī factional, sectarian,
denominational, confessionalism
طائفية ṭā’ifīya sectarianism,
denominationalism; confessionalism
مطوف muṭawwif pl. -ūn pilgrims’ guide
in Mecca
طاق (طوق ) ṭāqa u (ṭauq) to be able, be in a
position ( ھ to do s.th.), be capable ( ھ of,
of doing s.th.); to be able to bear or stand (
ھ s.th.), bear, stand, sustain, endure ( ھ
s.th.) II to put a collar or necklace ( طوقا
ṭauqan) around s.o.’s neck; to hoop ( ھ
s.th., e.g., a barrel); to surround, clasp,
enwrap, ring, encompass ( ب ھ، ه s.o., s.th.
with), encircle ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), form or
throw a circle or cordon ( ھ، ه around s.o.,
around s.th.), enclose ( ھ s.th.); to play ( ھ
about, e.g., a smile about the lips), flit ( ھ
across s.th.) │ طوقه بذراعيه (bi-dirā‘aihī) to
take s.o. in one’s arms, embrace, hug,
clasp s.o.; طوق عنقه ب (‘unuqahū) to
present s.o. with, bestow upon s.o. s.th. IV
= I ( على، ھ s.th., to do s.th., of s.th. or of
doing s.th.); to master ( ھ a method) │ لم
يطق صبرا lam yuṭiq ṣabran be could not
stand or bear it, he could not control
himself; شيء لا يطاق (yuṭāqu) s.th.
unbearable, s.th. intolerable
طوق ṭauq ability, faculty, power,
strength, potency, capability, aptitude,
capacity; endurance; (pl. اطواق aṭwāq)
necklace; neckband, ruff, collar; hoop,
circle │ طوق للنجاة (najāh) life 574 buoy;
اخرجه الحزن عن طوقه (akrajahū l-ḥuznu)
grief drove him out of his mind
طوقي ṭauqī collar-like, loop-shaped,
ring-shaped, annular
طاق ṭāq pl. –āt, طيقان ṭīqān arch (arch.);
(pl. -āt) stratum, layer
طاقة ṭāqa pl. -āt window
طاقة ṭāqa pl. -āt ability, faculty,
capability, aptitude, capacity, power,
strength, potency; energy (phys., etc.);
capacity (of a technical apparatus); bunch,
bouquet (of flowers) │ في الطاقة (with foll.
maṣdar) it is possible to ...; قدر الطاقة qadra
ṭ-ṭ. as far as possible, in the best way
possible; على قدر طاقته according to his
capability; طاقة مدخرة (muddakara)
accumulated energy; potential (phys.);
الطاقة الذرية (darrīya) atomic energy, atomic
power; طاقة انتاجية (intājīya) productive
power, productional capacity, output
capacity
طاقية look up alphabetically
تطويق taṭwīq pl. -āt encirclement,
encompassment, enclosure, surrounding,
ringing
اطاقة iṭāqa ability, faculty, aptitude,
power, capability, capacity
مطوق muṭawwaq ringdove
مطاق muṭāq bearable, endurable,
tolerable
طوكيو tōkiyō Tokyo
طال (طول 1 ) ṭāla u (ṭūl) to be or become long; to
last long; to lengthen, grow longer,
extend, be protracted, become drawn out;
to surpass, excel ( على or ه s.o.) │ طال به
الزمن حتى (zamanu) it took a long time
before he ...; يطول بي ھذا this will (would)
take me too long; طال الزمن او قصر
(zamanu, qaṣura) sooner or later, before
long II to make long or longer, lengthen,
elongate, stretch out, prolong, extend,
protract ( ھ s.th.); to be very elaborate,
very detailed, very exhaustive,
longwinded, prolix; to grant a delay or
respite ( ل to s.o.) │ طول باله عليه (bālahū) to
be patient with III to keep putting off ( في ه
s.o. in or with s.th.); to vie for power,
greatness or stature, contend, compete ( ه
with s.o.), rival, emulate ( ه s.o.) IV to
make long or longer, lengthen, elongate,
stretch out, extend, prolong, protract, draw
out ( ھ or من s.th.); to take too long, find
no end │ اطال عليه to keep s.o. waiting a
long time; اطال لسانه (lisānahū) to speak in
a forward manner, be pert, saucy, insolent
in speech; اطال النظر (naẓara) he kept
staring at him; اطال الوقوف he stayed a long
time VI to become long, be lengthened, be
extended, be prolonged; to stretch up,
stretch o.s.; to stretch ( الى for), crane one'.
neck ( الى at); to attack ( على s.o.); to
become insolent, get fresh ( على with s.o.);
to be insolent enough, have the cheek ( ل
to do s.th.); to dare do s.th. ( ب), presume (
ب s.th.), pretend ( ب to s.th.); to arrogate to
o.s. ( الى a rank) │ تطاول برأسه (bi-ra’sihī) to
bear one’s head high (with pride) X to be
or become long; to be or become
overbearing, presumptuous, display an
arrogant behavior ( على toward)
طالما ṭālamā and لطالما la-ṭālamā how
often! often, frequently (with foll. verbal
clause) │ طالما ان (anna) while, as, the
more so as
طول ṭaul might, power │ صاحب الحول
والطول (ṣ. al-ḥaul) the Almighty
طول ṭūl pl. اطوال aṭwāl length; size,
height, tallness │ طول الاناة ṭ. al-anāh longsuffering,
longanimity, forbearance,
patience; طول النظر ṭ. an-naẓar
farsightedness, hyperopia; خط الطول kaṭṭ
aṭ-ṭ. geographical longitude, degree of 575
longitude, meridian; بالطول and طولا
lengthwise, longitudinally; طول ṭūla
(prep.) during, throughout, … long, e.g.,
طول ھذه المدة (mudda) during this period,
during all this time, طول النھار (nahār) all
day (long); طول ما as long as; على طول
(with foll. genit.) along, along, side of; على
طول (eg.) straight ahead; straightway,
directly; at last, finally, after all; في طول
البلاد وعرضھا (wa-‘arḍihā) throughout the
country, all over the country; انا في طولك
(eg.) have mercy on me!
طولي ṭūlī of length, linear, longitudinal
│ خط طولي (kaṭṭ) geographical longitude,
degree of longitude, meridian
طول ṭuwwal a long-legged waterfowl
طوال ṭawwāla, ṭiwala (prep.) during,
throughout; along, alongside of
طويل ṭawīl pl. طوال ṭiwāl long; large,
big, tall; high; الطويل name of a poetical
meter; طويلا ṭawīlan long (adv.), a long
time │ طويل الأجل ṭ. al-ajal longterm, longdated;
طويل الأناة ṭ. al-anāh long-suffering
forbearing, patient; طويل الباع mighty,
powerful; capable, efficient; generous,
liberal, openhanded; طويل الروح ṭ. ar-rūḥ
long-suffering, forbearing, patient; طويل
القامة tall; طويل اللسان insolent, impertinent,
pert, saucy
طوال ṭuwāl long
طوالة ṭuwāla pl. -āt stable
طيلة ṭīlata (prep.) during, throughout,
… long
طولاني ṭaulānī measured lengthwise,
longitudinal
اطول aṭwal2, f. طولى longer, larger,
bigger, taller; extremely tall, very long
تطويل taṭwīl lengthening, elongation,
stretching, extension, prolongation,
protraction; elaborateness, exhaustiveness,
prolixity, long-windedness
اطالة iṭāla lengthening, elongation,
stretching, extension, prolongation,
protraction; elaborateness, exhaustiveness,
prolixity, long-windedness
استطالة istiṭāla overbearing attitude,
haughtiness, presumptuousness, arrogance
طائل ṭā’il long; huge, immense, ample,
enormous (of funds); use, avail; might,
power, force │ طائل الصولة ṭ. aṣ-ṣaula
mighty, powerful, forceful; دون طائل and لا
طائل تحته (فيه ) (ṭā’ila) of no use, of no avail,
useless, unavailing, futile; ما فاز بطائل to
accomplish nothing, be unsuccessful, fail
طائلة ṭā’ila might, power, force;
vengeance, revenge, retribution,
retaliation │ وقع تحت طائلة القانون to be
subject to punishment by law; تحت طائلة
الموت (ṭ. il-maut) under penalty of death
مطول muṭawwal elaborate, detailed,
exhaustive, circumstantial
متطاول mutatāwil long-extended, longstretched,
long-protacted, prolonged,
lengthy
مستطيل mustaṭīl long, oblong,
elongate(d), long-stretched; protracted,
prolonged, long drawn out; a rectangle, an
oblong; a saucy, presumptuous person
طاولة 3 look up alphabetically
طولكرم Tulkarm (town in NW Jordan)
طومار ṭūmār pl. طوامير ṭawāmīr2 roll, scroll
نھر الطونة nahr aṭ-ṭūna the Danube river
طونولاطة (It. tonnellata) ṭōnolāṭa ton
طوى ṭawā i ( طي ṭayy) to fold, fold up, fold in,
fold over, fold under, roll up ( ھ s.th.); to
shut, close ( ھ a book); to keep secret,
secrete, conceal, hide ( ھ s.th.); to harbor,
hold, contain ( ھ s.th.); to swallow up,
envelop, wrap up. Enwrap ه) 576 s.o.; of
the dark of night); to settle finally, bury ( ه
the past), have done with s.th. in the past (
ھ ); to cross, traverse ( ھ s.th., esp. a
country); to cover quickly ( ھ the way, the
distance, الى to); to spend, pass ( ھ a period
of time) ; to possess o.s. take possession (
ھ of), appropriate ( ھ s.th.); pass. طوى على
ṭuwiya ‘alā (= to be folded around or over,
i.e.) to bear (within itself), harbor, contain,
involve s.th. │ طوى الأرض طيا (l-arḍa
ṭayyan) to rush through a country; .l.~ .s).
(biodlaAu) to be finished, be done, come
to an end, finish; طوى البساط بما فيه to settle
an affair once and for all, wind up an
affair; طوى جوانحه على (jawāniḥahū) to
harbor s.th., conceal s.th. in one’s heart;
طوى كشحه (كشحا) على (kašḥahū, kašḥan)
and طوى صدره على (ṣadrahū) to harbor or
look (a secret) in one’s bosom, keep s.th.
secret, secrete, conceal, hide s.th.; طوى
صفحته (ṣafḥatahū) to have done with s.th.,
be through with s.th., give up, abandon
s.th.; طوى الطريق الى to hurry or rush to;
طوى الماضى طي السجل للكاتب (l-māḍiya ṭayya
s-sijilli) to break with the past, let bygones
be bygones; -- طوي ṭawiya a ( طوى ṭawan)
to be hungry, suffer hunger, starve IV =
ṭawiya V to coil (snake) VII to be folded,
be folded up, in, over, or under, be rolled
up, be turned (over) (page, leaf), be shut
(book, etc.); to go by, pass, elapse (time);
to disappear, vanish; to be covered
(distance); to be bidden, be concealed (
تحت under), be enveloped, be wrapped (
تحت in); to contain, comprise, encompass,
comprehend, embrace, involve, include (
على s.th.); to harbor, nurse, bear ( ھ
feelings, esp. hatred, love) │ انطوى على نفسه
to withdraw within o.s., be self-centered,
be introverted
طي ṭayy concealment, biding; (pl. اطواء
aṭwā’) fold, pleat │ طيه ṭayyahū and طي ھذا
(ṭayya) herein enclosed, herewith (in a
letter); في طي الغيب (ṭ. il-gaib) secretly,
covertly; تحت (في) طي الكتمان (ṭ. il-kitmān)
under the seal of secrecy; في اطواء (with
foll. genit.) in
طية ṭayya pl. -āt fold, pleat │ حمل بين
طياته involve, comprise, contain
طية ṭīya intention, design │ ( مضى ( ذھب
لطيته he went to his destination; he left in
order to do what he had in mind; he went
his way
طوى ṭawan hunger; mat │ على الطوى on
an empty stomach, without having eaten
طوية ṭawīya pl. طوايا ṭawāyā fold, pleat;
innermost thoughts, real conviction, true
mind; intention, design; conscience │ سليم
الطوية guileless artless; في طوايا (with foll.
genit.) inside, within, in, amid
طواية ṭawāya pl. -āt frying pan
مطوى maṭwan pl. مطاو maṭāwin pocket
knife, penknife; pl. folds, pleats │ في
مطاوى (with foll. genit.) inside, within, in,
amid; في مطاويه inwardly, at heart, in his
bosom
مطواة miṭwah pocket knife, penknife
انطواء inṭiwā’ introversion (psych.) │
الانطواء على النفس (nafs) do.
انطوائي inṭiwā’ī introverted (psych.)
طاو ṭāwin starved │ طاو البطن ṭ. l-baṭn
starved, lean, emaciated
مطوي maṭwīy folded up, infolded, rolled
up, etc.; مطوي على bearing (within itself),
harboring, containing, involving s.th. │
مطوى الضلوع على harboring s.th. in one’s
bosom
منطو munṭawin: منطو على نفسه selfabsorbed,
low-spirited, depressed
طاب (طيب 1 ) ṭāba i (ṭīb, طيبة ṭība) to be good,
pleasant, agreeable; to be or become 577
delightful, delicious; to please ( ل s.o.), be
to s.o.’s ( ل) liking; to be or become ripe,
to ripen; to regain health, recover,
recuperate, convalesce │ طابت ليلتكم
(lailatukum) may your night be pleasant!
good night! طابت نفسه (nafsuhū) he was
gay, cheerful, cheery, in good spirits, he
felt happy; طاب نفسا عن (nafsanl) to give up
s.th. gladly, renounce s.th. willingly; طابت
نفسه اليه (nafsuhū) he had a liking for it, it
was to his taste II to make ( ھ s.th.) good,
pleasant, agreeable, delightful, delicious,
or sweet, to sweeten ( ھ s.th.); to scent,
perfume ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to spice, season (
ھ food), mull ( ھ wine); to sanitate,
improve ( ھ air, drinking water); to heal,
cure ( ه s.o.); to massage ( ه s.o.) │ طيب
خاطره to mollify, soothe, placate,
conciliate s.o., set s.o.’s mind at rest; طيب
لله ثراه (tarāhu) may God make his earth
light (a eulogy added after mentioning the
name of a pious deceased) III to joke, jest,
banter, make fun ( ه with s.o.) IV to make (
ھ s.th.) good, pleasant, agreeable,
delightful, delicious, or sweet, to sweeten
ھ) s.th.) V to perfume o.s. X استطاب and
استطيب istaṭyaba to find or deem ( ھ s.th.)
good, pleasant, agreeable, delightful,
delicious, sweet; to like ( ھ s.th.), be fond (
ھ of)
طيب ṭīb goodness; (pl. طيوب ṭuyūb)
scent, perfume │ طيب العرق ṭ. al-‘irq noble
birth, noble descent; جوز الطيب jauz aṭ-ṭ.
nutmeg
طيب ṭayyib good; pleasant, agreeable;
delicious; gay; well-disposed, friendly,
kindly; well, in good health │ طيب الخلق ṭ.
al-kulq good-natured, genial; طيب الريحة
sweet-smelling, fragrant, sweet-scented;
طيب العرق ṭ. a1-‘irq highborn, of noble
descent; طيب النفس ṭ. an-nafs gay, cheerful,
cheery, in high spirits
طيبات ṭayyibāt nice, pleasant things;
gustatory delights, pleasures of the table
طيبة ṭība goodness; good nature,
geniality │ عن طيبة خاطر gladly, most
willingly, with pleasure
طوبى ṭūbā blessedness, beatitude;
Beatitude (title of honor of a patriarch;
Chr.)
طياب ṭayāb, ṭiyāb (eg.) north wind
طياب ṭayyāb pl. -ūn masseur
اطيب aṭyab2 better; -- pl. اطايب aṭāyib2
the best parts (of s.th.); pleasures,
comforts, amenities; delicacies, dainties
مطايب maṭāyib2 comforts, amenities
(e.g., of life)
مطايبة muṯāyaba pl. -āt banter, joke,
jest, teasing remark
طائب ṭā’ib unobjectionable ( ل for; Isl.
Law)
مطيب muṭayyab bouquet, bunch (of
flowers)
طيبة 2 ṭība2 Thebes
طاح (طيح ) ṭaḥa i (ṭaiḥ) to perish, die II to lose (
ھ s.th.)
طار (طير ) ṭāra i ( طيران ṭayarān) to fly;
to fly away, fly off, take to the wing; to
hasten, hurry, rush, fly ( الى to); to be in a
state of commotion, be jubilant, exult,
rejoice; طار ب to snatch away, carry away,
carry off (s.o., s.th.) │ طار بخياله (bikayālihī)
to let one’s imagination wander
to; طار له صيت في الناس (ṣīt) his fame spread
among people, he became well-known;
طار طائره (ṭā’iruhū) to become angry, blow
one’s top; طار عقله (‘aqluhū) to lose one’s
mind, go crazy; طار فؤاده (روحه) شعاعا
(fu’āduhū, rūḥuhū ša‘ā‘an) his mind
became confused, he became all mixed
up; طار فرحا (faraḥan) to be beside o.s.
with joy, be overjoyed; طار بلبه (bi-lubbihī)
to drive s.o. out of his mind; طار بصوابه
(bi-ṣawābihī) to make s.o. unconscious II
to make or let fly ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.), to fly,
send up ( ھ s.th., e.g., a balloon, a kite); to
pass on 578 promptly, dispatch posthaste,
forward without delay, rush, shoot ( الى ھ
s.th. to, esp. a report, a message); to knock
out ( ھ s.th., e.g., an eye, a tooth) │ طير
رأسه (ra’sahū) to chop off s.o.’s head,
behead s.o. IV to make or let fly ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), to fly ( ھ s.th.): to blow away ( ھ
s.th.; of the wind); to make ( ھ s.th.)
disappear at once, dispel ( ھ s.th.) V to see
an evil omen ( من or ب in) VI to be
scattered, be dispersed, scatter, disperse,
spread, diffuse; to be exuded, rise
(fragrance); to fly apart, fly about, fly in
all directions (esp. sparks); to vanish,
disappear, be dispelled X to make fly,
cause to fly ( ھ s.th.); to knock ( ھ s.th.) out
of s.o.’s hand; to alarm or upset seriously (
ه s.o.), agitate, excite ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); =
VI; pass. استطير ustuṭīra to be terrified │
استطير عقله (‘aqluhū) to go out of one’s
mind (with astonishment or fright)
طير ṭair (coll. and n. un.) pl. طيور ṭuyūr,
اطيار aṭyār birds, bird; augury, omen; طيور
poultry; fowl │ طيور جارحة predatory
birds, birds of prey; علم الطيور ‘ilm aṭ-ṭuyūr
ornithology; كأن على رؤوسھم الطير (ka’anna,
ṭaira) motionless or silent with awe
طيرة ṭaira commotion, agitation (of
anger, wrath); flight; female bird
طيرة ṭīra, ṭiyāra evil omen, portent,
foreboding
طيار ṭayyār flying; evanescent, fleeting;
volatile (liquid); floating, wafting,
hovering; (pl. -ūn) flyer, aviator, pilot │
زيوت طيارة volatile oils; طيار اول (awwal) a
military rank, approx.: first lieutenant of
the Air Force (Eg. طيار ثان ;( 1939 (ṭānin)
approx.: second lieutenant of the Air
Force (Eg. 1939)
طيارة ṭayyāra pl. -āt aviatrix, woman
pilot; airplane, aircraft, kite (toy) │ طيارة
رياضية (riyāḍīya) sport plane; طيارة قذافة
(qaddāfa) bomber; طيارة مائية seaplane
طيران ṭayarān flying, flight; aviation,
aeronautics │ طيران بھلواني (bahlawānī)
stunt flying; طيران شراعي (širā‘ī) glider
flying, gliding; خطوط الطيران airlines; سلاح
الطيران air force; وزير الطيران minister of
aviation
مطار maṭār pl. -āt airfield, airport │ O
مطار عائم aircraft carrier
مطارة maṭāra airfield, airport
مطير maṭīr airfield, airport
تطير taṭayyur pessimism
طائر ṭā’ir flying; flyer, aviator, pilot;
(pl. -āt, طير ṭair) bird; omen, presage │
سكون الطائر graveness, sedateness; على الطائر
الميمون (maimūn) good luck │ Godspeed!
(said to s.o. setting out on a journey); طار
طائره (ṭā’iruhū) to become angry, blow
one’s top
طائرة ṭā’ira pl. -āt airplane, aircraft │
على متن الطائرة (maṭni ṭ-ṭ.) aboard the
airplane; by (air)plane (e.g., traveling);
طائرة بحرية (baḥrīya) seaplane; O طائرة
دورية (daurīya) (short-range)
reconnaissance plane, observation plane;
طائرة شراعية (širā‘īya) sailplane, glider;
طائرة المطاردة ṭ. al-muṭārada fighter, pursuit
plane, interceptor; طائرة عمودية (‘amūdīya)
helicopter; طائرة القتال light bomber, combat
plane; طائرة المقاتلة ṭ. al-muqāṭala do.; O
طائرة الانقضاض or طائرة انقضاضية dive
bomber; طائرة مائية seaplane; طائرة نفاثة
(naffāṭa) jet plane; طائرة النقل ṭ. an-naql
transport (plane); O حاملات الطائرات and O
ناقلات الطائرات aircraft carrier
متطير mutaṭayyir pessimist
مستطير mustaṭīr imminent, impending,
threatening (of disaster); scattered,
dispersed; spread out, spread all over,
scattered about; widespread; pessimist
طاش (طيش ) ṭāša i (ṭaiš, طيشان ṭayašān) to be
inconstant, changeable, fickle,
lightheaded, thoughtless, heedless,
frivolous, reckless, undecided, confused,
helpless, 579 aimless, desultory; to miss
the mark (of an arrow, also عن الغرض ); to
stray ( عن from the target), miss ( عن a spot,
e.g., said of the hand) │ طاش سھمه
(sahmuhū) to be on the wrong track, bark
up the wrong tree, be unsuccessful, fail;
طاش صوابه (ṣawābuhū) to lose one’s head
طيش ṯaiš inconsistency, fickleness;
recklessness, heedlessness, rashness;
thoughtlessness; lightheadedness, levity,
frivolity
طياشان ṭayašān inconstancy, fickleness;
recklessness, heedlessness, rashness;
thoughtlessness; lightheadedness, levity,
frivolity
طياشة ṭiyāša inconstancy, fickleness;
recklessness, heedlessness, rashness;
thoughtless; lightheadedness, levity,
frivolity
طائش ṭā’iš inconstant, changeable,
fickle; lightheaded, frivolous; thoughtless,
heedless, reckless; undecided, confused,
perplexed, helpless; aimless, desultory,
purposeless
طاف (طيف ) ṭāfa i (ṭaif) to appear to s.o. ( ب) in
his sleep (of a specter)
طيف ṭaif pl. اطياف aṭyāf, طيوف ṭuyūf
fantacy, phantasm; vision, apparition;
phantom, specter, ghost; spectrum (phys.)
طيفي ṭaifī spectral, spectroscopic
مطياف miṭyāf spectroscope │ مطياف
مصور (muṣawwir) spectrograph
طيلة see طول
طيلسان ṭailasān pl. طيالسة ṭayālisa a shawl-like
garment worn over head and shoulders
طين II to daub or coat with clay ( ھ s.th.)
طين ṭīn pl. اطيان aṭyān clay, potter’s
clay, argil; soil; basis, foundation │ الطين
الخزفي (kazafī) kaolin, porcelain clay; زاد
الطين بلة zāda ṭ-ṭīna ballatan to make things
worse, aggravate or complicate the
situation
طينة ṭīna clay, potter’s clay, argil; stuff,
material, substance (of which s.th. is
made); kind, specific character,
disposition, constitution, nature
طيان ṭayyān mortar carrier, hod carrier
ظ
ظاء ẓā’ name of the letter ظ
ظئر ẓi’r wet nurse
ظبي ẓaby pl. ظباء ẓibā’ gazelle (Gazella dorcas)
ظبية ẓabya pl. ẓabayāt female gazelle
ظر ẓirr sharp-edged stone, flint
ظربان ẓaribān, ẓirbān pl. ظرابين ẓarābīn ظرابي , 2
ẓarābīy polecat, fitchew
ظرف ẓarufa u (ẓarf, ظرافة ẓarāfa) to be
charming, chic, nice, elegant, neat; to be
witty, full of esprit II to adorn, embellish,
polish ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), impart charm ( ھ، ه
to s.o., to s.th.); to put ( ھ s.th.) into an
envelope, cover or wrap, to envelop, wrap
up, cover ( ھ s.th.) V to affect charm or
elegance, display affectedness; to show
o.s. elegant, witty, full of esprit VI = V; I
to deem or find ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) elegant,
charming, adroit, witty, etc.
ظرف ẓarf elegance, gracefulness, grace,
charm; cleverness, resourcefulness; 580
wittiness, esprit; -- (pl. ظروف ẓurūf)
vessel, receptacle, container; covering,
wrap, cover; (letter) envelope; capsule,
case; (gram.) adverb denoting place or
time; pl. ظروف circumstances, conditions
│ بظرف or في ظرف within, in a (given)
period of; ظروف مخففة (mukaffifa) and
ظروف التخفيف extenuating circumstances;
ظروف مشددة (mušaddida) aggravating
circumstances; بحسب الظروف bi-ḥasabi aẓ-
ẓ. according to circumstances, depending
on the circumstances
ظرفي ẓarfī adverbial │ بينة ظرفية
(bayyina) or دليل ظرفي dalīl circumstantial
evidence
ظريف ẓarīf pl. ظرفاء ẓurafā’2, f. ظرائف
ẓarā’if elegant, graceful, charming; full of
esprit, witty, nice, fine
ظرافة ẓarāfa elegance, gracefulness,
grace, charm; esprit, wittiness
تظريف taẓrīf wittiness, brilliant and
witty manner
تظرف taẓarruf gracefulness, grace,
elegance, charm, wittiness, esprit
مظروف maẓrūf pl. مظاريف maẓārīf2
envelope
متظرف mutaẓarrif elegant, dandy, fop
مستظرف mustaẓraf elegant │ اصناف
مستظرفة luxury articles, fancy goods
ظعن ẓa‘ana a (ẓa‘n) to move away, leave,
depart
ظعن ẓa‘n departure, start, journey, trek
(esp. of a caravan)
ظعينة ẓa‘īna pl. ظعن ẓu‘un, اظعان aẓ‘ān
camel-borne sedan chair for women; a
woman in such a sedan
ظاعن ẓā‘in ephemeral, transient,
transitory
ظفر ẓafira a (ẓafar) to be successful, succeed,
be victorious, be triumphant; to gain a
victory ( على or ب over), conquer,
vanquish, defeat, overcome, surmount,
overwhelm ( على or ب s.o., s.th.), get the
better ( على or ب of s.o., of s.th.); to seize (
على or ب s.o., s.th.), take posession ( على or
ب of s.o., of s.th.); to get, obtain, attain,
achieve, gain, win ( على or ب s.th.) II to
grant victory ( على or ب ه to s.o. over),
make ( ه s.o.) triumph, render ( ه s.o.)
victorious ( على or ب over) IV = II; VI to
ally, enter into an alliance or confederacy,
join forces ( على against)
ظفر ẓufur, ẓufr, ẓifr pl. اظفار aẓfār, اظافر
aẓāfir اظافير , 2 aẓāfīr2 nail, fingernail;
toenail; claw, talon │ من (منذ) نعومة اظفاره
from (the days of) his earliest youth, since
his earliest youth or adolescence; ناعم الظفر
youthful, of tender age
ظفر ẓafar victory, triumph
ظفر ẓafir victorious, successful,
triumphant; (pl. ظفران ) young man, youth
(ḥij.)
اظفور uẓfūr pl. اظافير aẓāfīr2 nail,
fingernail, toenail; claw, talon
ظافر ẓāfir victorious, triumphant;
successful; victor, conqueror
مظفر muẓaffar victorious, successful,
triumphant
ظل ẓalla (1st pers. perf. ẓaliltu) a (ẓall.
ظلول ẓulūl) to be; to become, turn into,
grow into; (with foll. imperf., participle or
على :) to continue to do s.th., go on doing
s.th., persevere in doing s.th.,
stick to s.th., remain, persist in, e.g., ظل
يسكن البيت (yaskunu l-baita) he continued to
live in the house; ظل صامتا he remained
silent, persisted in his silence; ظل على موقف
(mauqif) to persist in a standpoint or
attitude II to shade, overshadow ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), cast a shadow ( ھ، ه over s.o., over
s.th.); to screen, shelter, protect ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to preserve, guard, maintain, keep
up 581
ھ) s.th.) IV = II; V to be shaded ( ب by),
sit in the shadow ( ب of) X = V; to protect
o.s. from the sun ( ب by or through s.th.),
hide in the shadow ( ب of s.th.), seek the
shadow ( ب of s.th.); to place s.o. under the
protection or patronage of s.o. ( ب), seek
shelter or refuge with s.o. ( ب), be under
the patronage or protection of s.o. ( (ب
ظل ẓill pl. ظلال ẓilāl, ظلول ẓulūl, اظلال
aẓlāl shadow, shade, umbra; shelter,
protection, patronage; shading, hub;
slightest indication, semblance, trace,
glimpse (of s.th.); tangent (geom.) │ في ظل
(with foll. genit.) under the protection or
patronage of, under the auspices of; under
the sovereignty of; تحت ظل under the
protection or patronage of, under the
auspices of; ثقيل الظل insufferable,
repugnant (of a person); خفيف الظل likable,
nice (of a person); استثقل ظله (istatqala) to
dislike s.o., find s.o. in sufferable,
unbearable, a bore; تقلص (قلص) ظله
taqallaṣa ẓilluhū his prestige or authority
faded, diminished; it decreased,
diminished, dwindled away, waned
ظلة ẓulla pl. ظلل ẓulal awning. marquee,
canopy, sheltering hut or tent, shelter;
shack, shanty; kiosk, stall; beach chair
ظليل ẓalīl shady, shaded, umbrageous
مظلة miẓalla, maẓalla pl. -āt, مظال
umbrella, parasol, sunshade; lamp shade;
awning; O veranda, porch │ عيد المظلة ‘īd
al-m. Feast of Tabernacles, Sukkoth
(Jud.); مظلة واقية (wāqiya) parachute; مظلة
ھابطة do.; جندي المظلة jundī al-m. pl. جنود
المظلات (المظلة ) paratrooper
مظلى miẓallī pl. -ūn paratrooper; pl.
paratroops, airborne troops
مظلل muẓallil shady, shadowy,
umbrageous, shading, causing shadow
مظل muẓill shady, shadowy,
umbrageous, shading, causing shadow
ظلع ẓala‘a a (ẓal‘) to limp, walk with a limp,
walk lamely
ظلع ẓali‘ lame
ظلف ẓilf pl. ظلوف ẓulūf, اظلاف cloven hoof
ظلم ẓalama i (ẓalm, ẓulm) to do wrong or evil;
to wrong, treat unjustly, ill-treat, oppress,
beset, harm, suppress, tyrannize ( ه s.o.),
commit outrage ( ه upon s.o.); to act the
tyrant, act tyrannically ( ه toward or against
s.o.); -- ẓalima a and IV to be or grow
dark, dusky, gloomy, murky, tenebrous,
darken, darkle V to complain ( من of,
about) VII and VIII اظلم iẓẓalama to suffer
injustice, be wronged
ظلم ẓulm wrong; iniquity; injustice,
inequity, unfairness; oppression,
repression, suppression, tyranny; ظلما
ẓulman unjustly, wrongfully
ظلمة ẓulma pl. -āt, ẓulumāt, ẓulamāt, ظلم
ẓulam darkness, duskiness, gloom,
murkiness │ بحر الظلمات baḥr aẓ-ẓ. the
Atlantic Ocean
ظلماء ẓalmā’2 darkness │ ليلة ظلماء (laila)
pitch-dark night
ظلام ẓalām darkness, duskiness, gloom,
murkiness
ظلام ẓalām evildoer, villain, malefactor,
rogue, scoundrel, tyrant, oppressor
ظليم ẓalīm pl. ظلمان ẓilmān male ostrich
ظلامة ẓulāma pl. -āt misdeed, wrong,
iniquity, injustice, outrage
ظلامة aẓlam2 darker, duskier, gloomier,
murkier; a viler, more infamous, more
heinous villain
مظلمة maẓlima pl. مظالم maẓālim2
misdeed, wrong, iniquity. act of injustice,
outrage
اظلام iẓlām darkness, gloom 582
ظالم ẓālim pl. -ūn, ظلام ẓullām, ظلمة
ẓalama unjust, unfair, iniquitous,
tyrannical, oppressing; tyrant, oppressor;
offender, transgressor, sinner
مظلوم maẓlūm wronged, ill-treated,
unjustly treated, tyrannized
مظلم muẓlim dark, dusky, gloomy,
tenebrous, murky
ظمئ ẓami’a a ( ظمأ ẓama’, ظماء ẓamā’,
ظماءة ẓamā’a) to thirst, be thirsty II to
make ( ه s.o.) thirst
ظمء ẓim’, ظمأ and ظماء ẓamā’ thirst
ظمآن ẓam’ān, f. ظمأى ẓam’ā thirsty
ظامئ ẓāmi’ thirsty
ظن ẓanna (1st pers. perf. ẓanantu) u (ẓann) to
think, believe, assume, presume, suppose (
ھ s.th.); to bold, think, deem, consider ( ھ
or ه ه s.o. to be s.o. or s.th.; ھ ھ s.th. to be
s.th.); to suspect ( ب or ه s.o.) │ ظنه يفعل to
think s.o. capable of doing s.th., believe of
s.o. that he would do s.th.; لا اظن احدا ينكر
(aḥadan yunkiru) I don’t think that anyone
can deny; لا اظنك تخالفني (tukālifunī) I don’t
believe that you can contradict me; ظن فيه
القدرة على (qudrata) he considered him
capable of ...; ظن به الظنون (ẓunūna) to
think ill of s.o., have a low opinion of s.o.;
ظن به الغباء (gabā’a) to suspect s.o. of
stupidity IV to suspect ( ه s.o.) V to
surmise, form conjectures
ظن ẓann pl. ظنون ẓunūn opinion, idea,
assumption, view, belief, supposition;
doubt, uncertainty │ حسن الظن ḥusn aẓ-ẓ.
good opinion; سوء الظن sū’ aẓ-ẓ. low
opinion, distrust; في اغلب الظن or في اكثر الظن
most probably, most likely; اكثر الظن ان
it is very likely that ...; ظنا منه ان (ẓannan)
since he believed that ...; ما ظنك ب
(ẓannuka) what is one to think of ...; حسن
ظنه ب (ḥasuna ẓannuhū) to have a good
opinion of s.o., think well of s.o.; احسن الظن
ب (aḥsana ẓ-ẓanna) do.; ساء به ظنا to have
a low opinion of s.o., think ill of s.o.; اساء
الظن ب (asā’a) do.
ظني ẓannī resting on mere assumption,
presumptive, supposed, hypothetical
ظنة ẓinna pl. ظنن ẓinan suspicion,
misgiving
ظنين ẓanīn suspicious, suspect(ed);
unreliable, untrustworthy ( على with regard
to); a suspect
ظنون ẓanūn suspicious, distrustful
مظنة maẓinna pl. مظان maẓānn2 time or
place where one expects s.th.; (with foll.
genit. or suffix) place where s.th. or s.o. is
presumably to be found, its most likely
location, the most likely place for it (or
him) to be; suspicion, misgiving │ التمسته
في مظانه I looked for him where I expected
to find him, where he presumably was; في
غير مظانه in places where he couldn’t
possibly be
مظنون maẓnūn supposed, presumed,
assumed; suspicious, suspect(ed)
ظنبوب ẓanbūb pl. ظنابيب ẓanābīb2 shinbone
ظھر ẓahara a ( ظھور ẓuhūr) to be or become
visible, perceptible, distinct, manifest,
clear, apparent, evident, obvious ( ل to
s.o.), come to light, appear, manifest itself,
come into view, show, emerge, crop up; to
appear, seem ( ل to s.o.); to break out
(disease); to come out; to appear, be
published (book, periodical); to arise,
result ( من from); to ascend, climb, mount (
ھ s.th.); to gain the upperhand, to triumph
على) over), get the better ( على of),
overcome, overwhelm, conquer, vanquish
على) s.o.); to get ( على s.th.) into one’s
power; to gain or have knowledge ( على
of), come to know ( على s.th.), become
acquainted ( على with); to know ( على s.th.);
to learn, 583 receive information ( على
about); to be cognizant ( على of); to learn (
على s.th.) II to endorse ( ھ a bill of
exchange) III to help, assist, aid, support ( ه
s.o.) IV to make visible, make apparent,
show, demonstrate, present, produce,
bring to light, expose, disclose, divulge,
reveal, manifest, announce, proclaim,
make known, expound, set forth ( ھ s.th.);
to develop ( ھ film; phot.); to grant victory
على ه) to s.o. over), render victorious ( على ه
s.o. over); to acquaint ( على ه s.o. with
s.th.), initiate ( على ه s.o. into s.th.), give
knowledge or information ( على ه to s.o.
about), inform, enlighten ( على ه s.o.
about), explain ( على ه to s.o. s.th.); to let ( ه
s.o.) in on s.th. ( على ), make ( ه s.o.) realize
على) s.th.); to show, reveal ( على ه to s.o.
s.th.); to articulate fully VI to manifest,
display, show outwardly, exhibit, parade (
ب s.th.); to feign, affect, pretend, simulate,
ب) s.th.), act as if, make out as if ( ب); to
demonstrate, make a public
demonstration; to help one another, make
common cause ( على against) X to show,
demonstrate, expose ( ھ s.th.); to
memorize, learn by heart ( ھ s.th.); to
know by heart ( ھ s.th.); to seek help,
assistance, or support ( ب with), appeal for
help, for assistance ( ب to س.o.); to
overcome, surmount, conquer, vanquish (
على s.o., s.th.), have or gain the upperhand
على) over), get the better ( على of)
ظھر ẓahr cast iron │ ظھر الحديد and حديد
الظھر see زھر
ظھر ẓahr pl. ظھور ẓuhūr, اظھر aẓhur
back; rear, rear part, rear aide, reverse;
flyleaf; deck (of a steamer); upper part,
top, surface; ظھورات ẓuhūrāt (as a genit.;
eg.) pro tempore, provisional, temporary
│ سلسلة الظھر silsilat aẓ-ẓ. spine, vertebral
column; ظھرا لبطن ẓahran li-baṭnin upside
down, topsy-turvy; ظھرا على عقب (‘aqib)
from the ground up, radically, entirely,
completely; بظھر الغيب bi-ẓ. il-gaib behind
s.o.’s back, insidiously, treacherously;
secretly, stealthily, clandestinely; بين
اظھرھم in their midst, among them; من بين
اظھرنا from our midst, from among us; على
ظھر on (e.g., on the ground, on the water.
etc.), على ظھر الباخرة on board the steamer;
عن ظھر القلب (ẓ. al-qalb), عن ظھر قلب (ẓ.
qalbin) or عن ظھر الغيب (ẓ. il-gaib) by
heart; مستخدم ظھورات (mustakdam)
temporary employee
ظھر ẓuhr pl. اظھار aẓhār noon, midday;
(f.) midday prayer (Isl. Law) │ بعد الظھر in
the afternoon, p.m.; قبل الظھر in the
forenoon, a.m.
ظھري ẓihrī: نبذه (طرحه) ظھريا to pay no
attention to s.th., not to care about s.th.
disregard s.th.
ظھير ẓahīr helper, assistant, aid,
supporter; partisan, backer; back (in
soccer); (mor.) decree, edict, ordinance
ظھور ẓuḥūr appearance; visibility,
conspicuousness; pomp, splendor, show,
ostentation, window-dressing │ حب الظھور
ḥubb aẓ-ẓ. ostentatiousness, love of pomp;
عيد الظھور ‘īd aẓ-ẓ. Epiphany (Chr.)
الظھران aẓ-ẓahrān Dhahran (town in
extensive oil region of E Saudi Arabia)
بين ظھرانيھم baina ẓahrānaihim in their
midst, among them
ظھارة ẓahāra outside, right side (of a
garment); blanket (e.g., of a mule)
ظھيرة ẓahīra noon, midday, midday
heat
اظھر aẓhar2 more distinct, more
manifest, clearer
مظھر maẓhar pl. مظاھر maẓāhir2
(external) appearance, external make-up,
guise; outward bearing, comportment,
conduct, behavior; exterior, look(s), sight,
view; semblance, aspect; bearer or object
of a phenomenon, object in which s.th.
584 manifests itself; phenomenon;
symptom (med.); pl. manifestations,
expressions │ مظاھر الحياة m. al-ḥayāh
manifestations of life (biol.); في المظھر
externally, in outward appearance,
outwardly
تظھير taẓhīr endorsement, transfer by
endorsement (of a bill of exchange; com.)
ظھار ẓihār pre-Islamic form of divorce,
consisting in the words of repudiation:
you are to me like my mother’s back ( انت
علي كظھر امي anti 'alayya ka-ẓahri ummī)
مظاھرة muẓāhara assistance, support,
backing; (pl. -āt) (public) demonstration,
rally
اظھار iẓhār presentation, exposition,
demonstration, exhibition, disclosure,
exposure, revelation, announcement,
declaration, manifestation, display;
developing (phot.)
تظاھر taẓāhur dissimulation, feigning,
pretending, pretension; hypocrisy,
dissemblance; (pl. -āt) (public)
demonstration, rally
ظاھر ẓāhir (of God) mastering,
knowing ( على s.th.); visible, perceptible,
distinct, manifest, obvious, conspicuous,
clear, patent, evident, apparent; external,
exterior, outward; seeming, presumed,
ostensible, alleged; outside, exterior,
surface; outskirts, periphery (of a city);
(gram.) substantive; (pl. ظواھر ẓawāhir2)
external sense, literal meaning (specif., of
Koran and Prophetic Tradition); ظاھرا
ẓāhiran externally, outwardly; seemingly,
presumedly, ostensibly, allegedly │ ظاھر
اللفظ ẓ. al-lafẓ the literal meaning of an
expression; الظاھر ان it seems, it appears
that ...; حسب الظاھر ḥasaba ẓ-ẓ. in outward
appearance, externally, outwardly; في
الظاھر apparently, obviously, evidently; في
الظاھر and في ظاھر الأمر (ẓ. il-amr) seen
outwardly, externally; outwardly; من الظاھر
from outside
ظاھري ẓāhirī outer, outside, external,
exterior, outward; superficial; Zahiritic,
interpreting the Koran according to its
literal meaning
ظاھرة ẓāhira pl. ظواھر ẓawāhir2
phenomenon, outward sign or token,
external symptom or indication │ ظواھر
الحياة ẓ. al-ḥayāh biological phenomena
(biol.); علم الظواھر الجوية ‘ilm aẓ-ẓ. algawwīya
meteorology; ستر الظواھر
(ẓawāhira) to keep up appearances
متظاھر mutaẓāhir pl. -ūn demonstrator
ظاء ẓā’ name of the letter ظ
ع
عب ‘abba u (‘abb) to drink in large draughts,
gulp down ( ھ s.th.); to pour down, toss
down ( ه a drink); to lap up, drink avidly ( ھ
s.th.)
عب ‘ubb, ‘ibb breast pocket
عباب ‘ubāb f. torrents, floods; waves,
billows
يعبوب ya‘būb torrential river
عبأ ‘aba’a a with negation; ما عبأ ب not to care
about, not to give a hoot for, pay no
attention to, attach no importance to, not
to insist on │ لا يعبأ به (yu‘ba’u)
unimportant, insignificant; غير عابئ
indifferent, unconcerned II to prepare,
arrange ( ھ s.th.); to array, set up ( ھ s.th.);
to mobilize, call up ( جيشا jaišan an army);
to fill, pack ( ب ھ s.th. with); 585 to load,
charge ( ب ھ s.th. with); to draw off,
decant ( في ھ s.th. into), bottle ( ھ s.th.)
عبء ‘ib’ pl. اعباء a‘bā’ load, burden (
على on), encumbrance ( على to) │ عبء
الإثبات ‘i. al-itbāt burden of proof (jur.);
نھض or قام الأعباء كلھا to take all burdens
upon o.s., carry all burdens
عباء ‘abā’ pl. اعبئة a‘bi’a aba, cloaklike,
woolen wrap (occasionally striped)
عباءة ‘abā’a pl. -āt aba, a cloak-like,
woolen wrap (occasionally striped)
تعبئة ta‘bi’a mobilization; drafting,
conscription; filling, drawing off, bottling
عابئ ‘ābi’ see under verb I
عبث ‘abita a (‘abat) to fool around, indulge in
horseplay, commit a folly; to play, joke,
jest ( ب with); to toy, play a frivolous game
ب) with), mock ( ب s.o., s.th.); to play
(absent-mindedly), fidget, fuas, dawdle,
fiddle ( ب with s.th., e.g., while talking); to
handle, manipulate ( ب s.th.), tinker ( ب
with); to abuse ( ب s.th.); to commit an
offense ( ب against), violate ( ب s.th.),
infringe, encroach ( ب upon); to impair,
injure ( ب s.th.) III to amuse o.s., make fun,
play around, banter, dally ( ه with s.o.),
tease ( ه s.o.), play a trick, prank or joke ( ه
on s.o.)
عبث ‘abat (frivolous) play; pastime,
amusement; joke, jest; mockery; عبثا
‘abatan in vain, futilely, to no avail,
Uselessly, fruitlessly │ من العبث ان it is
foolish and useless to ...; ولكن عبثا استطاع ان
يجيبه (iataṭā‘a, yujībahū) but he couldn’t
give him an answer
عبث mu‘ābata pl.-āt teasing, joke or
prank played on s.o.; funmaking, jesting,
banter, raillery
عابث ‘ābit joking, jocular; mocking,
scornful; frivolous; wanton, wicked,
outrageous; offender, transgressor,
evildoer, sinner
عبد 1 ‘abada u ( عبادة ‘ibada, عبودة ‘ubūda, عبودية
‘ubādīya) to serve, worship ( ه a god),
adore, venerate ( ه s.o., a god or human
being), idolize, deify ( ه s.o.) II to enslave,
enthrall, subjugate, subject ( ه s.o.); to
improve, develop, make serviceable, make
passable for traffic ( ھ a road) V to devote
o.s. to the service of God X to enslave,
enthrall, subjugate ( ه s.o.)
عبد ‘abd pl. عبيد ‘abād, عبدان ‘ubdān,
‘ibdān slave, serf; bondsman, servant; --
(pl. عباد ‘ibad) servant (of God), human
being, man; العباد humanity, mankind │
􀍿 العبد = I (form of modesty); العبد الضعيف
do.
عبد اللاوي، عبدلاوي ‘abdallāwī (eg.) a
variety of melon
عبدة ‘abda pl. -āt woman slave, slave
girl, bondwoman
عباد ‘abbād: عباد الشمس and عبادة الشمس
‘a. aš-šams sunflower (Helianthus annuus
L.)
عبادة ‘ibāda worship, adoration,
veneration; devotional service, divine
service (Chr.); pl. -āt acts of devotion,
religious observances (Isl. Law)
عبودة ‘ubūda humble veneration,
homage, adoration, worship; slavery, serfdom;
servitude, bondage
عبودية ‘ubūdīya humble veneration,
homage, adoration, worship; slavery,
serfdom; servitude, bondage
معبد ma‘bad pl. معابد ma‘ābid2 place of
worship; house of God, temple
تعبيد ta‘bīd enslavement, enthrallment,
subjugation, subjection; paving, pavement
│ تعبيد الطرق t. aṭ-ṭuruq road construction
586
تعبد ta‘abbud piety, devoutness,
devotion, worship; hagiolatry, worship or
cult of saints (Chr.)
استعباد isti‘bād enslavement,
enthrallment, subjugation
عابد ‘ābid pl. -ūn, عباد ‘ibād, عبدة ‘abada
worshiper, adorer,
معبود ma‘būd worshiped, adored; deity,
godhead; idol
معبودة ma‘būda ladylove, adored
woman
معبد ma‘bad passable, smooth,
improved (road)
متعبد muta‘abbid pious, devout; pious
worshiper (Chr.)
عبدان ‘abadān2 Abadan (island and town in W
Iran, oil center)
عبر ‘abara u (‘abr, عبور ‘ubūr) to cross,
traverse ( ھ s.th.); to ford ( ھ s.th.), wade (
ھ through s.th.); to swim ( ھ s.th. or across
s.th.); to pass ( ھ over s.th.); to ferry ( ھ a
river, and the like); عبر به ھ to carry s.o.
across or over s.th.; to pass, elapse (time),
fade, dwindle; to pass away, die, depart; --
‘abira (‘abar) to shed tears II to interpret (
ھ a dream); to state clearly, declare,
assert, utter, express, voice ( عن s.th.), give
expression ( عن to a feeling); to designate (
عن ب s.th. with or by); to determine the
weight of a coin ( ھ ), weigh ( ھ a coin)
VIII to be taught a lesson, be warned; to
learn a lesson, take warning, to learn, take
an example ( ب from); to consider, weigh,
take into account or consideration ( ھ
s.th.), allow, make allowances ( ھ for
s.th.); to acknowledge a quality ( ھ ) in s.o.
ل) ); to deem, regard, take ( ھ ھ، ه s.o. s.th.
as), look ( ھ ھ، ه at s.th. as); to esteem,
honor, revere, value, respect, hold in
esteem ( ه s.o.), have regard ( ه for s.o.) │ to
shed tears, weep
عبر ‘abr crossing, traversing, transit;
passage; fording; ‘abra (prep.) across,
over; beyond, on the other side of
عبور ‘ubūr crossing, traversing, transit;
passage; fording
عبير ‘abīr fragrance, scent, perfume,
aroma; bouquet (of wine)
عبري ‘ibrī Hebrew, Hebraic; (pl. -ūn) a
Hebrew; العبري or العبرية Hebrew, the
Hebrew language
عبرة ’abra pl. ’abarāt, عبر ‘ibar tear
عبرة ‘ibra pl. عبر ‘ibar admonition,
monition, warning; (warning or deterring)
example, lesson, advice, rule, precept (to
be followed); consideration befitting s.th.;
that which has to be considered, be taken
into consideration or account, that which
is of consequence, of importance, s.th.
decisive or consequential │ موطن العبرة
mauṭin al-‘i. the salient point, the crucial
point; لا عبرة به (‘ibrata) it deserves no
attention, it is of no consequence; في or
العبرة ب the crucial factor(s) is (are) ...,
decisive is (are) ...; لا عبرة لمن (li-man) it is
of no consequence if s.o. …
عبارة ‘ibāra pl. -āt explanation,
interpretation; mode of expression,
diction; word; sentence, clause, phrase,
idiom, expression │ بعبارة اخرى (ukrā) in
other words, expressed otherwise; عبارة
فعبارة ‘ibāratan fa-‘ibāratan sentence by
sentence, word by word; عبارة عن
consisting in; tantamount to, equivalent to,
meaning ...
عبراني ‘ibrānī Hebrew, Hebraic; a
Hebrew; العبراني or العبرانية Hebrew, the
Hebrew language
معبر ma‘bar pl. معابر ma‘ābir2 crossing
point, crossing, traverse, passage(way);
ford; pass, pass road, defile; O lobby
معبر mi‘bar pl. معابر ma‘ābir2 medium
for crossing, ferry, ferryboat; bridge 587
تعبير ta‘bīr interpretation (of a dream);
assertion, declaration, expression,
utterance ( عن of a feeling); (pl. -āt)
expression (in general, also artistic); (pl. –
تعابير ta‘ābīr2) (linguistic) expression,
phrase, term │ بتعبير آخر (ākar) in other
words, expressed otherwise
تعبيري ta‘bīrī expressional, expressive,
emotive
اعتبار i‘tibār respect, regard, deference,
esteem; (pl. -āt) consideration, regard;
reflection, contemplation; approach,
outlook, point of view, view │ (اعتبارا ل (ب
(itibāran) with respect to, with regard to,
in consideration of, considering .... in
view of (s.th.); اعتبارا من from, as of,
beginning ..., starting with ..., effective
from ... (with foll. indication of time);
باعتبار الشيء with respect to, with regard to,
in consideration of, considering in view of
(s.th.); باعتبار ان bi-‘tibāri an considering
(the fact) that ..., with regard to the fact
that ..., in view of the fact that ...; provided
that ..., with the proviso that ...; باعتباره as,
in terms of, in the opacity of, e.g., وزير
الخارجية باعتباره اقدم الوزراء (aqdama lwuzarā’i)
the Foreign Minister in his
capacity of senior-ranking minister; بھذا
الاعتبار from this standpoint, from this
viewpoint; على اعتبار ان considering (the
fact) that ..., with regard to the fact that ...,
in view of the fact that ...; on the
assumption that ...; على ھذا الاعتبار from this
standpoint, from this viewpoint; في كل
اعتبار in every respect; اعتبارا او حقيقة
(ḥaqīqatan) from a subjective point of
view or in reality
اعتباري i‘tibārī based on a subjective
approach or outlook; relative │ شخصية
اعتبارية (šakṣīya) legal person (jur.)
عابر ‘ābir passing; crossing, traversing,
etc. (see I); fleeting (smile); transient,
transitory, ephemeral; bygone, past,
elapsed (time); (pl. -ūn) passerby │ O
صاروخ عابر القارات intercontinental ballistic
missile, ICBM
معبر mu‘abbir interpreter ( عن of
feelings); expressive, significant │ رقص
معبر (raqṣ) interpretative dancing
□ عبرود (ḥi على ) musket, gun
عبس ‘abasa i (‘abs, عبوس ‘ubs) to frown, knit
one’s brows; to glower, lower, scowl,
look sternly │ عبس في وجھه to give s.o. an
angry look, scowl at s.o. II = I
عبوس ‘abūs frowning, scowling;
gloomy, dismal, melancholy; stern,
austere; ominous
عبوس ‘ubūs gloominess, gloom,
dreariness; sternness, austerity, severity,
gravity
عبوسة ‘ubūsa frown, scowl; glower,
gloomy look, a gloomy, morose, sullen or
stern mien
عباسي ‘abbāsī Abbaside; (pl. -ūn) an
Abbaside
عابس ‘ābis frowning, scowling; gloomy,
morose, sullen; austere, stern, severe
عبيط ‘abīṭ pl. عبطاء ‘ubaṭā’2 stupid, imbecile,
idiotic, silly, foolish
اعتباطا i‘tibāṭan at random, haphazardly,
arbitrarily
عبق ‘abiqa a (‘abaq) to cling ( ب to), linger ( ب
on, of ascent); to be fragrant, exhale
fragrance; to be filled, be redolent ( ب with
a scent, etc.)
عبق ‘abiq fragrant, redolent, exhaling
fragrance
عبقة ‘abqa pressure (on the chest),
feeling of suffocation
عابق ‘ābiq fragrant, redolent, exhaling
fragrance 588
عبقر ‘abqar legendary place inhabited by jinn;
fairyland, wonderland
عبقري ‘abqarī multicolored, colorful
carpet; ingenious, genial; (pl. -ūn, عباقرة
‘abāqira) ingenious person, genius
عبقرية ‘abqarīya ingenuity, genius
عبك ‘abak camlet (woolen fabric)
عبل 'abl pl. عبال ‘ibāl plump, well rounded,
chubby, fat (e.g., arms)
عبال ‘abāl (coll.; n. un. ة) a variety of
wild rose, eglantine
اعبل a‘bal granite
عبو II = عبأ II; to fill, pack ( ب ھ s.th. with); to
load, charge ( ب ھ s.th. with)
عبوة ‘ubūwa pl. -āt package, pack (of an
article, of a commodity); container with
its contents
عباية ‘abāya = عباءة ‘abā’a q.v.
عتب ‘ataba i u (‘atb, معتب ma‘tab) to blame,
censure, reprove, scold ( على s.o.); -- عتب
بابه ‘ataba bābahū to cross the threshold of
s.o. II to hesitate, be slow, be tardy III to
blame, censure, reprove, scold ( على ه s.o.
for)
عتب ‘atb censure, blame, rebuke,
reproof, reprimand
عتبة ‘ataba pl. عتب ‘atab, اعتاب a‘tāb
doorstep, threshold; (door) lintel, also العتبة
العليا (‘ulyā); step, stair │ الأعتاب السنية
(sanīya) (formerly:) His Highness the Bey
(Tun.); رفعه لأعتاب الملك rafa‘ahū li-a. lmalik
to present s.th. (e.g., a gift) most
obediently to the king
عتاب ‘itāb censure, blame, rebuke,
reproof, reprimand
معاتبة mu‘ātaba censure, blame, rebuke,
reproof, reprimand
عتد ‘atuda u ( عتاد ‘atād) to be ready, be
prepared IV to prepare, ready, make ready
ھ) s.th.)
عتاد ‘atād pl. اعتد a’tud, اعتدة a‘tida
equipment; (war) material, matériel,
ammunition │ عتاد حربي (ḥarbī) war
material, materiel, ammunition
عتيد ‘atīd ready, prepared; future,
forthcoming; venerable; solemn
□ معتر mu‘attar (< معثر ) slovenly, floppy;
stupid; unfortunate
عتق ‘atuqa u ( عتاقة ‘atāqa) and ‘ataqa i (‘atq,
‘itq) to grow old, age; to mature, mellow
(wine); -- ‘ataqa i to be emancipated, be
free (slave) IV to free, set free, release,
emancipate, manumit ( ه s.o., esp. a slave)
VII to free o.s., rid o.s. ( من of)
عتق ‘itq age, vintage (esp. of wine);
liberty (as opposed to slavery);
emancipation, freeing, manumission (of a
slave)
عتيق ‘atīq old, ancient, antique;
matured, mellowed, aged (wine); of
ancient tradition, long-standing;
antiquated, outmoded, obsolete; free,
emancipated (slave); noble │ عتيق الطراز
old-fashioned
عتاقة ‘atāqa age, vintage (esp. of wine)
اعتاق i‘tāq freeing, liberation,
manumission (of a slave)
عاتق ‘ātiq pl. عواتق ‘awātiq2 shoulder │
اخذه على عاتقه (akadahū) to take s.th. upon
o.s., take over, assume s.th; القى المسؤولية
على عاتقه (alqā l-mas’ūliyata) to place the
responsibility on s.o.; وقع على عاتق فلان to
be at s.o.’s expense, fall to s.o.
معتق mu‘attaq mellowed, matured
(wine); old, ancient
معتق mu‘tiq emancipator, liberator,
manumitter (of slaves)
عتك ‘ataka i to attack
عاتك ‘atik clear, pure, limpid (esp.
wine) 589
عتل ‘atala u i (‘atl) to carry ( ھ s.th.)
عتال ‘attāl porter, carrier
عتلة ‘atala pl. عتل ‘atal crowbar
عتالة ‘itāla porter’s or carrier’s trade;
porterage
عتم ‘atama i (‘atm) to hesitate II to darken,
obscure, cloud, black out ( ھ s.th.); to
hesitate (esp. with neg.) │ لا يعتم ان، ما عتم
ان، لم يعتم ان it does not (did not) take long
until …, before long ..., presently IV to
hesitate, waver
عتم (coll.; n. un. ة) wild olive tree
عتمة ‘atma dark, gloom, darkness
عتمة ‘atama first third of the night
عتامة ‘atāma opacity, opaqueness; (pl.
-āt) darkness
تعتيم ta‘tīm darkening, obscuring,
clouding
معتم mu‘tim dark
عته pass. ‘utiha (‘uth, ‘atah, عتاھة ‘atāha) to be
or become· idiotic, imbecile, dimwitted,
feeble-minded, demented, insane, mad,
crazy
عته ‘uth, ‘atah idiocy, imbecility
dimwittedness, feeble-mindedness
عتاھة ‘atāha idiocy, imbecility,
dimwittedness, feeble-mindedness
معتوه ma‘tūh pl. معاتيه ma‘ātīh2 idiotic,
insane, mad, crazy; idiot, lunatic,
imbecile, demented person, insane person
عتو) and عتي) عتا ‘atā u ( عتو ‘utūw, عتي ‘utīy,
‘itīy) to be insolent, refractory,
recalcitrant, unruly; to be violent, fierce,
strong, wild, furious, raging (e.g., storms)
V do.
عتو ‘utūw presumption, haughtiness,
insolence, impertinence, arrogance;
recalcitrance, unruliness, wildness,
ferocity
عتي ‘utīy presumption, haughtiness
insolence, impertinence, arrogUC8;
recalcitrance, unruliness, wildness,
ferocity │ بلغ من العمر عتيا (‘umr) to attain
great age; to be far advanced in years
عتي ‘atīy pl. اعتاء a‘tā’ haughty,
impertinent, insolent; recalcitrant,
refractory, unruly, intractable, wild
عات ‘ātin pl. عتاة ‘utāh presumptuous,
impudent, impertinent, insolent, arrogant;
violent, fierce, strong, wild, furious,
raging (storm)
عث ‘utt (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. عثث ‘utat moth
worm, moth larva; moth
معثوث ma‘tūt moth-ridden, fall of
moths, moth-eaten
عثر ‘atara u i (‘atr, عثير ‘atīr, عثار ‘itār) to
stumble, trip; عثر به to trip s.o., make s.o.
stumble, make s.o. fall, fell s.o., topple
s.o.; -- ‘atara u ( عثور ‘utūr) to come ( ب or
على scroll), hit, light, strike, stumble ( ب or
على upon), find, discover, detect ( ب or على
s.o. s.th.) II to cause ( ه s.o.) to stumble,
trip ( ه s.o.), make ( ه s.o.) fall, topple ( ه
s.o.) IV = II; to acquaint ( على ه s.o. with
s.th.); to lead ( على ه s.o. to s.th.) V to
stumble, trip; to stutter, stammer, speak
brokenly │ تعثر بأذيال الخيبة (bi-adyāl lkaiba)
to fail, meet with failure
عثرة ‘atra pl. ‘atarāt stumbling,
tripping; false step, slip, fall │ حجر عثرة
ḥajar ‘a. stumbling block; وقف عثرة في سبيله
(‘atratan) to be a stumbling block for s.o.,
obstruct s.o.’s way
عثور ‘atūr discovery, detection ( على of)
عثير ‘ityar dust, fine sand
عاثور ‘ātūr pl. عواثير ‘awātīr2 pitfall;
difficulty
متعثر muta‘attir stumbling, tripping;
speaking (a foreign language) brokenly;
broken (of a foreign language)
عثماني ‘utmānī Ottoman; (adj. and n.) 590
عثنون ‘utnūn pl. عثانين ‘atānīn2 beard
عثو ) and عثي) عثا ‘atā u ( عثو ‘utūw), عثى ‘atā a
i (‘utīy, ‘itīy) to act wickedly, do harm,
cause mischief
عج ‘ajja i (‘ajj, عجيج ‘ajīj) to cry, yell, roar; to
cry out for help ( الى to); to rage, roar; to
thunder, resound ( ب with); to swarm, teem
ب) with) II to raise, swirl up ( الغبار algubāra
the dust; of the wind)
عج ‘ajj crying, yelling; clamor, roar
عجة ‘ujja omelet
عجيج ‘ajīj crying, yelling; clamor, roar
عجاج ‘ajāj (swirling) dust; smoke
عجاجة ‘ajāja pl. -āt cloud of dust;
billow of smoke
عجاج ‘ajjāj crying, yelling, clamoring,
roaring, boisterous, vociferous; raging
(esp. sea)
عجب ‘ajiba a (‘ajab) to wonder,
marvel, be astonished, be amazed ( ب or ل
at, over) II to strike with wonder or
astonishment, amaze, astonish, surprise ( ه
s.o.) IV = II; to please, delight ( ه s.o.),
appeal ( ه to s.o.); -- pass. IV u‘jiba to
admire ( ب s.o., s.th.), have a high opinion
ب) of); to be proud ( ب of), be vain ( ب
about), glory ( ب in) │ اعجب بنفسه (u‘jiba)
to be conceited, be vain V to wonder,
marvel, be astonished, be amazed ( من at,
over) X = V
عجب ‘ujb pride ( ب of, in), vanity ( ب in),
conceit
عجب ‘ajab astonishment, amazement;
(pl. اعجاب a‘jāb) wonder, marvel; عجبا
‘ajaban how strange! how odd! How
astonishing! how remarkable! يا للعجب yā
la-l-‘ajab oh, how wonderful! لا عجب
(‘ajaba) no wonder! امر عجب amrun
‘ajabun a wonderful, marvelous thing;
عجب عجاب (ujāb) most prodigious
happening, wonder of wonders
عجاب ‘ujāb wonderful, wondrous,
marvelous, astonishing, amazing; see
‘ajab
عجيب ‘ajīb wonderful, wondrous,
marvelous, admirable; astonishing,
amazing, remarkable, strange, odd
عجيبة ‘ajība pl. عجائب ‘ajā’ib wondrous
thing, unheard of thing, prodigy, marvel,
miracle, wonder; pl. remarkable things,
curiosities, oddities │ من عجائب الأمر ان
the remarkable thing about the matter is
that ...
اعجب a’jab2 more wonderful, more
marvelous; more astonishing, more
remarkable
اعجوبة u‘jūba pl. اعاجيب a‘ājīb2
wondrous thing; unheard-of thing,
prodigy, marvel, miracle, wonder
تعجيب ta‘jīb arousing of admiration ( من
for s.th.), boosting ( من of s.th.), publicity (
من for s.th.)
اعجاب i‘jāb admiration ( ب for);
pleasure, satisfaction, delight ( ب in);
acclaim; pride; self-complacency, conceit
تعجب ta‘ajjub astonishment, amazement
استعجاب isti‘jāb astonishment,
amazement
معجب mu‘jib causing admiration,
admirable
معجب mu‘jab admirer ( ب of s.o., of
s.th.); proud ( ب of), vain ( ب about) │
معجب بنفسه (bi-nafsihī) conceited, vain
متعجب muta‘ajjib amazed, astonished
عجر ‘ajar outgrowth, protuberance,
excrescence, projection
عجر ‘ajr (eg.) green, unripe
عجرة ‘ujra pl. عجر ‘ujar knot, knob,
hump, protuberance, excrescence │ عجره
وبجره ‘ujaruhū wa-bujaruhū his (its)
obvious 591 and hidden shortcomings, all
his (its) faults
عجور ‘aggūr (coll.; n. un. ة) a variety of
green melon, (eg.)
عجرف II ta‘ajrafa to be presumptuous,
arrogant, haughty
عجرفة ‘ajrafa presumption, arrogance,
haughtiness
عجز ‘ajaza i (‘ajz) and ‘ajiza a to be
weak, lock strength, be incapable ( عن of),
be unable ( عن to do s.th.); -- ‘ajaza u (
عجوز ‘ujūz) and ‘ajuza u to age, grow old
(woman) │ ما عجز ان (‘ajaza, ‘ajiza) not to
fail to ... II to weaken, debilitate, disable,
incapacitate, hamstring, cripple, paralyze (
ه s.o.) IV to weaken, debilitate, disable,
incapacitate, hamstring, cripple, paralyze
(. s.o.); to be impossible ( ه for s.o.); to
speak in an inimitable, or wonderful,
manner │ اعجزه عن الدب والمشي (dabb,
mašy) to paralyze s.o.’s every move; اعجزه
عن الفھم (fahm) to make comprehension
impossible for s.o. X to deem ( ه s.o.)
incapable ( عن of)
عجز ‘ajz weakness, incapacity,
disability, failure, impotence ( عن for, to do
s.th.); deficit
عجز 'ajuz, ‘ajz pl. اعجاز a‘jāz backside,
rump, posteriors │ اعجاز النخل a. an-nakl
stumps of palm trees; رد العجز على
الصدرعجز (ṣadr) to bring the rear to the
fore, i.e., to reverse conditions, make up
for a deficiency
عجوز ‘ujūz old age
عجوز ‘ajūz pl. عجائز ‘ajā’iz عجز , 2 ‘ujuz
old woman; old man; old, advanced in
years
عجيزة ‘ajīza posteriors, buttocks (of a
woman)
اعجز i‘jāz inimitability, wondrous
nature (of the Koran)
عاجز ‘ājiz pl. عواجز ‘awājiz2 weak,
feeble, powerless, impotent; incapable ( عن
of), unable ( عن to do s.th.); -- (pl. عجزة
‘ajaza) physically weak; physically
disabled; decrepit │ اسعاف العجزة is‘āf
al-‘a. care for the aged
معجز mu‘jiz miracle (esp. one
performed by a prophet)
معجزة mu‘jiza pl. -āt miracle (esp. one
performed by a prophet)
عجعج ‘aj‘aja to bellow, bawl, roar
عجعجة ‘aj‘aja clamor, roar, bellowing
اعجف a‘jaf 2, f. عجفاء ‘ajfā’2 pl. عجاف ‘ijāf
slender, slim, svelte; lean, emaciated
عجل ‘ajila a (‘ajal, عجلة ‘ajala) to hurry,
hasten, speed, rush, be in a hurry; to rush,
hasten, hurry, come quickly ( الى to) II to
hurry, hasten, speed, rush, be in a hurry; to
bring about quickly, hasten on ( ب s.th.),
bring or take quickly ( ل ب s.th. to); to
hurry, rush, urge, impel, drive ( ه s.o.),
expedite, speed up, accelerate ( ه s.th.); to
pay in advance; to pay spot cash ( ھ ل to
s.o. for) III to hurry in order to catch up ( ھ
ه , with s.o., with s.th.), rush, hurry ( ھ, ه
after s.o., after s.th.); to catch up ( ه with
s.o.), overtake ( ه s.o.; esp. death), descend
swiftly ( ھ, ه upon); to anticipate, forestall
ب ه) s.o. in or with) IV to hurry, rush,
urge, impel, drive ( ه s.o.) │ اعجله الوقت عن
(waqtu) the time was too short for him
to ... V to hurry, hasten, speed, rush, be in
a hurry; to seek to get ahead in a hurry; to
hurry, rush, urge ( الى ه s.o. to); to
anticipate, forestall ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.); to be
ahead ( ھ of s.th.), precede ( ھ e.g., events);
to receive at once, without delay ( ھ a
sum), receive spot cash │ تعجله الجواب
(jawāba) to demand a quick reply from
s.o. X to hurry, hasten, rush, speed, be in a
hurry; to wish to expedite ( ھ s.th.); to 592
hurry, rush, urge, impel, drive ( ه s.o.),
expedite, speed up, accelerate ( ھ s.th.)
عجل ‘ijl pl. عجول ‘ujūl, عجلة ‘ijala calf │
عجل البحر ‘i. al-baḥr sea calf, seal
عجل ‘ajal hurry, haste │ على عجل in a
hurry, hurriedly, speedily, quickly, fast,
rapidly
عجل ‘ajil quick, fast, swift, speedy,
rapid
عجلة ‘ajala hurry, haste; precipitance,
precipitation
عجلة ‘ajala pl. -āt wheel; bicycle │ O
عجلة سيارة (sayyāra) motorcycle; عجلة القيادة
steering wheel; O عجلة نارية (nārīya)
motorcycle
عجيل ‘ajīl pl. عجال ‘ijāl quick, fast,
swift, speedy, rapid
عجول ‘ajūl pl. عجل ‘ujul quick, fast,
swift, speedy, rapid; hasty, precipitate,
rash
عجالة ‘ujāla work quickly thrown
together, hastily prepared work, rush job;
O sketch (lit.); quickly compiled report
عجلان ‘ajlān2, f. عجلى ‘ajlā, pl. عجالى
‘ajālā, عجال ‘ijāl quick, fast, swift, speedy,
hurried, rapid, hasty, cursory
اعجل a‘jal2, f. عجلى ‘ujlā, pl. عجل ‘ujl
quicker, faster; hastier; more cursory
تعجيل ta‘jīl speeding-up, expediting,
acceleration
استعجال isti‘jāl hurry, haste;
precipitance, precipitation │ على وجه
الاستعجال (wajhi l-ist.) expeditiously,
speedily
استعجالي isti‘jālī speedy, expeditious;
temporary, provisional
عاجل ‘ājil pertaining to this world,
worldly; temporal; immediate; عاجلا
‘ājilan soon, presently, before long; at
once, immediately, instantly │ حكم عاجل
(ḥukm) summary judgment (jur.); عاجلا او
آجلا sooner or later; في العاجل والآجل now
and in the future; في عاجله او آجله sooner or
later; في القريب العاجل in the immediate
future
عاجلة ‘ājila fast train, express train;
العاجلة life in this world, temporal existence
معجل mu‘ajjal urgent, pressing;
premature │ معجل الرسم m. ar-rasm
prepaid, postpaid (mail item); حكم بالنفاذ
المعجل (ḥukm, nafād) summary judgment,
sentence by summary proceedings (jur.)
دفع معجل dafa‘a mu‘ajjalan to pay in
advance
متعجل muta‘ajjil hasty, rash, precipitate
مستعجل musta‘jil hurried, in a hurry
مستعجل musta‘jal expeditious, speedy;
urgent, pressing; precipitate, premature │
قاضي الأمور المستعجلة magistrate of summary
justice
عجم ‘ajama u (‘ajm) to try, test, put to the test (
ه s.o.) │ عجم عوده (‘ūdahū) to try, test s.o.,
put s.o. to the test IV to provide ( ھ a
letter) with a diacritical point (with
diacritical points) VII to be obscure,
incomprehensible, unintelligible ( على to
s.o.; language) X to become un-Arabic
عجم ‘ajam (coll.) barbarians, non-
Arabs; Persians; العجم or بلاد العجم Persia
عجم ‘ajam (coll.; n. un. ة) stone, kernel,
pit, pip, seed (of fruit)
عجمي ‘ajamī pl. اعجام a‘jām barbarian,
non-Arab; Persian (adj. and n.)
عجمة ‘ajma barbarism, incorrectness (in
speaking Arabic)
عجماء ‘ajmā’2 pl. عجموات ‘ajmawāt
(dumb) beast
اعجم a‘jam2, f. عجماء ‘ajmā’2, pl. اعاجم
a‘ājim2 speaking incorrect Arabic; dumb,
speechless; barbarian, non-Arab,
foreigner, alien; a Persian 593
اعجمي a‘jamī non-Arabic; non-Arab,
foreigner, alien; a Persian
معجم mu‘jam incomprehensible,
unintelligible, obscure (language, speech);
dotted, provided with a diacritical point
(letter); (pl. معاجم ma‘ājim2) dictionary,
lexicon │ حروف المعجم the letters of the
alphabet
عجن ‘ajana i u (‘ajn) to knead ( ھ s.th.); to
soak ( ھ s.th.) │ لت وعجن في مسألة (latta,
mas’ala) to bring up a problem time and
again, harp on a question
عجان ‘ijān perineum (anat.)
عجان ‘ajjān, f. ة dough kneader
عجين ‘ajīn dough, batter, paste; pastes
(such as noodles, vermicelli, spaghetti,
etc.)
عجينة ‘ajīna a piece of dough; dough;
soft mass, soggy mixture; pl. عجائن ‘ajā’in2
plastics
عجيني ‘ajīnī doughy, doughlike, pasty,
paste-like
معجن mi‘jan pl. معاجن ma‘ājin2 kneading
trough; kneading machine
معجون ma‘jūn pl. معاجين ma‘ājīn2 paste,
cream (cosmet.); putty; electuary; majoon
(confection made of hemp leaves,
henbane, datura seeds, poppy seeds, honey
and ghee, producing effects similar to
those of hashish and opium) │ معجون
الأسنان tooth paste
معجنات mu‘ajjanāt (pot) pies, pasties
عجوة ‘ajwa pressed dates │ اقراص عجوة a pastry
made of rich dough with almonds and date
paste (syr.)
عد ‘adda u (‘add) to count, number,
reckon ( ھ s.th., من .s.o. among); to
enumerate ( ھ s.th.); to compute, calculate
ھ) s.th.); to regard ( ھ ھ, ه s.o., s.th. as),
look ( ھ ھ, ه at s.o., at s.th. as), consider,
think, deem ( ھ ھ, ه s.o., s.th. to be s.th.);
pass. ‘udda to be considered, go ( ھ as
s.th.), pass ( ھ for s.th.); to amount ( ب to)
│ عد الأنفاس عليه (to count s.o.’s breathing
=) to watch closely over s.o., keep a sharp
eye on s.o., watch s.o.’s every move; عد ھ
على to put down, or charge, s.th. to s.o.’s
disadvantage; لا يعد (yu‘addu) numberless,
countless, innumerable II to count off,
enumerate ( ھ s.th.); to make numerous,
multiply, compound ( ھ s.th.) │ عدد الميت
(mayyita) to enumerate the merits of a
dead person, eulogize s.o. IV to prepare ( ل
ھ، ه s.o., s.th. for); to ready, make ready,
get ready ( ل ھ، ه s.o., s.th. for); to prepare,
finish, fit, fix up, adapt, adjust, dress,
arrange, dispose, set up, make ( ل ه
s.th. for), draw up, draft, work out ( ھ
e.g.. a report); to prepare ( ھ one’s lesson)
│ اعد عدته ل (‘uddatahū) to make one’s
preparations for, prepare o.s. for V to be
or become numerous, be manifold, be
multifarious, be multiple; to multiply,
increase in number, proliferate, be
compounded VIII to regard ( ھ ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th. as), look ( ھ ھ، ه at s.o., at s.th. as),
consider, think, deem ( ھ ھ، ه s.o., s.th. to
be s.th.); to reckon ( ب with), rely ( ب
upon); to put down ( ھ، ب s.th., ل to s.o.’s
credit, على to s.o.’s disadvantage); to hold
ب على) against s.o. s.th.), take exception (
ب على to s.o. because of s.th.); to provide
o.s., equip o.s. ( ب with); (of a woman) to
observe the iddat, or legally prescribed
period of waiting, before contracting a
new marriage X to get ready, ready o.s.; to
stand prepared, keep in readiness, stand
by; to prepare o.s.; to be ready, willing,
prepared ( ل for, to do s.th.)
عد ‘add counting, count; enumeration,
listing; computation, calculation
عدة ‘udda readiness, preparedness; --
(pl. عدد ‘udad) equipment, outfit;
implement, instrument, tool; gadget,
device, appliance, contrivance; rigging,
594 tackle, sails; harness (of a horse) │ أخذ
اعد) عدته ل ) (a‘adda) to make one’s
preparations for, prepare o.s. for; s.th. أخذ
عدة الشيء to make preparations for s.th.; عدة
الساعة clockwork, watchwork
عدة ‘idda number; (attributively:)
several, numerous, many, e.g., رجال عدة
(‘iddatun) many men, عدة مرات ‘iddata
marrātin several times; iddat, legally
prescribed period of waiting during which
a woman may not remarry after being
widowed or divorced (Isl. Law)
عدد ‘adad pl. اعداد a‘dād number,
numeral; figure, digit, cipher; quantity;
number, issue (of a newspaper) │ عدد خاص
(kāṣṣ) special number, special issue (e.g.,
of a periodical)
عددي ‘adadī numerical, numeral,
relative to a number or numbers
عديد ‘adīd (with foll. genit.) counted
among or with; numerous; number; large
quantity; equal) │ عدد عديد (‘adad)
enormous quantity, great multitude; ھذا
عديد ذاك this equals that
عداد ’adād pl. -āt counter, meter (for
electricity, gas, etc.)
معداد mi‘dād pl. معاديد ma’ādīd2 abacus
تعداد ta‘dād counting, count;
enumeration, listing; computation,
calculation │ تعداد الأنفس t. al-anfus census
عداد ‘idād number, quantity │ لا عداد له
(‘idāda) innumerable, countless; في عداد
among, e.g., ھو في عدادھم he is counted
among them, he is one of them
اعداد i‘dād preparation, readying,
arranging, setting up, making, drawing up,
drafting
اعدادي i‘dadī preparatory │ شھادة اعدادية
(šahāda) certificate granted after
completing four years of secondary school
(eg.)
تعدد ta‘addud variety, diversity,
multiplicity, plurality, great number,
multitude │ تعدد الآلھة polytheism; تعدد
الزوجات t. az-zajāt polygamy
اعتداد i‘tidād confidence, reliance, trust (
ب in) │ الاعتداد بنفسه (bi-nafsihī) selfconfidence,
self-reliance
استعداد isti‘dād readiness, willingness,
preparedness; (pl. -āt) inclination,
tendency, disposition, propensity;
predisposition ( ل for a disease),
susceptibility ( ل to a disease); pl.
conveniences, amenities, comfort │ كان
على استعداد ل to be prepared, be set for ...; to
be ready, willing, inclined, in a position to
...
استعدادي isti‘dādī preparatory
معدود ma‘dūd countable, numerable,
calculable; limited in number, little, few, a
few, some
معددة mu‘addida (hired) female mourner
معد mu‘add destined, intended ( ل for);
ready, prepared ( ل for و to do s.th.), willing
ل) to do s.th.)
معدات mu‘addāt equipment, material,
materiel, gear; appliances, devices,
implements, gadgets) (معدات حربية (عسكرية
(ḥarbīya, ‘askarīya) war material; معدات
الحريق m. al-ḥarīq fire-fighting equipment
متعدد muta‘addid manifold, multiple,
plural, numerous, varied, variegated,
various, diverse, different; multi-, many-,
poly- (in compounds) متعدد الخلايا m. alkalāya
multicellular (biol.); متعدد النواحي m.
an-nawāḥī multifarious, variegated,
varied, manifold
مستعد musta‘idd prepared, ready ( ل for);
inclined, in a position ( ل to, to do s.th.);
predisposed ( ل for), susceptible ( ل to, esp.
to a disease)
عدس ‘adas (coil.; n. un. ة) lentil(s)
عدسة ‘adasa pl. -āt lens; magnifying
glass; object lens, objective
عدسي ‘adasī lenticular 595
عدل ‘adala i (‘adl, عدالة ‘adāla) to act justly,
equitably, with fairness │ عدل بينھم to treat
everyone with indiscriminate justice, not
to discriminate between them; -- ‘adala i
to be equal ( ھ, ه to s.o., to s.th.), be
equivalent ( ھ to s.th.), be on a par ( ھ, ه
with), be the equal ( ه of s.o.), equal, match
ھ, ه) s.o., s.th.), counterbalance, outweigh
ھ) s.th.); to make equal, equalize, level ( ب
ه s.o. with another), place ( ه s.o.) on the
same level or footing ( ب with another); --
‘adala i ( عدول ‘udūl) to deviate, swerve,
deflect, turn away ( الى عن from -- toward);
to digress, depart, refrain, desist, abstain,
avert o.s., turn away ( عن from), leave off,
relinquish. abandon, renounce, disclaim,
give up, forego, waive, drop ( عن s.th.) │
عدل به عن to make s.o. desist, abstain or
turn away from; عدل ببصره الى (bi-baṣarihī)
to let one’s eyes stray to or toward; --
‘adula u ( عدالة ‘adāla) to be just, fair,
equitable II to straighten, make or put
straight, set in order, array ( ھ s.th.); to
balance, right, rectify, put in order,
straighten out, fix, settle, adjust ( ھ s.th.);
to make ( ھ s.th.) just; to adapt ( ھ s.th.); to
change, alter, commute, amend, modify,
improve ( ھ s.th.); to modulate ( ھ current,
waves; el.) III to be equal ( ھ, ه to s.o., to
s.th.), be equivalent ( ھ to s.th.), be on a
par ( ھ, ه with), be the equal ( ه of s.o.),
equal, match ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.),
counterbalance, outweigh ( ھ s.th.); to
equate, treat as equal ( بين -- وبين two
persons or things) IV to straighten, make
or put straight ( ھ s.th.) V to he changed,
be altered, be commuted, be modified,
undergo modification, change or alteration
VI to be in a state of equilibrium, be
balanced; to be equal, be on a par; to
offset one another, strike a balance VIII to
straighten (up), tense; to draw o.s. up, sit
straight, sit up; to be straight, even,
balanced; to be moderate, be temperate
عدل ‘adl straightness,
straightforwardness; justice, impartiality;
fairness, equitableness, probity, honesty,
uprightness; equitable composition, just
compromise; -- (pl. عدول ‘udūl) just,
equitable, fair, upright, honest; person of
good reputation, person with an honorable
record (Isl. Law); juristic adjunct assigned
to a cadi (Magr.); عدلا ‘adlan equitably,
fairly, justly │ وزير العدل minister of
justice
عدلي ‘adlī forensic, legal, judicial,
juridical, juristic
عدل ‘idl equal, tantamount,
corresponding; -- (pl. اعدال a‘dāl, عدول
‘udūl) either of the two balanced halves of
a load carried by a beast of burden; sack,
bag
عديل ‘adīl equal, like, tantamount,
corresponding; (with foll. genit.) equal (to
s.o.), on a par (with s.o.); (eg.; pl. عدائل
‘adā’il) brother-in-law (husband of one’s
sister)
عدول ‘udūl refraining, abstention,
desistance ( عن from), forgoing,
renunciation, resignation, abandonment,
relinquishment ( عن of s.th.)
عدالة ‘adāla justice, fairness,
impartiality; probity, integrity, honesty,
equitableness; decency, proper conduct;
honorable record (Isl. Law)
عدلية ‘adlīya justice, administration of
justice, jurisprudence │ وزير العدلية
minister of justice
اعدل a‘dal2 more regular, more uniform;
more balanced; juster, fairer, more
equitable; more upright, more honest,
more righteous
تعديل ta‘dīl straightening, straightening
out, settling, setting right; -- (pl. -āt)
change, alteration, commutation, 596
amendment, modification; settlement,
adjustment, regulation; improvement;
reshuffle (of the cabinet); modulation (el.)
│ تعديل وزاري (wizārī) cabinet reshuffle
معادلة mu‘ādala assimilation,
approximation, adjustment, equalization,
leveling, balancing, equilibration; balance,
equilibrium; equality; equivalence;
evenness, proportion, proportionateness,
proportionality; equation (math.)
تعادل ta‘ādul balance, equilibrium;
equality; equivalence; evenness,
proportion, proportionateness,
proportionality; draw, tie (in sports) │
تعادل الأصوات tie vote, equal number of
votes
اعتدال i‘tidāl straightness, erectness,
tenseness; evenness, symmetry,
proportion (e.g., of stature, of growth);
moderateness, moderation, temperance,
temperateness; equinox │ سمت الاعتدال simt
al-i. equinoctial colure (astron.)
اعتدالي i‘tidālī equinoctial
عادل ‘ādil just, fair, equitable; upright,
honest, straightforward, righteous
معدل mu‘addal average; average
amount or sum │ معدل السرعة m. as-sur‘a
average speed; بمعدل as an average, on the
average
معادل mu‘ādil equal, of equal status,
having equal rights
متعادل muta‘āadil balanced, neutral
معتدل mu‘tadil straight, even,
proportionate, symmetrical, harmonious;
moderate, temperate; mild, clement
(weather) │ المنطقة المعتدلة (minṭaqa) the
Temperate Zone
عدم ‘adima a (‘udm, ‘adam) to be deprived, be
devoid, be in want, be deficient ( ھ of
s.th.); to lack, not to have ( ھ s.th:); to lose,
miss ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); -- pass. ‘udima to be
lacking, be missing, be absent, be
nonexistent; to be loot, be gone, have
disappeared; to disappear, vanish IV to
cause ( ه s.o.) to miss or lack ( ھ s.th.); to
deprive ( ھ ه s.o. of s.th.); to destroy,
annihilate, wipe out ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
execute ( ه s.o.); to be or become poor, be
reduced to poverty, become impoverished
VII = pass. I
عدم ‘adam non-being, nonexistence;
nothing, nothingness, nihility; lack, want,
absence; loss, privation; (with foll. genit.)
non-, un-, in-, dis-; (pl. اعدام a‘dām)
nonentity, nullity, banality, trifle │ عدم
الاھتمام inattention, indifference; عدم
الاختصاص noncompetency; عدم الوجود nonbeing,
nonexistence
عدمي ‘adamī nihilist
عدمية ‘adamīya non-being,
nonexistence; nihilism
عديم ‘adīm not having, lacking,
wanting; deprived (of); devoid (of),
without, -less, in-, un- (with foll. genit.) │
عديم الحياة ‘a. al-ḥayāh inanimate, lifeless;
عديم النظير unequaled, incomparable,
unique
اعدام i‘dām destruction, annihilation;
execution │ الحكم بالإعدام (ḥukm) death
sentence
اعدامية i‘dāmīya headcloth without ‘iqāl
(as a sign of mourning)
انعدام in‘idām absence, lack,
nonexistence
عادم ‘ādim pl. عوادم ‘awādim2
nonexistent, lost; unrestorable,
irreclaimable; waste- (in compounds); pl.
waste, refuse, scraps │ المياه العادمة sewage,
sullage, waste water; عوادم الأقطان cotton
waste; انبوبة العوادم unbūbat al-‘a. exhaust
pipe (automobile)
معدوم ma‘dūm nonexistent, wanting,
lacking, absent; missing; lost; gone,
vanished
معدوم mu‘dim poor, destitute;
impoverished 597
عدن ‘adn Eden, Paradise; ‘adan2 Aden (city in
southern Arabia)
معدن ma‘din pl. معادن ma‘ādin2 mine;
lode; metal; mineral; treasure-trove,
bonanza (fig.); (place of) origin, source │
علم المعادن ‘ilm al-m. mineralogy; امتحن معدنه
to probe into s.o.’s very nature
معدن ma‘dan (eg.; syr, ma‘din) very
good! bravo! well done!
معدني ma‘dinī metallic, mineral; المعدنيات
mineralogy │ ماء معدني mineral water
تعدين ta‘dīn mining of metals and
minerals; mining, mining industry
معدن mu‘addin miner
عدنان ‘adnān2 legendary ancestor of the North
Arabs
عدا (عدو ) ‘adā u (‘adw) to run, speed, gallop,
dash, race; to pass ( ھ، ه or عن s.o., s.th.),
go past s.o. or s.th. ( ھ، ه or عن ); to give up,
abandon, leave ( ھ، ه or عن s.o., s.th.); to
pass over, bypass, omit ( ه s. o.), not to
bother ( ب ه s.o. with), exempt, except ( ب
ب s.o. from); to cross, overstep, exceed,
transcend ( ھ s.th.), go beyond s.th. ( ھ ); to
exceed the proper bounds; to infect ( الى
s.o.); -- u ( عدو ‘adw, ‘udūw, عداء ‘adā’,
عدوان ‘udwān, ‘idwān) to engage in
aggressive, hostile action, commit an
aggression, a hostile act ( على against); to
act unjustly ( على toward), wrong ( على s.o.);
to assail, assault, attack, raid ( على s.o.,
s.th.); -- u ( عدو ‘adw) to handicap, hamper,
impede, obstruct ( عن ه s.o. in); to prevent,
hinder ( عن ه s.o. from) │ عدا طوره
(ṭaurahū) to transcend one’s bounds or
limits; لا يعدو ان يفعله not to rail to do s.th.;
to do s.th. inevitably; لا يعدو ان يكون ... it is
no more than , it is only or merely ... II to
cause to cross, overstep, exceed or
transcend; to ferry ( ه s.o., over a river);
(gram.) to make transitive ( ھ a verb); to
give up, abandon, leave ( ھ، ه or عن s.o.,
s.th.); to cross ( ھ s.th., e.g., a river) III to
treat as an enemy ( ه s.o.), show enmity ( ه
toward s.o.), be at war, feud ( ه with s.o.);
to fall out ( ه with s.o.), contract the enmity
ه) of s.o.); to act hostility ( ه toward s.o.); to
counteract, disobey ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), act in
opposition ( ھ، ه to), contravene, infringe (
ھ s.th.) IV to infect ( ه s.o., من with a
disease) V to cross, overstep ( ھ s.th.); to
traverse ( ھ s.th.); to exceed, transcend,
surpass ( ھ s.th.). go beyond s.th. ( ھ ); to
go beyond s.th. ( ھ ) and turn one’s
attention to s.th. else ( الى ), not to be
limited to s.th. ( ھ ) but also to comprise (
الى s.th. else), extend beyond s.th. ( ھ ) to
s.th. else ( الى ); to overtake, pass, outstrip,
outdistance, leave behind ( ھ s.th.); to
overcome, surmount ( ھ s.th., e.g., a
crisis); to pass on, shift, spread ( الى to); to
transgress, infract, violate, break ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., laws); to engage in brutal, hostile
action, commit aggression, a hostile act (
على against); to act unjustly ( على toward
s.o.); to assail, assault, attack, raid ( على
s.o., s.th.); to infringe, encroach, make
inroads ( على upon) │ تعدى عليه بالضرب
(ḍarb) to come to blow, with s.o., lay
hands upon s.o. VI to harbor mutual
enmity, be hostile to one another, be
enemies VII to be infected ( ب with a
disease), catch an infection ( من by, from)
VIII to cross, overstep ( ھ s.th.); to exceed,
transcend, surpass ( ھ s.th.), go beyond
s.th. ( ھ ); to act outrageously, brutally,
unlawfully ( على against); to commit
excesses ( على against); to engage in
aggressive, brutal, hostile action ( على
against), commit an aggression, a hostile
act ( على against); to act unjustly ( على
toward); to violate ( على a woman); to
assail, assault, attack, raid ( على s.o., s.th.),
infringe, encroach, make inroads ( على
upon), make an attempt on s.o.’s ( على ) Iif.
X to appeal for assistance ( ه ٥٩٨ to s.o.
على against); to stir up, rouse, incite ( على ه
s.o. against)
عدا ‘adā, ما عدا or فيما عدا fī-mā ‘adā
(with foll. acc. or genit.) except, save,
with the exception of, excepting ...; فيما عدا
ذلك besides
عدو ‘adw running, run, race (also in
sports)
عدوة ‘udwa side, slope (of a volley),
bank, embankment (of a river), shore
عدو ‘aduw pl. اعداء a‘dā’, عدى ‘idan,
‘udan, عداة ‘udāh, اعاد a‘ādin, f. عدوة
‘adūwa enemy │ عدو لدود (لديد، الد ) (ladūd,
aladd) foe, archenemy
عدوة ‘adūwa fem. of عدو ‘adūw
عدى ‘adīy acting hostilely, aggressive
عداء ‘adā’ enmity, hostility,
antagonism, animosity; aggression
عدائي ‘adā’ī hostile, inimical,
antagonistic, aggressive
عداء ‘adā’ runner, racer
اعدى a‘dā: اعدى الأعداء a. l-a‘dā’ the
worst of enemies
عدوى ‘adwd infection, contagion; --
‘udwā hostile action
عداوة ‘adāwa pl. -āt enmity, hostility,
antagonism, animosity
عدواء ‘udawā’2 hindrance, handicap,
impediment; inconvenience, nuisance,
discomfiture │ ذو عدواء rough, rugged,
uneven; adverse, discomfiting,
inconvenient; bad, poor (mount)
عدوان ‘udwān, ‘idwān enmity, hostility,
hostile action, aggression
عدواني ‘udwānī: سياسة عدوانية policy of
aggression
معدى ma‘dan escape, way out,
avoidance │ لا معدى منه (ma‘dā) inevitable,
unavoidable, inescapable
معدية ma‘diya pl. معاد ma‘ādin ferry,
ferryboat
تعدية ta‘diya ferrying, ferry service;
conversion into the transitive form (gram.)
تعد ta‘addin crossing, overstepping,
exceeding, transcending; overtaking,
passing (e.g., of an automobile); -- (pl.
تعديات ta‘addiyāt) infraction, violation,
breach (e.g., of laws), transgression,
encroachment, inroad ( على on),
infringement of the law; offense against
law, tort, delict (Isl. Law); attack, assault;
aggression
اعتداء i‘tidā’ pl. -āt attack, assault, raid,
inroad ( على on), attempt ( على on s.o.’s
life), criminal attack ( على on); outrage ( على
upon); aggression ( على against; esp. pol.)
معاھدة (اتفاق) عدم الاعتداء mu‘āhadat (ittifāq)
‘adam al-i‘t. pact of nonaggression
عاد ‘ādin pl. عواد ‘awādin aggressive,
attacking, assailing, raiding; (pl. عداة
‘udāh) enemy │ عواد الوحوش beasts of
prey, predatory animals
عادية ‘ādiya pl. -āt, عواد ‘awādin wrong,
offense, misdeed, outrage; adversity,
misfortune, reverse; obstacle, impediment,
obstruction; pi. vicissitudes │ عدت عليھم
عواد (‘adal) fate dealt them heavy blows,
they fell on evil days
معاد mu‘ādin hostile, inimical,
antagonistic
معد mu‘din contagious, infectious │
امراض معدية contagious diseases
متعد muta‘addin transitive (gram.);
aggressor, assailant
معتد mu‘tadin pl. -ūn assailant, assassin;
aggressor (pol.)
عذب ‘aduba u ( عذوبة ‘udūba) to be
sweet, pleasant, agreeable; -- ‘adaba i to
599 hinder, handicap, impede, obstruct ( ه
s.o.) II to afflict, pain, torment, try,
agonize, torture, rack ( ه s.o.); to punish,
chastise, castigate ( ه s.o.) V to be
punished, suffer punishment; to feel pain,
suffer; to torment s.o., be in agony, be
harassed X to find ( ھ s.th.) sweet,
pleasant, or agreeable; to think ( ھ s.th.)
beautiful, nice
عذب ‘adb pl. عذاب ‘idāb sweet; pleasant,
agreeable │ مياه عذب fresh water; عذب
الحديث entertaining, amusing,
companionable, personable
عذاب ‘adāb pl. -āt, اعذبة a‘diba pain,
torment, suffering, agony, torture;
punishment, chastisement, castigation
عذوبة ‘udūba sweetness
اعذب a‘dab2 sweeter, more pleasant,
more agreeable
تعذيب ta‘dīb affliction, tormenting,
agonizing, torture, torturing; punishment,
chastisement, castigation
عذر ‘adara i (‘udr, عذر ma‘dira) to
excuse, absolve from guilt ( ه s.o.), forgive
عن) or في ه s.o. s.th.) │ لم يعذرني he
wouldn’t let me give any excuses, he
wouldn’t take no for an answer, he kept
insisting; -- ‘adara i (‘adr) to circumcise (
ه s.o.) IV = I; to have an excuse │ اعذر من
انذر (man a‘dara) he who warns is excused
V to be difficult, impossible,
impracticable, unfeasible ( على for) VIII to
excuse o.s. apologize ( من ل or الى to s.o.
for s.th.); to give or advance ( ب s.th.) as
an excuse ( عن or من for), plead s.th. ( ب) in
defense of ( عن or من ) X to wish to be
excused; to make an apology, excuse o.s.,
apologize
عذر ‘udr pl. اعذار a‘dār excuse │ ابو عذر
abū ‘u. (with foll. genit.) responsible for,
answerable for; ھو ابو عذر ھذا التطور
(taṭawwur) he is the originator of this
development
عذرة ‘udra virginity, virginhood; name
of an Arab tribe │ ابو عذرة = ابو عذر see
above
عذري ‘udrī belonging to the tribe of
‘udra (see above)
الھوى العذري (hawā) platonic love
عذار ‘idār pl. عذر ‘udur cheek; fluff,
first growth of heard (on the cheeks);
cheekpiece (of a horse’s harness) │ خلع
عذاره to throw off all restraint, drop all
pretenses of shame; خالع العذار unrestrained,
wanton, uninhibited
عذراء ‘adrā’2 pl. عذارى ‘adārā virgin;
العذراء Virgo (astron.); the Virgin Mary
(Chr.) │ فتاة عذراء (fatāh) maiden, virgin
معذرة ma‘dira pl. معاذر ma‘ādir2 excuse,
forgiveness, pardon
معذار mi‘dār pl. معاذير ma’ādīr2 excuse,
plea
تعذر ta‘addur difficulty, impossibility,
impracticability, unfeasibility
اعتذار i‘tidār apology, excuse, plea
معذور ma‘dūr excused, justified,
warranted; excusable
متعذر muta‘addir difficult, impossible,
impracticable, unfeasible
عذق ‘idq pl. اعذاق a‘dāq bunch, cluster (of
dates, of grapes)
عذل ‘adala u (‘adl) to blame, censure, reprove,
rebuke, reproach ( ه s.o.) II = I
عذل ‘adl blame, censure, reproof,
reproach
عذول ‘adūl stem censurer, rebuker,
severe critic
عاذل ‘ādil pl. عذال ‘uddāl, f. عاذلة ‘ādila
pl. عواذل ‘awādil2 censurer, reprover, critic
عذو) and عذى) عذا ‘adā u and عذى ‘adiya a to
be healthy (country, city; due to its
climate, air, etc.) 600
عر ‘arra u to be a shame, be a disgrace ( ھ، ه
for s.o., for s.th.); to bring shame or
disgrace ( ھ، ه upon s.o., upon s.th.),
disgrace, dishonor ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
عرة ‘urra scabies, mange; dung; a
disgraceful, shameful thing
عرر ‘arar scabies, mange
معرة ma‘arra shame, disgrace,
ignominy; stain, blemish, stigma
معتر mu‘tarr miserable, wretched;
scoundrel, rogue
عرب II to Arabicize, make Arabic ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.): to translate into Arabic ( ھ s.th.); to
express, voice, state clearly, declare ( عن
s.th.); to give earnest money, give a
handsel, make a down payment IV to
Arabicize, make Arabic ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.),
give an Arabic form ( ھ to s.th.); to make
plain or clear, state clearly, declare ( عن or
ھ s.th.), express (unmistakably), utter,
voice, proclaim, make known, manifest,
give to understand ( عن s.th., esp. a
sentiment), give expression ( عن to s.th.,
esp. to a sentiment); (gram.) to use
desinential inflection, pronounce the
i‘rāb V to assimilate o.s. to the Arab,
become an Arab, adopt the custom, of the
Arabs X = V
عرب ‘arab (coll.) pl. عروب ‘urūb, اعرب
a‘rub, عربان ‘urbān, اعراب a‘rāb Arabs;
true Arabs, Arabs of the desert, Bedouins
عربي ‘arabī Arab, Arabic, Arabian;
truly Arabic; an Arab; العربية the ‘Arabīya,
the language of the ancient Arabs;
classical, or literary, Arabic
عربة ‘araba a swift river; (pl. -āt)
carriage, vehicle, wagon, cart; (railroad)
car, coach; araba, coach │ عربة الأجرة ‘a.
al-ujra cab, hack, hackney; عربة الأكل ‘a.
al-akl dining car, diner; عربة رش ‘a. rašš
water wagon, sprinkling wagon; عربة ركوب
cab, hack, hackney; عربة الشحن ‘a. aš-šaḥn
wagon, lorry; freight car; عربة مطعم
(maṭ‘am) dining car, diner; عربة الأطفال
baby carriage; عربة النقل ‘a. an-naql wagon,
lorry, van; freight car; عربة النوم ‘a. annaum
sleeping car, sleeper; عربة يد ‘a. yad
handcart, pushcart; wheelbarrow
عربية ‘arabīya pl. -āt carriage, vehicle;
araba, coach; see عربي
عربجي ‘arbajī pl. -īya coachman,
cabman
عربخانة ‘arbakāna car shed, coach
house
عراب ‘arrāb godfather, sponsor
عرابة arrāba godmother, sponsor
اعرابي a‘rābī pl. اعراب a‘rāb an Arab of
the desert, a Bedouin
عروبة ‘urūba Arabism, Arabdom, the
Arab idea, the Arab character
تعريب ta‘rīb Arabicizing, Arabization;
translation into Arabic; incorporation (of
loanwords) into Arabic
اعراب i‘rāb manifestation, declaration,
proclamation, pronouncement, utterance;
expression ( عن of a sentiment); desinential
inflection (gram.)
معرب mu‘arrib translator into Arabic
معرب mu‘arrab Arabicized; translated
into Arabic
معرب mu‘rab desinentially inflective
(gram.)
مستعرب musta‘rib Arabist
عربد ‘arbada to be quarrelsome, be
contentious, pick quarrels; to be noisy,
boisterous, riotous, raise a din
عربد ‘arbada quarrelsomeness,
contentiousness; noise, din, uproar, riot
عربيد ‘irbīd quarrelsome, contentious;
noisy, boisterous, riotous
معربد mu‘arbid quarrelsome,
contentious; noisy, boisterous, riotous
عربس ‘arbasa to upset, disturb, confuse ( ه s.o.)
601
عربن ‘arbana to give earnest money, give a
handsel, make a down payment ( ه to s.o.)
عربون ‘urbūn, ‘arabūn pl. عرابين
‘arābīn2 handsel, earnest money, down
payment; pledge, pawn, gage
عرج ‘araja u ( عروج ‘urūj) to ascend, mount,
rise; -- ‘arija a (‘araj) to be lame, walk
lamely, limp, hobble II to turn ( على to,
toward); to stop, halt, stop over ( على in,
at); to turn ( عن off s.th.), swerve ( عن
from); to lame, cripple, paralyze ( ه s.o.); to
zigzag, make zigzag ( ھ s.th.) IV to lame,
cripple, paralyze ( ه s.o.) V to zigzag,
follow a zigzag course VII to incline, lean,
bend, curve; to be or become crooked,
curved, bent, sinuous, winding
عرج ‘araj lameness
اعرج a‘raj2, f. عرجاء ‘arjā’2, pl. عرج
‘urj, عرجان ‘urjān lame, limping; -- jack
(in a deck of cards)
معرج ma‘raj pl. معارج ma‘ārij2 place of
ascent; (route of) ascent
معرج mi‘raj pl. معارج ma‘ārij2 ladder,
stairs
معراج mi‘rāj; pl. معاريج ma‘ārīj2 ladder,
stairs; المعراج the midnight journey to the
seven heavens (made by Mohammed on
the 27th of Rajab, from Jerusalem) │ ليلة
المعراج lailat al-m. the night of
Mohammed’s ascension to the seven
heavens
تعاريج ta‘ārīj2 (pl.) curves, curvatures,
bends, turns, twists, windings, sinuosities;
wavy lines, serpentines
تعرج ta‘arruj zigzag (course)
متعرج muta‘arrij winding, twisting,
tortuous, sinuous; zigzag
منعرج mun‘arij crooked, curved, bent,
winding, twisting, tortuous, sinuous
منعرج mun‘araj pl. -āt bend, turn,
curve, twist, angle (of roads, etc.)
عرزال ‘irzāl hut or shack of the rural warden
(usually in a tree or on top of a roof)
عرس II (nejd.) to marry ( ب ه s.o. to) IV to
arrange a wedding feast
عرس ‘urs, ‘urus pl. اعراس a‘rās, عرسات
‘urusāt marriage; wedding, wedding feast
عرس ‘irs pl. اعراس a‘rās husband; wife
│ ابن عرس ibn ‘irs pl. بنات عرس banāt ‘irs
weasel (zool.)
عرسة ‘irsa weasel
عروس ‘arūs pl. عرس ‘urus bridegroom;
f. (pl. عرائس ‘arā’is) bride; doll; العروسان
al-‘arūsān bride and groom, the
newlyweds │ عرائس النيل ‘a. an-nīl lotus
عروسة ‘arūsa pl. عرائس ‘arā’is2 bride;
doll, baby doll │ عروسة البرقع ‘a. al-burqu‘
metal tubes ornamenting the veil of
Muslim women
عريس ‘arīs bridegroom
عريس ‘irrīs lair of a lion, lion’s den
عرش ‘araša i u to erect a trellis ( ھ for
grapevines), train on a trellis or espalier,
to trellis, to espalier ( ھ vines) II to roof
over ( ھ s.th.)
عرش ‘arš pl. عروش ‘urūš, اعراش a‘rāš
throne; tribe (magr.)
عريش ‘arīš pl. عرش ‘uruš, عرائش
‘arā’iš2 arbor, bower; hut made of twigs;
booth, shack, shanty; trellis (for
grapevines); shaft, carriage pole
العريش El Arish (town in N Egypt, on
Mediterranean)
تعريشة ta‘rīša pl. تعاريش ta‘ārīš2 trellis,
lattice-work; arbor, bower
عرص ‘araṣa a (‘araṣ) to be lively, gay, merry
عرص ‘arṣa pl. ‘araṣāt, اعراص a‘rāṣ
vacant lot; courtyard, court of a house
معرص mu‘arraṣ pimp, procurer;
cuckold 602
عرض 1 ‘aruḍa u to be or become wide, broad,
to widen, broaden; -- ‘araḍa i (‘arḍ) to
become visible, appear ( ل to s.o.); to get in
s.o.’s ( ل) way; to happen ( ل to s.o.), befall
ل) s.o.); to occur ( ل to s.o.), come to s.o.’s
ل) ) mind; to turn ( ل to s.o., to s.th.); to
take care ( ل of), concern o.s. ( ل with), turn
one’s attention, put one’s mind, apply o.s.,
attend ( ل to), go in ( ل for), go into s.th. (
ل), enter, embark ( ل upon), take up, treat (
ل s.th.), deal ( ل with); to show,
demonstrate, present, set forth, display,
exhibit, lay open, submit, turn in ( على ھ
s.th. to s.o.), lay, put ( على ھ s.th. before
s.o.); to show ( ھ e.g., a film), stage ( ھ
e.g., a play); to offer, suggest, propose (
على ھ s.th. to s.o.); to subject ( على ھ s.th.
to a critical examination, and the like); to
inspect ( ھ s.th.); to review ( ھ troops),
pass in review ( ھ s.th., also before one’s
mental eye); pass. ‘uriḍa to be or go mad,
insane │ عرض له عارض an obstacle arose
in his path; عرض له خاطر a thought
occurred to him, he had an idea II to make
wide or broad, widen, broaden, extend ( ھ
s.th.); to expose ( ل ھ، ه s.o., s.th. to s.th.,
esp. to risk: ل ھ s.th. to the sun); to
intimate, insinuate ( ل or ب s.th.), allude ( ل
or ب to), hint ( ل or ب at) │ عرضه للنور to
hold s.th. against the light III to offer
resistance ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.), resist ( ,ھ
s.o., s.th.), work against s.o. or s.th. ( ;(ھ، ه
to contradict, oppose ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), raise
objections, protest, remonstrate ( ھ، ه
against s.o., against s.th.); to be against
s.o. or s.th. ( ھ , .); to avoid, shun ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to compare ( ب ھ s.th. with) IV to
turn away, avert o.s. ( ب from), avoid, shun
عن) s.o., s.th.), shirk ( عن s.th.), give up,
abandon, relinquish, discard, renounce,
disclaim ( عن s.th.); not to mention ( عن
s.th.): اعرض عن ... الى to turn away from
s.th. and to s.th. else V to resist, oppose ( ل
s.o., s.th.), stand up ( ل against), raise
objections, object ( ل to); to face ( ل s.th.,
e.g., a problem); to interfere ( ل with),
meddle ( ل in); to put one’s mind, turn
one’s attention ( ل to), go into s.th. ( ل, e.g.,
a topic): to undertake ( ل s.th.), embark ( ل
upon s.th.); to expose o.s., be exposed, be
subjected ( ل to s.th.); to run the risk ( ل of),
risk ( ل doing or being s.th.); to dare,
venture, risk ( ل s.th.) VI to oppose one
another; to be contradictory, conflict, be
incompatible ( مع with) VIII to betake o.s.,
go, present o.s. ( ه to s.o.); to raise an
objection, make objections, object ( على
to). veto ( على s.th.), remonstrate, protest (
على against); to resist, oppose ( على s.o.,
s.th.); to stand up ( ل or ھ، ه against s.o.,
against s.th.), stand in, or obstruct, the
way of s.o. or s.th. ( ل or ھ، ه ); to hinder
impede, obstruct ( ل s.o.); to happen ( ه to
s.o.), befall ( ه s.o.) │ اعترض سبيله to block
s.o.’s way X to ask to be shown ( ه s.o., ھ
s.th.); to pass in review ( ھ s.th., esp. in
one’s imagination, before one’s mental
eye), call up, conjure up, call to one’s
mind, picture to o.s., visualize ( ھ s.th.); to
weigh, consider, examine ( ھ s.th.); to
inspect, review ( ھ troops); to expound, set
forth ( ھ s.th.); to proceed ruthlessly; to
massacre without much ado ( ھم the
enemy)
عرض ‘arḍ pl. عروض ‘urūḍ breadth;
width; presentation, demonstration,
staging, show(ing), performance; display,
exposition, exhibition; submission, filing
(e.g., of an application); proposition,
proposal, offer, tender; parade; review
(mil.); merchandise, goods │ بالعرض
across, crosswise, in breadth; العرض والطلب
(ṭalab) supply and demand; عرض الأزياء
‘a. al-azyā’ fashion show; عرض حال ‘a.
ḥāl or عرضحال pl. عرضحالات ‘arḍuḥālāt
application, petition, memorial; ( خط (درجة
العرض kaṭṭ (darajat) al-‘a. degree 603 of
latitude; شباك العرض šubbāk al-‘a. show
window; يوم العرض yaum al-‘a. the Day of
Judgment, Doomsday
عرضي ‘arḍī cross- (in compounds),
transverse, horizontal │ خط عرضي (kaṭṭ)
latitudinal degree, geographical latitude
عرض ‘urḍ pl. اعراض a‘rāḍ honor, good
repute; dignity │ انا في عرضك I rely on
your generosity, have mercy upon me!
عرض ‘urḍ side; middle │ في عرض البحر
(‘u. il-baḥr) at sea, on the high seas; القى
ضرب) به عرض الحائط ) to undervalue, scorn,
disdain, despise, reject s.th.; to ruin,
thwart, foil s.th.; to throw s.th. overboard,
jettison s.th.; نظر اليه عن عرض (‘an ‘urdin)
he looked askance at him, he gave him a
slanting glance (contemptuously); في عرض
الناس amid the crowd of people; ھو من عرض
الناس he belongs to the common people
عرضاني ‘arḍānī transversal, transverse,
latitudinal; measured crosswise
عرض ‘araḍ pl. اعراض a‘rāḍ accident
(philos.); contingent, nonessential
characteristic; s.th. nonessential, a
contingent, s.th. accidental: symptom,
manifestation of disease; عرضا ‘araḍan,
بالعرض incidentally, by chance
عرضي ‘araḍī accidental (philos.), nonessential,
unessential; incidental,
accidental, contingent, fortuitous, casual;
عرضيات ‘arādīyāt unessential incidents,
unessentials; accidentals │ خطيئة عرضية
venial sin (Chr.)
عرضة ‘urḍa target; (object of)
intention, intent, design; object ( ل of):
exposed, subject(ed), liable ( ل to s.th.);
(with foll. genit.) suitable for, fitting for,
appropriate for
عروض ‘arūḍ prosody; (pl. اعاريض
a‘ārīḍ2) last foot of the first hemistich │
علم العروض ‘ilm al-‘a. metrics, prosody
عروضي ‘arūḍī prosodic(al), metrical
عريض ‘arīḍ pl. عراض ‘irāḍ broad,
wide; extensive, vast
عريضة ‘arīḍa pl. عرائض ‘arā’iḍ2
petition, application, memorial
معرض ma‘riḍ pl. معارض ma‘āriḍ2 place
where s.th. is exhibited or displayed;
showroom, stage; exposition, exhibition;
show; fair (com.); (with foll. genit.) time,
occasion for s.th. │ في معرض (with foll.
genit.) in the form of ..., in ... manner; on
the occasion of, at the occurrence or
appearance of; لسنا الآن في معرض ... (lasnā)
with foll. verbal noun: this is not the place
for us to ...; لسنا في معرض الكلام عن let us not
speak of ... now, this is not the place to
speak of ...; معرض الأزياء m. al-azyā’
fashion show; معرض الصحف m. aṣ-ṣuḥuf
press review
معرض mi‘raḍ wedding gown
معراض mi‘rāḍ: قال في معراض كلامه (m.
kalāmihī) to mention casually, say among
other things
تعريض ta‘rīḍ intimation, allusion, hint,
indication
معارضة mu‘āraḍa opposition (esp.
pol.); resistance, contradiction,
remonstrance, objection, exception,
protect; O resistance (el.)
اعراض i‘rāḍ shunning, avoidance,
evasion; reluctance │ في اعراض reluctantly
تعارض ta‘āruḍ conflict, clash,
antagonism, contradiction, contrariety
اعتراض i‘tirāḍ pl. -āt resistance,
opposition, objection, exception,
counterargument, counterassertion,
counterblast, riposte, rebuttal, rejoinder,
expostulation, remonstrance, protest;
(right of) veto (Isl. Law) │ حق الاعتراض
ḥaqq al-i‘t. (right of) veto (pol.)
استعراض isti‘rāḍ examination, survey;
parade, review; revue, musical show 604
استعراضي isti‘rāḍī revue-, show- (in
compounds), revue-like │ فرقة استعراضية
(firqa) Show troupe; revue troupe; فلم
استعراضي film musical
عارض ‘āriḍ pl. -ūn exhibitor (e.g., at a
fair); demonstrator; -- (pl. عوارض ‘awāriḍ)
obstacle, impediment, obstruction;
temporary disturbance, anomalous
condition (physically); attack, fit, spell;
s.th. accidental, s.th. nonessential, an
accidcnt; side of the face; -- العارضان the
cheeks │ خفيف العارضين k. al-‘āriḍain
having a sparse beard; في عارض الطريق in
the middle of the road
عارضة āriḍa pl. -āt woman
demonstrator, woman exhibitor; -- (pl.
عوارض ‘awāriḍ2) side of the face;
doorpost, jamb; crossbeam, transom; joist,
girder; purlin; O anode (el.) │ قوة العارضة
qūwat al-‘ā. eloquence; عارضة الأزياء
mannequin
عارضي ‘āridī accidental, casual,
occasional
معروض ma‘rūd pl. معاريض ma‘ārīḍ2
exposition, report; memorial, petition,
application; -- pl. -āt propositions,
proposals, offers, tenders; exhibits,
exhibited articles
معارض mu‘āriḍ adversary, opponent,
antagonist, opposer; contradicter
معترض mu‘tariḍ running or lying
across, transversal, transverse; adversary,
opponent, antagonist, opposer;
contradicter; resistance (el.) │ جملة معترضة
(jumla) parenthetical clause, parenthesis
عرضي 2 ‘urḍī (from Turk. ordu) military
encampment, army camp
عرف ‘arafa i ( معرفة ma‘rifa, عرفان ‘irfān) to
know ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to recognize,
perceive ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to be cognizant,
be aware ( ھ of s.th.), be acquainted ( ھ
with s.th.), to discover, experience, find
out ( ھ s.th.); to recognize, acknowledge (
ب s.th., ھ s.th. as being right; ھ ھ s.th. as);
to concede, acknowledge ( ل ھ s.th. to
s.o.), allow ( ل ھ for s.th. in s.o.); to
approve ( ھ of); to distinguish,
differentiate ( من ھ، ه s.o., s.th. from); pass.
‘urifa to be known ( ب as, by the name of)
│ عرف حق المعرفة (ḥaqqa l-m.) to know for
sure, be sure (of), be positive (about);
عرفت له الجميل she was grateful to him, she
appreciated his service, she gratefully
acknowledged his service II to announce (
ھ ه to s.o. s.th.), inform, advise, apprise ( ھ
ه s.o. of), acquaint ( ھ ه s.o. with s.th.); to
introduce ( الى or ب ه s.o. to s.o. else), have
ه) s.o.) meet ( الى or ب s.o. else), present ( ب
ه s.o. to s.o. else); to define ( ھ s.th.); to
determine, specify, characterize, explain (
ھ s.th.); (gram.) to make definite ( ھ a
noun); (Chr.) to confess ( ه a penitent),
hear the confession ( ه of s.o.) V to become
acquainted ( ب or الى also على with s.o.),
meet ( ب or الى s.o.), make the
acquaintance of s.o. ( ب or الى ); to make
o.s. known, disclose one’s identity, reveal
o.s. ( الى to s.o.); to acquaint o.s.,
familiarize o.s. ( ل. or الى with), get to
know ( على or الى s.th.); to sound, explore (
ھ s.th.); to trace, discover, uncover ( ھ
s.th.); (gram.) to be or become definite
(noun) VI to become acquainted with one
another, become mutually acquainted, get
to know each other; to become acquainted
ب) with); to come to know ( ھ s.th.), learn
ھ) about) VIII to confess, admit,
acknowledge, own, avow ( ھ s.th.); to
recognize ( ب s.o., s.th.), grant recognition
ب) to s.o., to s.th.); to concede,
acknowledge ( ل ب s.th. to s.o.); to make a
confession, to confess (Chr.) │ اعترف
بالجميل to be grateful X to discern,
recognize ( ھ s.th.)
عرف ‘arf fragrance, perfume, scent,
aroma 605
عرف ‘urf beneficence, kindness;
custom, usage, practice, convention,
tradition, habit; legal practice; custom,
customary law (jur.); (pl. اعراف a‘rāf)
crest, comb (or a rooster), mane (of a
horse) │ في عرفه as was his wont,
according to his habit; in his opinion;
العرف السياسي (siyāsī) protocol
عرفي ‘urfī traditional, conventional,
usual, common, customary, habitual;
pertaining to secular legal practice (as
opposed to šar‘ī); private, unofficial (as
opposed to rasmī) │ الحكم العرفي (ḥukm)
martial law; الأحكام العرفية do.; محكمة عرفية
(maḥkama) court-martial
عرف ‘arīf pl. عرفاء ‘urafā’2 knowing ( ب
s.th.), cognizant, aware ( ب of s.th.);
expert, authority, specialist; teaching
assistant, monitor (an older pupil assisting
the teacher of a Koran school); sergeant
(Ir.); corporal (U.A.R); رئيس العرفاء a
military rank, approx.: master sergeant
(Ir., Syr.); نائب عريف approx.: corporal
(Ir.); (pl. عرفان ‘irfān) teacher, esp. a
teacher and precentor of congregational
singing (Copt.-Chr.)
عراف ‘arrāf diviner, fortuneteller
عرافة ‘arrāfa pl. -āt (woman)
fortuneteller
عرافة ‘irāfa fortuneteller’s trade;
fortunetelling, divination
عرفات ‘arafāt Arafat, name of a
mountain and adjacent plain, located four
hours’ distance east of Mecca, where the
Mecca pilgrims spend the 9th day of
Zu’lhijja
عرفان ‘irfān cognition, knowledge,
perception; recognition, acknowledgment
│ عرفان الجميل gratitude, thankfulness;
عرفان الفضل ‘i. al-faḍl do.
اعرف a‘raf2 knowing better ( ب s.th.),
more cognizant. more knowledgeable ( ب
of), better acquainted. more conversant ( ب
with), more expert, more versed ( ب in); a
better connoisseur ( ب of); (f. عرفاء ‘arfā’2)
having a crest or mane, crested, maned
معرفة ma‘rifa pl. معارف ma‘ārif2
knowledge, learning, lore, information.
Skill, know-how; cognition, intellection,
perception, experience, realization;
gnosis; acquaintance, cognizance,
conversance, versedness; an acquainted
person, an acquaintance, a friend; (gram.)
definite noun; pl. المعارف cultural affairs,
education │ بمعرفة by, through (after the
passive); مع المعرفة knowingly, deliberately
(jur.); وزير المعارف العمومية (‘umāmīya)
minister of education; لم يكن معرفة في قومه
(qaumihī) he was unknown among his
people
معارف ma‘ārif2 face, countenance,
features
تعريف ta‘rīf pl. -āt, تعاريف ta‘ārīf2
announcement, notification,
communication, information; instruction,
direction; (social) introduction; definition,
determination, identification,
specification, characterization; a rendering
definite (gram.) │ اداة التعريف adāt at-t.
(gram.) the definite article; بطاقة التعريف
identity card
تعريفة ta‘rīfa notification, information,
apprising; -- (pl. -āt, تعاريف ta‘ārīf2) tariff;
price list
تعرف ta‘arruf acquaintance ( ب or الى
with); exploration, study; cognition,
knowledge, perception, realization
اعتراف i‘tirāf recognition, acceptance;
acknowledgment, avowal, admission,
confession; (Chr.) confession │ اعترافا ب
in recognition of; الاعتراف بالجميل (bi-ljamīl)
gratitude, thankfulness; ابو الاعتراف
father-confessor, confessor (Chr.); سر
الاعتراف sirr al-i‘t. sacrament of penance
(Chr.); معلم الاعتراف mu‘allim 606 al-i‘t.
father-confessor, confessor (Chr.); من
الاعتراف ان it must be admitted that ...,
admittedly ...
عارف ‘ārif acquainted, conversant,
familiar ( ب with); connoisseur, expert;
master (tun.)
عارفة ‘ārifa (syr.) sage, wise man (of a
village or tribe)
معروف ma‘rūf known, well-known;
universally accepted, generally
recognized; conventional; that which is
good, beneficial, or fitting, good, benefit;
fairness, equity, equitableness; kindness,
friendliness, amicability; beneficence;
favor rendered, courtesy, mark of
friendship; active voice (gram.) │ بالمعروف
or بمعروف in (all) fairness; with
appropriate courtesy, in a friendly manner,
amicably; ناكر المعروف ungrateful; المعروف
ان it is (well-) known that ..., as is wellknown
..., it is commonly held that ..., it is
generally understood that ...
متعارف muta‘āraf or متعارف عليه
common, usual, customary;
commonplace, trivial, trite, hackneyed,
banal
معترف mu‘taraf confessor (in the
hierarchy of saints; Chr.)
معترف به mu‘taraf bihī recognized,
accepted, admitted, granted, approved-of,
licensed, authorized ھ ‘ariqa a (‘araq) to
sweat, perspire II to make or let ( ه s.o.)
sweat, promote perspiration; to add water
ھ) to a drink), dilute ( ھ a drink); to take
root, strike roots; to be deeply rooted; to
vein, marble ( ھ s.th.) IV to take root,
strike roots V = IV
عرق ‘irq pl. عروق ‘urūq root; stem (of a
plant, of a leaf); vein (bot., anat.);
hereditary disposition; race, stock, descent
│ عرق الذھب ‘i. ad-dahab ipecac,
ipecacuanha (bot.); عرق سوس ‘i. sūs
licorice root; عرق النسا ‘i. an-nasā sciatica
(med.); طيب العرق ṭīb al-‘i. noble descent;
طيب العرق ṭayyib al-‘i. of noble descent,
high born; العرق دساس (dassās) blood will
tell, what ill bred in the bone will come
out in the flesh; ضرب فيه بعرق to have a
share in s.th., participate in s.th.
عرق ‘araq sweat, perspiration; arrack, a
strong colorless liquor made of raisins,
milky white when diluted with water
(esp. syr.; = eg. zabīb) │ عرق القربة ‘a.
al-qirba pains, toil, exertion; عرق زحلاوي
(zaḥlāwī) a well-known brand of arrack
made in Zahlé (Lebanon)
عرقة ‘araqa transom between two
layers of stone or brick
عرقية ‘araqīya (eg.) white cotton
skullcap often worn under the tarboosh)
عراقة ‘arāaqa deep-rootedness; ancient
ancestral line, old family │ عراقة في النسب
(nasab) noble descent
عراقية ‘arrāqīya (eg.) white cotton
skullcap (often worn under the tarboosh)
عريق ‘arīq deep-rooted │ عريق في القدم
(qidam) ancient; centuried, centuries-old;
من عائلة عريقة from an old, respectable
family; عريق النسب ‘a. an-nasab of noble
descent, highborn
العراق al-‘irāq Iraq; العراقان al-‘irāqān
Basra and Kufa
عراق ‘irāqī Iraqi, Iraqian; (pl. -ūn) an
Iraqi
اعرق a’raq2 more deep-rooted
معروق ma‘rūq gaunt, emaciated, lean
(face, hand, etc.)
معرق mu‘arriq sudorific, promoting
perspiration
معرق mu‘arraq veined; mu‘riq firmly
rooted │ معرق في القدم (mu‘riq, qidam) very
old, ancient, centuried, centuries-old 607
عرقب ‘arqaba to hamstring ( ھ an animal)
عرقوب ‘urqūb pl. عراقيب ‘arāqīb2
Achilles’ tendon; hamstring; ‘urqūb name
of a famed liar │ اكذب من عرقوب a greater
liar than ‘Urqūb
عرقوبي ‘urqūbī false, deceitful
(promise)
عرقل ‘arqala to render difficult, complicate,
handicap, hinder, hamper, encumber,
impede, obstruct, delay ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.),
throw obstacle, in the way of s.o. or s.th. (
ھ، ه ); (tun.) to seize, confiscate, impound (
ھ s.th.) II ta‘arqala to be aggravated,
rendered difficult, be or become
complicated, be hindered, hampered,
encumbered, impeded, obstructed,
handicapped, delayed
عرقلة ‘arqala impeding, hindering,
encumbering; -- (pl. عراقيل ‘arāqīl2)
encumbrance, impediment, hindrance;
obstacle, difficulty, handicap
عرك ‘araka u (‘ark) to rub ( ھ s.th.); to turn,
adjust ( ھ the knobs of a radio, and the
like) ; to play havoc ( ھ with), damage
severely ( ھ s.th.); -- ‘arika a to be strong
in battle, be a tough fighter III to fight,
struggle, contend ( ه with s.o.) VI to
engage in a fight, fight one another VIII =
VI
عرك ‘ark experience (gained through
suffering)
عركة ‘arka fight, struggle, battle,
combat
عريكة ‘arīka disposition, frame of mind,
temper, nature
معركة ma‘raka, ma‘ruka pl. معارك ‘arik2
battlefield; battle
عراك ‘irāk struggle, fight, strife, battle,
combat
معاركة mu’āraka struggle, fight, strife,
battle, combat
عرك mu’tarak fighting ground, battle
ground
عرم II to heap up, pile up, stack ( ھ s.th.) VIII
to be vicious; to be stubborn, obstinate,
headstrong
عرم ‘arim vicious; strong, violent,
vehement, powerful, terrific; dam, dike │
جيش عرم (jaiš) numerous, huge army
عرام ‘urām viciousness (of character);
violence, vehemence │ سيل عرام (sail)
huge quantity, tremendous flood
عرمة ‘urma pl. عرم ‘uram heap, pile,
bulk, mass, large amount, multitude
عرمة ‘arama pl. عرم ‘aram heap, pile,
bulk, mass, huge amount, multitude
عارم ‘ārim vicious; tempestuous,
violent, vehement, strong; tremendous,
enormous, huge
عرمرم ‘aramram strong, violent, vehement │
جيش عرمرم (jaiš) a numerous, huge army
عرين ‘arīn pl. عرن ‘urun thicket; lair of a lion,
lion’s den
عرينة ‘arīna pl. عرائن ‘arā’in2 lair of a
wild animal
عرنين ‘irnīn pl. عرانين ‘arānīn2 upper
part of the nose, bridge of the nose
عرناس ’irnās pl. عرانيس ‘arānīs2 distaff │ عرناس
ذرة ‘i. dura corncob (syr.)
عرا (عرو ) ‘arā u (‘arw) and VIII to befall, grip,
seize, strike, afflict ( ه s.o.), come, descend
ه) upon s.o.), happen ( ه to s.o.); to take
possession ( ه of s.o.)
عروة ‘urwa pl. عرى ‘uran buttonhole;
loop, noose, coil; ear, handle (of a jug, and
the like); tie, bond, e.g., عرى الصداقة ‘u. aṣ-
ṣadāqa bonds of friendship; support, prop,
stay │ العروة الوثقى (wutqā) the firm,
reliable grip or hold, the firm tie
عري ‘ariya a (‘ury, عرية ‘urya) to be
naked, nude; to be free, be bare ( عن of) │
عري عن (من) ثيابه to take off one’s clothes,
strip (naked), undress, have no clothes 608
on; عرى عن كل اساس (asās) to be
completely unfounded, be without any
foundation II to disrobe, unclothe, undress
ه) s.o.); to bare, denude, lay bare, uncover
ه) s.th.); to strip ( من ثيابه ه s.o. of hill
clothes); to deprive, divest, strip ( ه من s.o.
of s.th.)
عري ‘ūry nakedness, nudity; unsaddled
(horse)
عرية ‘urya nakedness, nudity
عراء ‘arā’ nakedness, nudity; bareness;
open space, open country │ في العراء in the
open air, under the open sky, outside,
outdoors; مسرح في العراء (masraḥ) open-air
theater
عريان ‘uryān pl. عرايا ‘arāyā naked,
nude, undressed, bare │ عريان ملط
(malṭ)`stark-naked (eg.)
O عريانية ‘uryānīya nudism
المعاري al-ma‘ārī the uncovered parts of
the body (hands, feet, face)
عار ‘ārin pl. عراة ‘urāh naked, nude,
undressed, bare; free, devoid, destitute,
bare, deprived, stripped, denuded ( من or
عن of s.th.); blank, bare (e.g., a room),
stark (e.g., a narrative) │ عاري الأقدام
barefoot(ed), unshod
عز ‘azza i (‘izz, عزة ‘izza عزازة ‘azāza) to be or
become strong, powerful, respected; to be
or become rare, scarce, be scarcely to be
found; to be or become dear, cherished,
precious ( على to s.o.); عز عليه ان he is sorry
that ...; to be hard, difficult ( على for s.o.);
to hurt, pain ( على s.o.), be painful ( على for
s.o.), be hard ( على on s.o.) II to make
strong. strengthen, reinforce, fortify,
corroborate, confirm, solidify, invigorate,
harden, advance, support ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.);
to consolidate ( ھ s.th,); to honor ( ه s.o.); to
raise in esteem, elevate, exalt ( ه s.o.); to
make dear, endear ( ه s.o.) │ عزز جانبه to
strengthen, reinforce, fortify, solidify,
consolidate s.th., make s.th. strong,
powerful, mighty IV to make strong,
strengthen, fortify, reinforce, invigorate,
harden, steel ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to love ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to honor ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
esteem, value, prize ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
make dear, endear ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) V to be
or become strong, powerful, mighty,
forceful, strengthened, fortified,
reinforced, invigorated, hardened,
solidified, consolidated; to be proud, boast
ب) of), pride o.s., glory, exult ( ب in) VIII
to feel strong or powerful ( ب due to,
because of); to be proud, boast ( ب of),
pride o.s., glory, exult ( ب in); to arrogate
to o.s. ( ب s.th.) X to overwhelm,
overcome ( على s.o.); to become powerful,
mighty, respected, honored, be exalted; to
make or hold dear, value highly, esteem ( ه
s.o.)
عز might, power, standing, weight;
strength, force; honor. glory, high rank,
fame, celebrity, renown │ عزھا Her
Highness (title); في عز شبابه (šabābihī) in
the prime of his youth
عزة ‘izza might, power, standing,
weight; strength. force; honor, glory, high
rank, fame, celebrity. renown; pride │ عزة
الجانب power, might; العزة القومية (qaumīya)
national pride; عزة النفس ‘i. an-nafs sense
of honor, self-respect, self-esteem; صاحب
العزة title of a bey
عزيز ‘azīz pl. اعزاء a‘izzā’ اعزة , 2 a‘izza
mighty, powerful, respected,
distinguished, notable; strong; noble,
esteemed, venerable, august; honorable;
rare, scarce, scarcely to be found;
difficult, hard ( على for); precious, costly,
valuable; dear, beloved ( على to),
cherished, valued ( على by); friend; ruler,
overlord │ عزيزي my dear! (esp. as a
salutation in letters); عزيز الجانب mighty,
powerful, strong 609
اعز a‘azz2 mightier, more powerful;
stronger; dearer, more beloved; العزى
al-‘uzzā a goddess of the pagan Arabs
معزة ma‘azza esteem, regard, affection,
love
تعزيز ta‘zīz pl. -āt strengthening,
consolidation, support, backing
اعزاز i‘zāz strengthening, fortification,
reinforcement, consolidation; love,
affection, esteem, regard
اعتزاز i‘tizāz pride ( ب in)
معتز mu‘tazz proud; mighty, powerful
عزب ‘azaba i u ( عزوب ‘uzūb) to be far, be
distant ( عن from); to slip, escape ( عن s.o.’s
mind) │ عزب عن الأذھان to be forgotten,
sink into oblivion; -- ‘azaba u ( عزبة ‘uzba,
عزوبة ‘uzūba) to be single, unmarried
عزب ‘azab pl. عزاب ‘uzzāb, اعزاب a‘zāb
celibate, single, unmarried; bachelor
عزبة ‘izba pl. عزب ‘izab (eg.) country
estate, farm; rural settlement
عزبة ‘uzba celibacy; bachelorhood
عزوبة ‘uzūba celibacy; bachelorhood
اعزب a‘zab2 celibate, single, unmarried;
bachelor
معزب mu‘azzab sheik, emir (Nejd)
عزر ‘azara i (‘azr) to censure, rebuke, reprove,
reprimand ( ه s.o.); to refuse to have
anything to do with s.o.; -- ‘azara i to
curb, restrain, subdue ( ه s.o.’s pride, and
the like) II to censure, rebuke, reprove.
reprimand ( ه s.o.); to refuse to have
anything to do with s.o.
عزر ’azr censure, blame, rebuke,
reproof, reprimand
تعزير ta‘zīr censure, blame, rebuke,
reproof, reprimand; chastisement,
castigation
اعتزار i‘tizār self-discipline
عزرائيل ‘izrā’īl2 Azrael, the angel of death
عزف ‘azala i (‘af) to play ( على on a musical
instrument, ھ tunes); to play ( ل to or for
s.o.), make music ( ل for s.o.); -- i u (‘azf,
عزوف ‘uzūf) to turn away ( عن from s.th.),
become averse ( عن to s.th.), avoid, shun (
عن s.th.), abstain, refrain ( ان from doing
s.th.)
عزوف ‘azūf disinclined, averse ( عن to
s.th.)
معزف mi‘zaf pl. معازف ma‘āzif2 stringed
instrument; O piano
عازف ‘āzif player, (musical) performer
معزوفة ma‘zūfa pl. -āt piece of music,
performance, recital (on an instrument)
عزق ‘azaqa i (‘azq) to hoe, dig up, break up,
loosen ( الأرض al-arḍa the soil)
معزقة mi‘zaqa pl. معازق ma‘āziq2 hoe,
mattock
عزل ‘azala i (‘azl) to remove, set aside,
isolate, separate, segregate, detach, cut off
عن ھ، ه) s.o., s.th. from); to depose ( ه s.o.),
release, dismiss, discharge ( ه s.o. عن منصبه
‘an manṣibihī of his office) IV اعزل منصبه
(manṣibahū) to give up one’s position,
resign VII to be or become isolated, cut
off, separated, segregated, detached ( عن
from) VIII to keep away, stand aloof,
leave, withdraw; to retire, seclude o.s.,
segregate, secede, detach o.s., dissociate
o.s., separate o.s., isolate o.s. ( عن or ھ، ه
from s.o., from s.th.), part ( عن or ھ، ه with
s.o., with s.th.); to be or get deposed │
اعتزل الخدمة (kidmata), اعتزل العمل (‘amala)
to retire from service, from work, go into
retirement
عزل ‘azl removal, dissociation,
detachment, setting aside, isolation (also,
e.g., in case of contagious disease),
cutting-off, segregation, separation;
deposition, discharge, dismissal │ حائط
عزل الحرق (ḥarq) 610 fire wall; غير قابل
للعزل irremovable, appointed for life tenure
(judge)
عزل ‘azal unarmedness,
defenselessness
عزل ‘uzul unarmed, defenseless
عزلة ‘uzla retirement, seclusion, retreat,
privacy; segregation, reparation,
detachedness; insulation, insularity,
isolatedness; isolation; solitude │ في عزلة
عن secluded, segregated, cut off, detached,
separated, insulated, isolated from
عزلة ‘izla pl. عزل ‘izal subdistrict of a
nāḥiya (Yemen)
عزال ‘izāl (eg.) furniture, household
effects, movable goods, luggage
اعزل a‘zal2, f. عزلاء ‘azlā’2, pl. عزل ‘uzl
unarmed, defenseless │ السماك الأعزل star α
in the constellation Virgo, Spica Virginia
(astron.)
معزل ma‘zil pl. معازل ma‘āzil2 place of
retirement, house of retreat; seclusion,
segregation, isolation; isolation ward (in a
hospital) │ بمعزل عن separated, detached,
apart, secluded, segregated, isolated from
انعزال in‘izāl detachedness, seclusion,
segregation, insularity, insulation;
isolation
انعتزالية in‘izālīya isolationism
اعتزال i‘tizāl retirement, seclusion,
retreat, privacy │ اعتزال الخدمة i‘tizāl alkidma
retirement from service
O عازل ‘āzil insulator (el.)
O عازلة ‘āzila pl. -āt, ‘awāzil2 insulator,
nonconductor (el.)
معزول ma‘zūl far, distant, remote ( عن
from); isolated, insulated
منعزل mun‘azil isolated, single, solitary,
sporadic
المعتزلة al-mu‘tazila name of a
theological school which introduced
speculative dogmatism into Islam
معتزل mu‘tazal pl. -āt (place of)
solitude, (place of) retirement
عزم ‘azama i (‘azm, عزيمة ‘azīma) to decide,
resolve ( على on s.th.); to make up one’s
mind, determine, be determined, be
resolved ( على to do s.th.), be bent ( على on
s.th.); to adjure ( على s.o.); to invite ( ه s.o.
ان or على to or to do s.th.) II to enchant,
spellbind ( على s.o., s.th., by magic rites)
VIII to decide, resolve ( على or ھ on s.th.),
make up one’s mind, determine, be
determined, be resolved ( على or ھ to do
s.th.), be bent ( على or ھ on s.th.)
عزم ‘azm determination, firm will, firm
intention, decision, resolution; energy
عزمة ‘azma decision, resolution; strict
order ( ب to do s.th.)
عزوم ‘azūm determined, resolved,
resolute
عزومة ‘azūma invitation; banquet
عزيمة ‘azīma determination, firm will,
firm intention; (pl. عزائم ‘azā’im2)
resolution ( على to do s.th.), decision;
incantation; spell
عازم ‘āzim determined, resolved ( على to
do s.th.)
معتزم mu‘tazim determined, resolved (
على to do s.th.)
عزو) and عزي) عزا ‘azā u (‘azw) and
عزى ‘azā i (‘azy) to trace (back) ( ل or الى ھ
s.th. to an origin), ascribe, attribute,
impute, owe ( ل or الى A s.th. to s.o., to
s.th.); to charge, incriminate ( ل or الى ھ
with s.th. s.o. or s.th.), blame ( الى ھ for
s.th. s.o. or s.th.), lay the blame ( الى ھ for
s.th. on s.o., on s.th.); -- عزي ‘aziya a ( عزاء
‘azā’) and عزا ‘azā u ( عزاء ‘aza’) to take
patience, console o.s. II to persuade ( ه s.o.)
to bear with equanimity ( في or عن s.th., the
death of s.o. or the loss of s.th.), comfort,
console ( عن ه s.o. over), 611 give comfort,
express one’s sympathy, offer one’s
condolences ( ه to s.o.) V to take patience;
to console o.s. ( عن for) VII to console o.s.
ب) with), find solace ( ب in) VIII to trace
(back) one’s descent ( الى to)
عزو ‘azw tracing back, ascription,
attribution; imputation, accusation
عزوة ‘izwa: حسن العزوة ḥasan al-‘i. of
good ancestry, of good stock
عزاء ‘azā’ composure, equanimity;
comfort, consolation, solace; ceremony of
mourning
تعزية ta‘ziya pl. تعاز ta‘āzin consolation,
solace, comfort; condolence │ رفع تعزيته to
express one’s sympathy, offer one’s
condolences; قدم التعازي (qaddama) do.
معز mu‘azzin comforter, consoler,
condoler
عس ‘assa u (‘ass) to make the rounds by night,
patrol by night
عسعس patrol (as a body of men)
عسس ‘asas guard │ العسة المصونة
(maṣūna) (formerly:) the bodyguard of the
Bey of Tunisia
عسيب ‘asīb tail bone (of the horse); (pl. عسب
‘usub) a palm branch stripped of its leaves
يعسوب ya‘sūb pl. يعاسيب ya‘āsīb2 male
bee, drone; notable, chief, leader
عوسج ‘ausaj boxthorn (Lycium europaeum
L. and Lycium arabicum Schwf.; bot.)
عسجد ‘asjad gold
عسجدي ‘asjadī golden
معسجد mu‘asjad gilded
عسر ‘asura u (‘usr, ‘usur) and ‘asira a (‘asar)
to be difficult, hard, trying, adverse ( على
for s.o.); -- ‘asara i u (‘asr) to press, urge
على ه) s.o. to); to force, compel, coerce (
على ه s.o. to) II to make difficult or hard ( ھ
s.th.); to act hostilely ( على toward s.o.); to
oppress, distress ( على s.o.), bear down
hard ( على on s.o.) III to treat ( ه s.o.)
roughly or harshly IV to be in distress, be
in a fix, in a predicament; to become
impoverished, be reduced to poverty, be
up against it, be in financial straits, live in
straitened circumstances V to be difficult,
hard, trying, adverse ( على for s.o.) VI = V;
X = V; to find ( ھ s.th.) difficult, hard,
trying, or adverse
عسر ‘usr difficulty, trying or distressful
situation, predicament, plight, fix, pinch,
press, straits, straightened circumstances,
distress, poverty, destitution
عسر ‘asir hard, difficult; trying,
distressing, adverse
عسر ‘usra = عسر ‘usr
عسير ‘asīr difficult, hard, harsh, rough;
Asir (mountainous district in SW Arabia,
between Hejaz and Yemen)
اعسر a‘sar2 left-handed; harder, more
difficult
معسرة ma‘sara = عسر ‘usr
اعسار i‘sār poverty; financial straits,
insolvency
تعسر ta‘assur difficulty
معسور ma‘sūr (living) in straitened
circumstances
معسر mu‘sir (living) in straitened
circumstances; poor, impoverished
متعسر muta‘assir hard, difficult, trying,
distressing, adverse
عسعس ‘as‘asa to darken, grow dark
عسف ‘asafa i (‘asf) to act recklessly or
thoughtlessly ( في in s.th.), do ( في s.th.)
rashly; to treat unjustly, oppress, tyrannize
ه) s.o.) II to overburden, 612 overtask,
overtax ( ه s.o.) IV = II; V to do ( ھ s.th.) at
random, haphazardly, dispose arbitrarily (
في of); to deviate, stray ( عن from) VIII to
do ( ھ s.th.) at random, haphazardly; to
deviate, stray ( عن from); to go astray; to
force, compel, coerce ( ب ه s.o. to)
عسف ‘asūf injustice, oppression,
tyranny
عسوف ‘asūf oppressor, despot, tyrant
عساف ‘assāf oppressor, despot, tyrant
تعسف ta‘assuf arbitrariness; an
arbitrary, liberal, inaccurate manner of
using the language; aberration; deviation
تعسفي ta‘assufī arbitrary; despotic,
tyrannical
اعتساف i‘tisāf straying, aberration,
deviation; coercion, compulsion, force
عسقلان ‘asqalān2 Ashkelon (seaport in SW
Palestine)
عسكر ‘askar pl. عساكر ‘asākir2 army, host,
troops │ عساكر ضابطية (ḍābiṭīya)
constabulary, police troops
عسكري ‘askarī military, army- (in
compounds); pl. العسكريون the military; --
pl. عساكر ‘asākir2) soldier; private (mil.);
policeman; pl. enlisted men, ranks
عسكرية ‘askarīya military service;
militarism; soldiership, soldiery,
soldierliness
معسكر mu‘askar pl. -āt military
encampment, army camp; camp │ معسكر
الاعتقال concentration camp
عسل II to prepare or mix with honey ( ھ s.th.);
to sweeten, make sweet or pleasant ( ھ
s.th.)
عسل ‘asal pl. اعسال a‘sāl, عسول ‘usūl
honey │ عسل سكر ‘a. sukkar molasses,
treacle; عسل اسود do.; شھر العسل šahr al-‘a.
honeymoon
عسلي ‘asalī honey-colored, amber,
brownish
عسال ‘assāl gatherer of honey;
beekeeper, apiculturist
عسالة ‘asāla beehive
عيسلان ‘aisalān hyacinth (bot.)
معسلة ma‘sala beehive
تعسيلة ta‘sīla (eg.) nap, doze
معسول ma‘sūl: prepared with honey;
honeyed, honeysweet
معسل mu‘assal: دخان معسل (dukān) a
mild-tasting tobacco, due to its
preparation with molasses, glycerine,
fragrant oils or essences
عسلج ‘usluj pl. عسالج ‘asālij2 tender sprig, small
twig, shoot
عسلوج ‘uslūj pl. عساليج ‘asālīj2 tender
sprig, small twig, shoot
عسى 1 ‘asā with foll. ان an and
subjunctive: it might be, it could be
that ..., possibly ..., maybe ..., perhaps ... │
ما عسى ان يكون what might be ...?! ماذا عسى
ان يكون what should I do! ما عسى ينفع ھذا
(yanfa‘u) of what use could this possibly
be! ماذا عساه يقول what could he possibly
say?
عسي ‘asīy appropriate, proper, fitting
(with personal construction) │ ، ھو عسى ب
ھم عسيون ب ( ان ) it befits him (them) to ... or
that he (they) it is proper for him (for
them) to or that he (they) …
عاس 2 ‘āsin dry, withered, wilted
عش II to build a nest, to nest; to take root,
become established, settle in VIII to build
a nest, to nest
عش ‘ušš pl. عشاش ‘išāš, اعشاش a‘šāš,
عششة ‘išaša nest
عش ‘ušša, ‘išša pl. عشش ‘ušaš, ‘išaš
hut, shanty, shack, hovel; arbor, bower
613
عشب ‘ašiba a, ‘ašuba u to be grassy, grasscovered
(ground) II do.
عشب ‘ušb (coll.: n. un. ة) pl. اعشاب
a‘šāb (green) grass, herbage, plants;
pasture
عشبة ‘ušba plant, herb
عشبي ‘ušbī herbaceous, herbal,
vegetable, vegetal, plant- (in compounds)
│ مجموعة عشبية herbarium
عشب ‘ašib grassy, abundant in grass
عشابة ‘ašāba luxuriant vegetation
معشب mu‘šib grassy, abundant in grass
عشتروت ‘aštarūt2 Astarte
عشر ‘ašara u to collect the tithe ( ه from
s.o., ھ of s.th.) II = I; to divide into tenths
III to be on intimate terms, associate
(closely) ( هwith s.o.) VI to be on intimate
terms, associate with one another, live
together
عشر ‘ušr pl. اعشار a‘šār, عشور ‘ušūr one
tenth, tenth part; tithe │ عشر معشار ‘u.
mi‘sār one hundredth
عشري ‘arī decimal (adj.)
اعشاري a‘šārī decimal (adj.)
عشرة ‘išra (intimate) association,
intimacy, companionship, relations,
(social) intercourse, company; conjugal
community, community of husband and
wife
عشرة ‘ašara (f. عشر ‘ašar) ten: العشر the
first ten days of Muharram
ثلاثة عشر talātata ‘ašara (f. ثلاث عشرة
talāta ‘ašrata) thirteen
عشرات ‘ašarāt some tens, tens (of);
decades; (with foll. genit.) dozens of ...,
scores of ...
عشار ‘išār (eg.) with young, pregnant
(animal)
عشار ‘aššār collector of the tithe
عشير ‘ašīr pl. عشراء ‘ušarā’ companion,
fellow, associate, friend, comrade
عشيرة ‘ašīra pl. عشائر ‘ašā’ir2 clan,
kinsfolk, closest relatives; tribe; pl. العشائر
(syr.) the Bedouins │ حرس العشائر ḥaras
al-‘a. Bedouin police (responsible for
surveillance of the nomads)
عشائري ‘ašā’irī (syr.) Bedouin (adj.) │
العرف العشائري (‘urf) the customary law of
the Bedouins
عاشوراء ‘āšūrā’ عشوراء , 2 ‘ašārā’ يوم , 2
عاشوراء yaum ‘ā., ليلة عاشوراء lailat ‘ā.
Ashura, name of a voluntary fast day on
the tenth day of Moharram; day of
mourning sacred to the Shiites, the
anniversary of Husain’s martyrdom at
Kerbela (10th of Muharram A. H. 60)
عشرون ‘išrūn twenty
معشر ma‘šar pl. معاشر ma‘āšir2
assemblage, community, company,
society, group, troop; kinsfolk │ يا معشر
الشباب yā ma‘šara š-šabāb oh ye young
men!
معشار mi‘šāar one tenth, tenth part
معاشرة mu‘āšara (intimate) association,
intimacy, social relations, social
intercourse; company, society,
companionship; community, jointness
معاشر mu‘āšir companion, fellow,
associate, friend, comrade
عشق ‘ašiqa a (‘išq) to love passionately ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.), be passionately in love ( ھ، ه
with s.o., with s.th.) II to fit tightly
together, interjoin closely, dovetail ( ھ
s.th.); to couple, connect ( ھ s.th.: techn.)
V to court, woo ( ھا a woman), make love (
ھا to a woman)
عشق išq love, ardor of love, passion
عشيق ‘ašīq lover, sweetheart (m.)
عشيقة ‘ašīqa beloved, sweetheart (f.)
عشيق ‘iššīq lover 614
تعشيق ta‘šīq tight interjunction,
dovetailing; coupling (techn.)
عاشق ‘āšiq pl. عشاق ‘uššāq lover;
fancier, fan, -phile (in compounds); -- (pl.
عواشق ‘awāšiq2) knucklebone; (game of)
knucklebones
معشوق ma‘šūq lover, sweetheart (m.)
معشوقة ma‘šūqa beloved, sweetheart (f.)
عشو) and عشى) عشا ‘ašā u (‘ašw), and عشو
‘ašiya a ( عشا ‘ašan) to be dim-sighted; to
be night-blind II to make dim-sighted,
make night-blind ( ه s.o.); to give a dinner (
ه for s.o.) IV to make dim-sighted ( ه s.o., ه
the eyes) V to have dinner (or supper), to
dine, to sup
عشا ‘ašan dim-sightedness;
nightblindness, nyctalopia
عشى ‘ašīy evening
عشاء ‘asa’ pl. اعشية a‘šiya dinner,
supper │ اعشاء السري (sirrī) the Lord’s
supper, the Eucharist (Chr.)
عشاء ‘išā’ evening; (f.) evening prayer
(Isl. Law)
عشوة ‘ašwa darkness, dark, gloom;
dinner, supper
عشاوة ‘ašāwa dim-sightedness; nightblindness,
nyctalopia
عشية ‘ašīya pl. -āt, عشايا ‘ašāyā (late)
evening │ عشية امس ‘ašīyata amsi last
night, yesterday in the evening; بين عشية
وضحاھا (ḍuḥāhā) from one day to the
other, overnight, all of a sudden
عشواء ‘ašwā’2 darkness, dark, gloom;
also see اعشى a‘šā
اعشى a‘šā, f. عشواء ‘ašwā’ dim-sighted;
night-blind, nyctalopic; blind, aimless,
haphazard, desultory, senseless │ يخبط خبط
عشواء yakbiṭu kabṭa ‘ašwā’ he acts blindly,
thoughtlessly, at random, haphazardly
عص aṣṣa a (‘aṣṣ, عصص ‘aṣaṣ) to be or
become hard, harden
عصص ‘uṣaṣ, ‘uṣuṣ coccyx
عصب ‘aṣaba i (‘aṣb) to wind, fold, tie, bind,
wrap ( ھ على s.th. around or about s.th.); to
bind up, bandage ( ھ s.th.); to fold ( ھ
s.th.); to wrap ( ھ the head) with a brow
band, sash, or turban │ عصب الريق فاه (rīqu
fāhu) the saliva dried in hill mouth,
clogged his mouth II to wind around, fold
around, tie around, wrap around ( ھ s.th.);
to bind up, bandage ( ھ s.th.); to wrap ( ھ
the head) with a brow band, sash, or
turban V to wind the turban round one’s
head, put on the turban; to apply a
bandage, bandage o.s.; to take sides, to
side ( مع، ل with; على against); to cling
obdurately or fanatically ( ل to); to be
fanatic, bigoted, be a fanatic, a zealot; to
form a league, clique, group, team, gang,
or coalition, gang up, team up; to plot,
conspire, collude, connive ( على against)
VIII to form a league, clique, group, team,
gang, or coalition, gang up, team up; to go
on strike, to strike
عصب ‘aṣab pl. اعصاب a‘ṣāb nerve;
sinew
عصبي ‘aṣabī sinewy, nerved, nervy;
nervous, neural, nerve-, neuro-, neur- (in
compounds); nervous, high-strung │
عصبي المزاج nervous, high-strung; الجھاز
العصبي (jahāz) the nervous system; حالة
عصبية nervousness, nervosity; ~I الضعف
العصبي (ḍu‘f) neurasthenia
عصبية ‘aṣabīya nervousness, nervosity;
-- (pl. -āt) zealous partisanship, bigotry,
fanaticism; party spirit, team spirit, esprit
de corps; tribal solidarity, racialism,
clannishness, tribalism, national
consciousness, nationalism
عصبة ‘aṣba pl. عصب ‘uṣab (eg.) a black
headcloth with red or yellow border 615
عصبة pl. -āt and ‘uṣba pl. عصب ‘uṣab
union, league, federation, association;
group, troop, band, gang, clique; ‘aṣaba
paternal relations, relationship, agnates │
عصبة الأمم ‘uṣbat al-umam the League of
Nations
عصيب ‘aṣib hot, crucial, critical (time,
stage)
عصاب iṣāb band, ligature, dressing,
bandage
عصابة ‘iṣāba pl. عصائب ‘aṣā’ib2 band,
ligature, dressing, bondage; headcloth,
headband, fillet; brow band, frontlet; --
(pl. -āt) union, league, federation,
association; group, troop, band, gang │
عصابات الخطف ‘i. al-kaṭf bands of robbers;
حرب العصابات ḥarb al-‘i. guerilla war(fare)
تعصب ta‘aṣṣub fanaticism, ardent zeal,
bigotry, fanatical enthusiasm; party spirit,
partisanship; clannishness, racialism, race
consciousness, tribalism
اعتصاب i‘tiṣāb pl. -āt strike
معصب muta‘aṣṣib fanatically
enthusiastic ( ل for); enthusiast, fanatic,
bigot, zealot
عصيدة ‘aṣīda a thick paste made of flour and
clarified butter
عصر ‘ṣara i (‘aṣr) to press (out), squeeze (out)
ھ) s.th., e.g., grapes, olives, etc.); to wring
ھ) s.th., esp. wet clothes); to compress ( ھ
s.th.) III to be a contemporary ( ه of s.o.);
to be contemporaneous, coeval, or
concomitant ( ھ with) V to be pressed
(out), be squeezed (out) VII = V VIII to
press (out), squeeze (out) ( ھ s.th., e.g.,
grapes, olives, etc.) │ اعتصر جبينه
(jabīnahū) to knit one’s brows (pensively)
عصر ‘aṣr (act of) pressing (out),
squeezing (out); (act of) wringing (out);
(pl. اعصر a‘ṣur, عصور ‘uṣūr, اعصار a‘ṣār)
age, era, time; period; epoch; afternoon;
(f.) afternoon prayer (Isl. Law) │ العصر
الحجري (ḥajarī) the Stone Age; العصر
الحاضر the present (time), our time; في كل
عصر ومصر (wa-maṣrin) always and
everywhere, at any time and any place
عصرى ‘aṣrī modern, recent, present,
actual, contemporary; (pl. -ūn) a
contemporary
عصرية ‘aṣrīya modernism
عصير ‘asīr that which is pressed or
squeezed out, (squeezed-out) juice, extract
(also fig.); the best, the pick, the prime of
s.th.
عصيرة ‘aṣīra (squeezed-out) juice
عصار ‘uṣār juice, sap
عصارة ‘uṣāra pl. -āt juice, sap (also
physiol.)
عصارة ‘aṣṣāra pl. -āt press, squeezer;
oil press; cane press (also عصارة القصب ‘a.
al-qaṣab); wringer
عصاري يوم ‘aṣāriya yaumin one
afternoon
اعصار i‘ṣār pl. اعاصير a‘āṣīr2
whirlwind, tornado, cyclone, hurricane │
O ضد الإعصار ḍidd al-i. anticyclone
معصرة mi‘ṣara pl. معاصر ma‘āṣir2 press,
squeezer; oil press; cane press
معصري ma‘ṣarī (tun.) a brand of lamp
oil
معاصر mu‘āṣir contemporary,
contemporaneous; a contemporary
عصعص ‘uṣ‘uṣ, ‘aṣ‘aṣ pl. عصاعص ‘aṣā‘iṣ
coccyx
عصف ‘aṣafa i (‘aṣf, عصوف ‘uṣūf) to storm,
rage, blow violently (wind); عصف به to
blow s.th. away, carry s.th. away (wind);
to shake s.o. thoroughly, through and
through
عصف ‘aṣf storming, blowing; stalk and
leaves of grain 616
عصف ‘aṣfa (n. vic.) gust of wind, blast
عصافة ‘uṣafa chaff; straw
عاصف ‘āṣif blowing violently │ ريح
عاصف (rīḥ) or ريح عاصفة violent wind, gale
عصف ‘āṣifa pl. عواصف ‘awāṣif violent
wind, gale, tempest, storm, hurricane
عصفر 1 ‘uṣfur safflower (Carthamus tinctorius;
bot.); the red dyestuff prepared from its
flower heads
معصفر mu‘aṣfar dyed with ‘uṣfur
عصفور 2 ‘ufūr pl. عصافير ‘aṣāfīr2
sparrow; any small bird │ عصفور الجنة ‘u.
al-janna swallow; عصفور دوري (dūrī)
house sparrow; عصفور مغن (mugannin)
warbler; عصفور كناري (kanārī) canary;
ضرب (اصاب) عصفورين بحجر (واحد ) (aṣāba,
‘uṣfūrraini bi-ḥajarin) to kill two birds
with one stone; عصفور في اليد خير من الف على
الشجرة (kairun min alfin, šajara) a bird in
the hand is worth two in the bush
(proverb)
عصفورة ‘uṣfūra female sparrow; dowel,
pin, peg
عصفورية ‘uṣfūrīya (syr.) insane asylum,
madhouse
عصل ‘aṣala u (‘aṣl) to bend, twist,
warp ( ھ s.th.); -- ‘aṣila a (‘aṣl) to be
twisted; to warp (wood)
عصم ‘aṣama i (‘aṣam) to hold back,
restrain, curb, check, prevent, hinder ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to preserve, guard, safeguard,
protect, defend ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
immunize, render immune ( ه s.o., med.)
VIII to cling, keep, adhere ( ب to); to seek
shelter or refuge ( ب with, in), take refuge,
resort ( ب to) ; to keep up, maintain, guard,
preserve ( ب s.th., e.g., بالصمت bi-ṣ-ṣamt
silence, برباط الجأش bi-r. il-ja’š equanimity)
X = VIII; to resist (a temptation)
عصمة ‘iṣma hindering, hindrance,
prevention, obviation; preservation,
guarding, safeguarding; defense;
protection; chastity, purity, modesty,
virtuousness; impeccance, sinlessness,
infallibility │ صاحبة العصمة title of ladies
of high social standing; عصمة النكاح the
bond of marriage; في عصمة فلان under
s.o.’s custody, protection, or power;
married to s.o.; جعلت عصمتھا في يدھا ja‘alat
‘iṣmatahā fī yadihā she made herself
independent; she became or remained
independent; فك عصمتھا من زوجھا fakka
‘iṣmatahā min zaujihā to revoke the
husband’s matrimonial authority over his
wife (jur.)
عصام ‘iṣām pl. اعصمة a‘ṣima, عصم
‘uṣum, عصام ‘iṣām strap, thong
عصامي ‘iṣāmī noble, eminent,
distinguished (due to one’s own merits, as
opposed to عظامي ‘iẓāmī); self-made; (pl.
-ūn) self-made man
عصامية ‘iṣāmīya self-made success
اعصم a‘ṣam2, f. عصماء ‘aṣmā’2, pl. عصم
‘uṣm having a white foot (animal);
excellent, valuable, precious │ اندر من
الغراب الأعصم (gurāb) rarer than a whitefooted
crow (proverbially of s.th. rare)
معصم mi‘ṣam pl. معاصم ma‘āṣim2 wrist
O معصم ma‘ṣam pl. معاصم ma‘āṣim2
traffic island, safety isle
اعتصام i‘tiṣām clinging, adherence ( ب
to), maintenance, preservation, guarding,
safeguarding
عاصم ‘āṣim protector, guardian
عاصمة ‘āṣima pl. عواصم ‘awāṣim2
capital city, metropolis
معصوم ma‘ṣūm inviolable, sacrosanct,
protected by the laws of vendetta (Isl.
Law); infallible, sinless, impeccant,
impeccable │ معصوم من الزلل (zalal)
infallible
عصا (عصو ) ‘aṣan (f.) pl. عصى ‘uṣīy,
‘iṣīy, اعص a‘ṣin staff, rod; wand; stick;
617 walking stick, cane; scepter, mace;
(field marshal’s) baton │ عصا المارشالية ‘a.
l-māršālīya field marshal’s baton; لعب
العصا la‘b al-‘a. (eg. = تخطيب ) singlestick
fencing (a popular game, esp. in rural
areas); شق العصا (šaqqa) to dissent, secede
from the community; شق عصا الطاعة to
rebel, revolt, renounce allegiance; شق عصا
القوم (‘aṣā l-qaum) to sow dissension
among the people; انشقت عصاھم (inšaqqat)
they fell out (with one another), broke
with one another
عصاة ‘aṣāh staff, rod; wand; stick
□ عصاية ‘aṣāya staff, rod; wand; stick;
walking stick, cane
عصية ‘uṣayya little stick, little rod; O
bacillus
عصى ‘aṣā i (‘aṣīy, معصية ma‘ṣiya, عصيان
‘iṣyān) to disobey, resist, oppose, defy ( ھ
ه s.o. in s.th.), refuse, or renounce, one’s
obedience ( ھ، ه to s.o. in s.th.), rebel,
revolt ( ه against s.o.) III = I; V to be or
become difficult, intricate, or involved
(affair) VI to be difficult, hard,
inaccessible, or impossible ( على for s.o.);
to refuse ( عن to do s.th.) VIII = V X to
resist, oppose, withstand, defy ( على s.o.,
s.th.), revolt, rebel ( على against s.o.); to be
recalcitrant, insubordinate, rebellious; to
be difficult, hard ( على for s.o.); to be
malignant, insidious, incurable (disease);
to elude, escape, defy ( عن s.th.), be
beyond s.th. ( عن ); (of an instrument,
machine, etc.) to fail, break down ( على on
s.o.), refuse to work ( على for s.o.), fail to
operate
عصى ‘aṣīy pl. -ūn, اعصياء a‘ṣiyā’2 rebel;
intractable, refractory, recalcitrant │ عصي
النطق ‘aṣīy an-nuṭq unable to speak,
incapable of speech
عصيان ‘iṣyān disobedience,
insubordination, refractoriness;
insurrection, revolt, rebellion, sedition
معصية ma‘ṣiya disobedience,
insubordination, refractoriness;
insurrection, sedition, revolt, rebellion;
(pl. معاص ma‘āṣin) sin
استعصاء isti‘ṣā’ refractoriness,
recalcitrance, obstinacy; impenetrability,
unfathomableness; difficulty; malignancy,
virulence, insidiousness; mechanical
failure, breakdown, malfunction; jam,
misfire (of a firearm)
عاص ‘āṣin pl. عصاة ‘uṣāh disobedient,
insubordinate, rebellious, mutinous,
riotous, seditious, subversive; rebel,
insurgent; sinning, sinful
متعص muta‘āṣṣin difficult, intricate,
implicated, involved, delicate; incurable,
irremediable
مستعص musta‘ṣin difficult, intricate,
implicated, involved, delicate; incurable,
irremediable
عض ‘aḍḍa (1st pers. perf. ‘aḍiḍtu) a (‘aḍḍ,
عضيض ‘aḍīḍ) to grab with the teeth, bite (
ب or على or ھ, ه s.o., s.th.); to bite into s.th.
ھ) ); to hold on, cling, cleave ( ب to); to
torment ( ه s.o., e.g., hunger) │ عضه الزمان
(zamānu) or عضه الدھر بنابه ‘aḍḍahū ddahru
bi-nābihī time, or fate, gave him a
raw deal, heaped trials and tribulations
upon him, he suffered reverses II to bite
fiercely or frequently ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.)
عض ‘iḍḍ small prickly shrubs,
brambles
عضة ‘aḍḍa a bite
عضاض ‘aḍāḍ (given to) biting,
snappish, mordacious
عضوض ‘aḍūḍ (given to) biting,
snappish, mordacious
عضب ‘aḍb sharp, caustic, acid (tongue)
عضد ‘aḍada u (‘aḍd) to help, aid, assist,
support, back ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.), stand up ( ه
for s.o.), advocate ( ھ s.th.) II and 618 III =
I; VI to help, assist, or support one
another, give mutual help, assistance, or
support; to work hand in hand, cooperate
عضد ‘aḍud help, aid, assistance,
support, backing; helper, aide, assistant,
supporter, backer
عضد ‘aḍud (m. and f.) pl. اعضاد a‘ḍād
upper arm; strength, power, vigor, force │
شد عضده (‘aḍudahū) to aid, assist s.o.,
stand by s.o.; ھو عضده المتين he is an
indispensable aid to him
تعضيد ta‘ḍīd help, aid, assistance,
support, backing
معاضدة mu‘āḍada help, aid, assistance,
support, backing
تعاضد ta‘āḍud mutual aid, mutual
assistance, cooperation
تعاضدي ta‘āḍudī cooperative (adj.)
معضد mu‘aḍḍid helper, aide, assistant,
supporter, backer
عضل ‘aḍila a (‘aḍal) to be or become
muscular; -- ‘aḍala IV (‘aḍl) to prevent ( ھا
a woman) from marrying IV to be or
become difficult, problematic, puzzling,
enigmatic, or mysterious ( ب or ه for s.o.)
│ اعضل الداء الأطباء (aṭibbā’) the disease
defied all medical skill, gave the
physicians a headache, posed a puzzling
problem for the doctors V تعضل الداء الأطباء
= اعضل الداء الأطباء
عضل ‘aḍil muscular, brawny
عضلة ‘aḍala pl. -āt, عضل ‘aḍal muscle
│ عضلة باسطة extensor; عضلة قابضة flexor
عضلي ‘aḍalī muscle-, musculo-,
muscul- (in compounds), muscular
عضال ‘uḍāl inveterate, chronic,
incurable (disease)
معضل mu‘ḍil difficult, problematic,
puzzling, enigmatic, mysterious
معضلة mu‘ḍila pl. -āt, معاضل ma‘āḍil2
difficulty, problem, dilemma, puzzle,
enigma
عضاه ‘iḍāh fair-sized thorny shrubs
عضو ‘uḍw pl. اعضاء a‘ḍā’ member, limb,
organ (of the body); member (of an
organization) │ عضو اصلي (aṣlī) regular
member; عضو التأنيث pistil (bot.); عضو
احتياطي (iḥtiyāṭī) substitute member,
alternate member; عضو التذكير stamen
(bot.); عضو فخري
(fakrī) honorary member; اعضاء التناسل
a. at-tanāsul and الأعضاء الدقيقة the sexual
organs, the genitals; الدوا الأعضاء (duwal)
the member states; علم وظائف الأعضاء ‘ilm
w. al-a. physiology
عضوات ‘aḍawāt female members
عضوي ‘uḍwī organic; لاعضوي or غير
عضوي inorganic │ كتلة عضوية (kutla)
organism
عضوية ‘uḍwīya pl. -āt membership;
organism
عطب ‘aṭiba a (‘aṭab) to perish, be
destroyed, be ruined II to ruin, destroy,
wreck, damage, injure, impair, mar, spoil (
ھ s.th.); to spice, mull ( ھ s.th.); to brew,
mix ( ھ a drink) IV to ruin, destroy, wreck,
damage, injure, impair, mar, spoil ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.) V to be damaged VIII = I
عطب ‘aṭab perdition; wreck (e.g., of
ships); destruction, ruin; damage, injury
تعطيب ta‘ṭīb damaging, ruin(ing),
wreck, destruction
تعطب ta‘attub a suffering of damage,
impairment, ruin
عطر II to perfume, scent ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) V to
perfume o.s.
عطر ‘iṭr pl. عطور ‘uṭūr, عطورات ‘uṭūrāt
perfume, scent; essence │ عطر الورد ‘i. alward
attar of roses, rose oil 619
عطر ‘aṭir sweet-smelling, fragrant,
aromatic │ سمعة عطرة (sum‘a) brilliant or
excellent reputation
عطري ‘iṭrī sweet-smelling, fragrant,
aromatic
عطرية ‘iṭrīya pl. -āt aromatic, perfume,
scent
عطار ‘aṭṭār perfumer, perfume vendor;
druggist
عطارة ‘iṭāra drug business; perfumeries;
drugs
عطار ‘aṭṭār sweet-smelling, fragrant,
aromatic │ اثنى عليه عاطر الثناء atnā ‘alaihi
‘āṭira t-tanā’ to extol s.o. to the skies
معطر mu‘aṭṭar perfumed, scented
عطارد ‘uṭārid2 (the planet) Mercury
عطس ‘aṭasa i u (‘aṭs, عطاس ‘uṭās) to sneeze II
to cause ( ه s.o.) to sneeze
عطسة ‘aṭsa (n. vic.) a sneeze
عطس ‘uṭṭāš sneezing, sneezes
عاطوس ‘āṭūs snuff (tobacco)
معطس ma‘ṭiš pl. معاطس ma‘āṭis2 nose
عطش ‘aṭiša a (‘atāš) to be thirsty, to thirst; to
long, languish, thirst ( الى for) II to make
thirsty, cause to thirst ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.) IV =
II; V to thirst, languish, long, yearn ( الى
for)
عطش ‘aṭaš thirst
عاطش ‘āṭiš thirsty; dry, parched (soil)
عطشان ‘aṭšān2, f. عطشى ‘aṭšā pl. عطاش
‘iṭāš thirsty; covetous, desirous ( الى of),
languishing, yearning, craving ( الى for)
عاطش ‘āṭiš thirsty; covetous, desirous (
الى of), languishing, yearning, craving ( الى
for)
متعطش muta‘aṭṭiš thirsty; covetous,
desirous ( الى of), languishing, yearning,
craving ( الى for)
عطشجي ‘aṭašjī pl. عطشجيات ‘aṭašjīya stoker,
fireman
عطعط ‘aṭ‘aṭa to clamor, yell; to be uproarious,
very noisy
عطف ‘at`tafa i (‘at`tf) to bend, incline,
bow ( ھ s.th.); to incline, lean ( الى toward,
to); to be favorably disposed ( على toward
s.o.), be attached ( على to s.o.), harbor
affection ( على for), be fond ( على of s.o.),
have or feel compassion, sympathize ( على
with s.o.), feel ( على for s.o.); to turn away
عن) from); عطف به to incline, dispose s.o. (
على toward), awaken affection or
sympathy ( على for) or interest ( على in
s.th.); عطف به على to make s.o. appreciate
s.th., bring s.th. close to s.o.’s heart; عطف
به عن to dissuade, alienate s.o. from II to
fold, double, fold up ( ھ s.th.); to make ( ه
s.o.) favorably disposed; to soften s.o.’s ( (ه
heart, move s.o.; to awaken affection,
sympathy, tenderness ( ه in s.o., على for); to
fill with affection, love, etc. ( ه s.o., ھ
s.o.’s heart, على or نحو for) V to be
favorably disposed ( على toward s.o.), be
attached ( على to s.o.), be fond ( على of s.o.),
have or feel compassion, sympathize ( على
with s.o.), feel ( على for s.o.); to deign ( ب
to do s.th.) │ تعطف بالعطاف to put on a coat,
wrap o.s. in a coat or cloak VI to harbor
mutual affection, be attached to one
another VII to be bent, inclined, crooked,
or curved; to bend, curve; to bow, make a
bow; to turn off ( الى toward, to), turn,
swing ( الى into a road, etc.); to be
favorably disposed ( الى، على toward), be
attached ( الى، على to), be fond ( الى، على of),
have or feel compassion, sympathize (، الى
على with), feel ( الى، على for s.o.); to turn
away, turn around VIII = اعتطف بالعطاف
تعطف بالعطاف X to ask for, or seek, s.o.’s ( (ه
compassion or sympathy; to entreat,
beseech, implore ( ه s.o.); to affect winning
or conciliatory manners, display affection;
to seek to conciliate, propitiate, or 620
win over ( خاطره kāṭirahū or ه s.o.); to seek
to be friends ( ه with s.o.); to try to attract
or win ( ھ s.th.)
عطف ‘aṭf bond(ing), inclination,
curving, curvature; corner; sympathy ( على
with), affection, attachment, liking ( على
for) │ اداة (حرف) العطف adāt (ḥarf) al-‘a.
conjunction (gram.); عطف البيان ‘a. albayān
explicative apposition (gram.)
عطف ‘iṭf pl. اعطاف a‘ṭāf side (of the
body) │ لين الأعطاف layyin al-a. tractable,
docile, pliant; ترنحت الأعطاف (tarannaḥat)
they were carried away, became ecstatic;
ضم بين أعطافه to combine, encompass,
comprise s.th.
عطفة ‘aṭfa turn, turning, twist, curve,
bend; (pl. -āt, عطف ‘uṭaf) blind alley, dead
and (eg.)
عطاف ‘iṭāf pl. عطف ‘uṭuf, اعطفة a‘ṭifa
coat, cloak
عطوف ‘aṭūf compassionate,
sympathetic, affectionate, loving, tender,
kind
عطوفة ‘uṭūfa affection, attachment,
benevolence, good will; (as an honorific
title before the name = صاحب العطوفة His
Grace
معطف mi‘ṭaf pl. معاطف ma‘āṭif2 coat,
overcoat; smock, frock │ معطف مشمع
(mušamma‘) (impregnated) raincoat; معطف
فرو m. farw fur coat
انعطاف in‘iṭāf inclination, bind(ing),
curving, curvature; sympathy,
compassion; liking, attachment, affection
استعطاف isti‘ṭāf imploring, entreaty,
earnest supplication; tender affection;
conciliatory attitude
عاطف ‘āṭif compassionate, sympathetic,
affectionate, loving, tender, kind │ حرف
عاطف (ḥarf) conjunction (gram.)
عاطفة ‘āṭifa pl. عواطف ‘awāṭif2 amorous
affection; affectionate benevolence,
solicitude, sympathy, compassion,
affection, attachment, liking, kind(li)ness;
feeling, sentiment
عاطفي ‘āṭifī sentimental; emotional;
emotive, feeling; tender, affectionate,
loving
عاطفية ‘āṭifīya sentimentality;
emotionalism, emotionality
منعطف mun‘aṭaf pl. -āt (road) turn,
curve; turn, turning, winding, tortuosity,
twist, bend; lane, alley, narrow street
عطف musta‘ṭaf imploring, beseeching,
supplicatory; tender, affectionate
عطل ‘aṭala a (‘aṭal) to he destitute, he
devoid ( من of s.th.), lack ( من s.th.); to be
idle, not to work, rest; to he without work,
he unemployed II to leave without care, to
neglect ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to leave without
work, leave idle ( ھ ه s.o. s.th.); to hinder,
hamper, impede, obstruct ( ھ s.th.); to
interrupt, suspend, defer, discontinue, stop
ھ) s.th., esp. some activity); to ban
temporarily, suspend ( ھ s.th., esp.
publication of a newspaper); to damage
(gravely), destroy, ruin, wreck, paralyze,
neutralize, put out of service or
commission, lay up; put out of action,
make inoperative ( ھ s.th.); to stop, shut
off ( ھ s.th., e.g., a motor); to shut down,
keep closed ( ھ s.th., e.g., an office) V to
remain without work or employment; to
he or become unemployed (also تعطل عن
العمل ); to be or become idle, inactive; to be
hindered, hampered, impeded, obstructed,
delayed, suspended, deferred, or
interrupted; to stop, stall (motor,
machine); to fail (apparatus); to he
(gravely) damaged. be or be put out of
action or commission; to be shut down, be
or remain closed; to he no longer valid, be
ineffective (statutes)
عطل ‘uṭl destitute, devoid ( من of s.th.);
impairedness, defectiveness, (gravely)
damaged state; damage, loss 621
عطل ‘aṭal unemployment
عطلة ‘uṭla unemployment, also عطلة عن
الشغل (šugl); leisure, holidays, vacation(s),
recess; (pl. -āt, عطل ‘uṭal) holiday, off
day, free day │ عطلة رسمية (rasmīya)
official, or legal, holiday; ايام العطلات الرسمية
(ayyām al-‘u.) official, or legal, holidays;
عطلة الأسبوع ‘u. al-usbū‘ weekend; عطلة
قضائية (qaḍā’īya) court recess (jur.); عطلة
نھاية الأسبوع ‘u. nihāyat al-usbū‘ weekend
عطالة ‘aṭāla unemployment
تعطيل ta‘ṭīl hindering, obstruction,
hampering; discontinuance, interruption,
deferment, suspension (of some activity);
temporary ban, suspension (of a
newspaper); impairment, damaging,
destruction, ruining, wrecking, injury;
paralyzation, neutralization, stoppage
(e.g., of traffic); stopping, shutting-off (of
a motor); shutdown, closure (of an office);
a theological concept denying God all
attributes (as opposed to tašbīš; theol.) │
تعطيل حركة المرور t. ḥarakat al-murūr
traffic congestion
تعطل ta‘aṭṭul unemployment; inactivity,
idleness; (mechanical) failure, breakdown;
standstill │ تعطل عن العمل (‘amal)
unemployment
عاطل ‘āṭil destitute, devoid ( من of s.th.);
inactive. idle, out of work, jobless,
unemployed; an unemployed person;
useless │ عضو عاطل (‘uḍw) functionless
organ (biol.)
عواطل ‘awāṭil2 vacations, holidays
معطل mu‘aṭṭil one who denies God all
attributes (theol.)
معطل mu‘ṭṭal inactive, idle, out of work,
jobless, unemployed; inoperative, out of
action, service, or commission, shutdown;
stopped, shut-off (motor); closed
(office)
عطن ‘aṭan i u (‘aṭn) to soak ( الجلد aljilda
the skin or hide so as to remove the
hair, in tanning); to macerate ( الكتان alkattāna
the flax); -- ‘aṭina a (‘aṭan) to rot,
decay, putrefy (skin, hide, in tanning) II =
I ‘aṭana
عطن ‘aṭan resting place of camels near
a waterhole │ ضيق العطن ḍayyiq al-‘a.
narrow-minded, parochial; رحب العطن raḥb
al-‘a. broad-minded
عطن ‘aṭin putrid, rotten, stinking
عطين ‘aṭīn putrid, rotten, stinking
عطان ‘iṭān tanbark
عطو III to give ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.) IV to give ( ھ
ل or ه to s.o. s.th.); to present, hand over,
offer ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.); to grant, award,
accord ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.); to present ( ھ ه
s.o. with s.th.), bestow ( ھ ه upon s.o.
s.th.); pass. u‘ṭiya to get, obtain, receive (
ھ s.th.) │ اعطى دروسا to give lessons; اعطى
اقواله (aqwālahū) to give evidence, give
one’s testimony (jur.); اعطى له الكلمة
(kalimata) to allow s.o. to speak; اعطاه بيده
(bi-yadihī) to surrender or submit to s.o. V
to ask for charity, ask for alms ( ه s.o.); to
beg VI to take ( ھ s.th.); to swallow, take (
ھ a medicine); to take over, assume,
undertake, take upon o.s. ( ھ a task); to
occupy o.s., be occupied or buoy ( ھ with
s.th.), be engaged ( ھ in s.th.), pursue,
practice ( ھ an activity) X = V
عطا ‘aṭan gift, present
عطاء ‘aṭā’ pl. a‘tiys gift, present; (pl.
-āt) offer, tender │ قدم عطاء (qaddama) to
make an offer or tender
عطية ‘aṭīya pl. عطايا ‘aṭāyā gift, present
معاطاة mu‘āṭāh exercise, practice,
pursuit (of an activity)
اعطاء i‘ṭā’ donation; presentation,
grant(ing), award(ing)
تعاط ta‘āṭin pursuit, practice (of an
activity) 622
استعطاء isti‘ṭā’ begging, mendicity
معط mu‘ṭin giver, donor
معطى mu‘ṭan given; (pl. -āt) given
quantity (math.)
مستعط musta‘ṭin beggar
عظل III عاظل الكلام (kalāma) to be repetitious in
one’s speech, use tautologisms, repeat o.s.
in speaking
عظم ‘aẓuma u (‘iẓam, عظامة ‘aẓāma) to be or
become great, big, large, grand, grandiose,
magnificent, imposing, powerful, or
mighty; to be huge, vast, enormous,
tremendous, immense, stupendous; to be
hard, distressing, painful, agonizing, or
oppressive ( على for s.o.) II to make, or
cause to become, great(er), big(ger),
large(r), (more) grandiose, (more)
imposing, (more) magnificent, mighty or
mightier, (more) powerful ( ھ، ه s.o. s.th.),
enhance the greatness, grandeur,
magnificence, power, or might ( ھ، ه of
s.o., of s.th.); to enlarge, enhance, magnify
ھ) s.th.); to aggrandize, glorify, extol,
exalt ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) IV = II; to attach
great importance ( ھ to s.th.); to regard ( ھ
s.th.) as huge, vast, tremendous,
enormous, immense, or stupendous; to
find ( ھ s.th.) hard, distressing, or
oppressive V to be proud ( ب of s.th.); to
boast ( ب of), vaunt, flaunt ( ب s.th.); to he
arrogant, presumptuous, haughty VI to be
proud, arrogant, presumptuous, haughty,
supercilious; to be great, grand, grandiose,
imposing, huge, prodigious; to equal in
weight, significance or importance ( ھ
s.th.); to be weighty, grave, serious,
portentous ( ه for s.o.) │ لا يتعاظمه شأن العدو
(ša’nu l-‘adūw) the enemy’s importance
does not unduly impress him X to be
proud, arrogant, presumptuous, haughty,
supercilious; to regard as great,
significant, or important ( ھ s.th.)
عظم ‘aẓm pl. اعظم a‘ẓum, عظام ‘iẓām
bone │ عظم الساق shinbone; مسحوق العظام
bone meal; لين العظام līn al-‘i. softening of
the bones, osteomalacia
عظمي ‘aẓmī bone-, osteo- (in
compounds) osseous, bony
عظم ‘iẓam, ‘uẓm greatness, magnitude,
grandeur, power, might; significance,
importance
عظمة ‘aẓma piece of bone; bone
عظمة ‘aẓama majesty; pride, arrogance,
haughtiness; exaltedness, sublimity,
augustness │ صاحب العظمة His Majesty;
His Highness; عظمة السلطان ‘a. as-sulṭān
His Highness, the Sultan
عظموت ‘aẓamūt greatness, magnitude,
grandeur, power, might
عظيم ‘aẓīm pl. عظماء ‘uẓamā’ عظام , 2
‘iẓām, عظائم ‘aẓā’im2 great, big, large;
strong, powerful, mighty; significant,
important; grand, grandiose, imposing,
stately, magnificent; lofty, exalted, august,
sublime, splendid, gorgeous, glorious,
superb; huge, vast, prodigious, enormous,
tremendous, immense, stupendous; hard,
distressing, gruesome, trying, oppressive
│ فرصة عظيمة (furṣa) golden opportunity;
عظائم الأمور great or terrible things; العظماء
والكبراء (kubarā’) the great of the world
عظيمة ‘aẓīma pl. عظائم ‘aẓā’im2 a
prodigious, terrible thing; great
misfortune, calamity, disaster
عظامي ‘iẓāmī of noble descent,
highborn, aristocratic, noble, blueblooded,
of or pertaining to nobility;
aristocrat, nobleman
اعظم a‘ẓam2, f. عظمى ‘uẓmā, pl. اعاظم
a‘āẓim2 greater, bigger; mare significant,
more important; greatest, major, supreme;
most significant, paramount │ اعاظم رجال
مصر a. r. miṣr the most outstanding men
623 of Cairo; جريمة عظمى capital crime;
الحرب العظمى (ḥarb) World War I; السواد
الأعظم (sawād) the great mass, the great
majority, the major portion (of the
people); الصدر الأعظم (ṣadr) (formerly:)
title of the Grand Vizier of the Ottoman
Empire (Ott.-Turk.: ṣadr-i a‘ẓam)
تعظيم ta‘ẓīm aggrandizement,
glorification, exaltation; military salute
معظم mu‘aẓẓam glorified, exalted,
revered, venerated; sublime, august (esp.
of rulers); splendid, gorgeous, glorious,
magnificent, resplendent; bony; ossified
معظم mu‘aẓza􀀀m most of (them), the
majority, major part or portion (of), main
part; maximum │ في معظمه mostly, for the
moot part, largely
متعاظم muta‘āẓim proud, arrogant,
presumptuous, haughty, supercilious
عظة ‘iẓa see وعظ
عف ‘affa i ( عفة ‘iffa, عفاف ‘afāf) to refrain,
abstain ( عن from s.th. forbidden or
indecent); to be abstinent, continent,
virtuous, chaste, modest, decent, pure V =
I; to shrink ( عن from), be shy ( عن of), be
ashamed
عف ‘aff chute, modest, virtuous, pure;
decent; honest, upright, righteous
عفة ‘iffa abstinence, continence,
virtuousness, virtue, chastity, decency;
purity; modesty; integrity, probity,
honesty, uprightness, righteousness
عفاف ‘afāf = عفة ‘iffa
عفيف ‘afīf pl. اعفاء a‘fā’ اعفة , 2 a‘iffa
chaste, modest, virtuous, pure; decent;
honest, upright, righteous
اعف a‘aff2 chaster, more virtuous; more
decent, of greater integrity
تعفف ta‘affuf abstinence, continence,
chastity, modesty; restraint
متعفف muta‘affif chute, modest,
virtuous, pure; decent; honest, upright
righteous
عفر ‘afara i (‘afr) to cover with dust, to
soil, begrime (also بالتراب bi-t-turāb; ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.) II = I; to dust, sprinkle with dust
or powder ( ھ s.th.); to glean
عفر ‘afar pl. اعفار a‘far dust
عفر ‘ufār (eg.) duet
O عفارة ‘afāra pl. -āt spray, atomizer
اعفر a‘far2, f. عفراء ‘afrā’2 dust-colored,
earth-colored
يعفور ya‘fūr pl. يعافير ya‘āfīr2
earthcolored gazelle
تعفير ta‘fīr (act of) dusting, sprinkling
with dust or powder
عفرت II ta‘frata to behave like a demon
or devil
عفريت ‘ifrīt pl. ‘afārīt2 malicious,
mischievous; sly, cunning, crafty, wily;
afreet, demon, imp, devil; (eg.) naughty
child │ ولد عفريت (walad) mischievous
child, good-for-nothing, ne’er-do-well
(eg.)
عفريتة ‘afrīta (lifting) jack (eg.)
عفرتة ‘afrata devilry; dirty trick
عفارم ‘afārim (eg.) bravo! well done!
عفش ’afaša i (‘afš) to gather, collect, heap up,
amass ( ھ s.th.)
عفش ‘afš refuse, rubbish, trash, junk;
luggage, baggage; household effects,
furniture
عفاشة ‘afāša: عفاشة من الناس worthless
people
عفص ‘afṣ, galls, gallnuts, oak apples
عفص ‘afṣ sharp, pungent, acrid,
astringent and bitter (of taste)
عفوصة ‘ufūṣa sharpness, pungency,
acridity, astringence (of taste) 624
عفن ‘afina a (‘afan, عفونة ‘ufūna) to rot, decay,
putrefy, spoil; to be rotten, decayed, putrid
spoiled; to be or become moldy, musty,
mildewy, decomposed V = I
عفن ‘afan rottenness, putridity, decay,
spoiledness
عفن ‘afin rotten, putrid, decayed,
decomposed, spoiled, moldy, musty,
mildewy; septic │ الحمى العفنة (ḥummā)
putrid fever
عفونة ‘ufūna rottenness, putridity,
decay, spoiledness
تعفن ta‘affun rottenness, putridity,
decay, spoiledness
معفن mu‘affan rotten, putrid, decayed,
decomposed, spoiled, moldy, musty
mildewy; septic
متعفن muta‘affin rotten, putrid, decayed,
decomposed, spoiled, moldy, musty,
mildewy; septic
عفا (عفو ) ‘afā u (‘afw, عفاء ‘afā) to be or
become effaced, obliterated, wiped out,
eliminated; -- ‘afā u (‘afw) to efface,
obliterate, wipe out, eliminate ( عن or ھ
s.th.); to forgive ( عن s.o.); to excuse, free,
relieve, exempt ( عن ل s.o. from s.th.); to
desist, abstain, refrain ( عن from) II to
efface, obliterate, wipe out, eliminate ( على
or ھ s.th.) III and IV to restore to health,
heal, cure ( ه s.o.); to guard ( عن or من ه s.o.
against), protect, save ( عن or من ه s.o.
from); to free, release, relieve, exempt,
except ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th. عن or من from),
excuse, dispense ( عن or من ه s.o. from
s.th.) IV to dismiss, discharge, fire, depose
ه) s.o.) VI to recuperate, recover, regain
health VIII to call on s.o. ( ه) in order to
obtain s.th. X to ask s.o.’s ( ه) pardon, ask
for a reprieve ( ه s.o.); to request ( ه of s.o.)
exemption ( من from s.th.); to tender one’s
resignation ( من from an office); to resign (
من from an office)
عفو ‘afw effacement, obliteration,
elimination; pardon, forgiveness; waiver
of punishment (Isl. Law); amnesty ( عن
for); boon, kindness, favor; surplus; عفوا
‘afwan I beg your pardon! excuse me! (in
reply to “thank you”) you’re welcome!
don’t mention it!; of one’s own accord, by
o.s., spontaneously; casually; without
design, in passing, incidentally I
شامل) عفو عام) (‘āmm) amnesty ( عن for);
حق العفو عن العقوبة (ḥaqq al-‘a., ‘uqūba)
right of granting pardon (jur.); عفو الخاطر
‘afwa l-kāṭir spontaneously,
unhesitatingly, casually
عفو ‘afw pl. عفاء ‘afā’ young donkey
عفوي ‘afwī spontaneous
عفي ‘afīy (eg.) strong, vigorous, husky,
robust
عفاء ‘afā’ effacement, obliteration,
extinction, ruin, fall; dust │ ادركه العفاء
adrakahū l-‘afā’u to fall into disuse, pass
out of use; عليه العفاء it’s all over with him,
he is done for
معافاة muāfāh exemption, excuse,
dispensation
اعفاء i‘fā’ exemption (from a fee, and
the like), excuse, dispensation; remission
(of punishment); discharge, dismissal
(from an office)
استعفاء isti‘fā’ request for pardon;
excuse, apology; resignation ( من from an
office)
عاف ‘āfin effaced, obliterated, wiped
out, eliminated
عافية ‘āfiya (good) health, well-being;
vigor, vitality
معافى mu‘āfan exempt(ed), free,
excused, dispensed ( من from); healthy
عق ‘aqqa u (‘aqq) to cleave, split, rip, rend ( ھ
s.th.); -- ‘aqqa u ( عقوق ‘uqūq) to be
disobedient, disrespectful, undutiful, 625
refractory, recalcitrant ( اباه abāhu or والده
wālidahū toward his father, of a child)
عق ‘aqq disobedient, disrespectful,
undutiful, refractory, recalcitrant (child)
عقيق ‘aqīq (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. عقائق
‘aqā’iq2 carnelian; (pl. اعقة a‘iqqa)
canyon, gorge, ravine
عقيقي ‘aqīqī carnelian-red
عقوق ‘uqūq disobedience, unruliness,
refractoriness, recalcitrance (of a child)
اعق a‘aqq2 more irreverent, more
disrespectful, naughtier │ ما اعقك
(a‘aqqaka) how irreverent you are!
عاق ‘āqq disobedient, disrespectful,
undutiful, refractory, recalcitrant (child)
عقب ‘aqaba u (‘aqb) to follow ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.
or after s.o., after s.th.), succeed ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to come after, ensue; to continue II
to follow ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th. or after s.o., after
s.th.), succeed ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to pursue,
follow, trail ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to expose,
compromise, show up ( على s.o.); to revise,
correct, rectify, amend; to review
critically, criticize ( على s.th.), comment (
على on s.th.) │ عقب آثاره to tread in s.o.’s
footsteps III to alternate, take turns ( ه with
s.o.); to punish ( على or ب ه s.o. for) IV to
follow ( ھ ه s.o., s.th. or after s.o., after
s.th.), succeed ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to come
after, ensue; to have for son ( ه s.o.), be the
father ( ه of a son); to have as offspring,
have sired ( ه s.o.); to revert from evil to
good, mend one’s ways, reform; to end
well, succeed, V to pursue, follow, trail (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) VI to be successive or
consecutive, succeed one another, follow
one after the other; to dart one by one ( على
upon), launch successive attacks, act
successively, embark successively ( على
upon)
عقب ‘aqib, ‘aqb pl. اعقاب a‘qāb heal;
last part of s.th., end; that which follows
subsequently or ensues, subsequence
(with foll. genit.); grandson; offspring,
progeny; ‘aqiba (prep.) immediately after,
subsequent to │ جاء عقبه (‘aqibahū) or جاء
بعقبه, جاء في عقبه he came closely after him;
على عقب ‘alā ‘aqibi immediately after ...;
رجع (عاد) على عقبيه (‘aqibaihi) pl. رجعوا
عادوا) على اعقابھم ) to retrace one’s steps,
turn back; رده على عقبيه (raddahū) pl. ردھم
على اعقابھم to drive s.o. back to where he
came from; ارتد على عقبيه (irtadda) pl. ارتدوا
على اعقابھم to withdraw, retreat; رأسا على
عقب (ra’san) head over heels, topsy-turvy,
upside down; from the ground up,
radically; ظھرا على عقب (ẓahran) do.; في
اعقاب الشھر (a. iš-šahr) at the end of the
month; اعقاب الصلوات a. aṣ-ṣalawāt
(supererogatory) prayers performed after
the prescribed salat; في اعقاب الليلة at
daybreak, immediately after night was
over
عقب ‘uqb pl. اعقاب a‘qāb end, outcome,
upshot; issue, effect, result, consequence;
rest, remnant, remainder; (cigarette, etc.)
end, butt, stub (of a pencil, of a candle, of
a check, etc.); counterfoil
عقب ‘aqaba pl. عقاب ‘iqāb steep road or
track, steep incline; pass, mountain road;
العقبة or قلعة العقبة qal‘at al-‘a. ھ qaba
(seaport in SW Jordan): (pl. -āt, عقاب
‘iqāb) obstacle; difficulty │ وقف عقبة دون
(‘aqabatan) to stand in the way of s.th.,
obstruct s.th.
عقيب ‘aqīb one who, or that which,
succeeds or is subsequent; following,
subsequent │ عقيب ذلك (‘aqība) thereafter,
afterwards, subsequently
عقاب ‘uqāb (usually f.) pl. اعقب a‘qub,
عقبان ‘iqbān eagle; العقاب ھ quila (astron.)
عقابي ‘uqābī eagle, (in compounds),
aquiline
عقيب ‘uqayyib a small eagle, Eaglet 626
عقوبة ‘uqūba pl. -āt punishment,
penalty; pl. punitive measures, sanctions
│ عقوبات اقتصادية (iqtiṣādīya) economic
sanctions; قانون العقوبات penal code
عقوبي ‘uqūbī penal, punitive
عقبى ‘uqbā end, outcome, upshot; issue,
effect, result, consequence
يعقوب ya‘qūb2 Jacob, James; ya‘qūb (pl.
يعاقيب ya‘āqīb2) male mountain quail
(zool.) │ لحاجة في نفس يعقوب li-hājatin fī
nafsi y. for some unknown reason, from
secret motives
يعقوبي ya‘qūbī pl. يعاقبة ya‘āqiba a
Jacobite, an adherent of Jacob Baradai;
Jacobite (adj.; Chr.)
تعقيب ta‘qīb pl. -āt pursuit, chase;
investigation; comment(ing); appeal (of a
sentence, jur.) │ دائرة التعقيب court of
review, appellate court (Tun.)
معاقبة mu‘āqaba infliction of
punishment, punishment; pl. معاقبات
sanctions (pol.)
عقاب ‘iqāb infliction of punishment,
punishment; penalty
عقابي ‘iqābī penal, punitive
تعقب ta‘aqqub pl. -āt pursuit, chase;
investigation
تعاقب ta‘āqub succession │ على تعاقب
العصور in the course of centuries
عاقب ‘āqib: على العاقب successively
عاقبة aqiba pl. عواقب ‘awāqib2 end,
outcome, upshot; issue, effect, result,
consequence │ سليم العاقبة benign (disease)
معاقب mu‘āqib alternate; punisher
متعاقب muta‘āqib successive,
consecutive, uninterrupted, continuous
عقد ‘aqada i (‘aqd) to knit, knot, tie ( ھ
s.th.) to fasten with a knot ( ھ s.th.); to put
together, join, fold, lock ( ھ one’s hands,
and the like); to contract ( ھ the brows,
and the like); to fix ( ھ one’s eyes, ب on);
to arch, vault ( ھ a structure); to hold,
convene, convoke, summon, call ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., a session, a meeting); to conclude ( ھ
a contract), effect ( ھ a transaction, a sale);
to contract ( ھ a loan) │ عقد املا على ‘aqada
amalan) to pin, or set, one’s hope(s) on ...;
عقد جبھته (jabhatahū) to knit, or wrinkle,
one’s brows, frown; عقد محادثة
(muḥādatatan) to strike up a conversation;
عقد خطبتھا على (‘uqida kiṭbatuhā) she
became engaged to; ( عقد الخنصر (الخناصر
على (kinṣir, kanāṣir) to give s.th. toprating
because of its excellence, put s.th.
above everything else; عقد زواجا (zawājan)
to contract a marriage; عقد العزم (العزيمة) على
(‘azma) to make up one’s mind to do s.th.,
be (firmly) determined to do s.th.; عقد لسانه
to silence s.o.; عقد لواء الشيء to found, start,
originate, launch, produce, kindle,
provoke s.th.; السفينة المعقود لھا لواء القيادة
(liwā’u l-q.) the flagship; البارحة المعقود
لواؤھا للاميرال (liwā’uhā li-l-amīrāl) the
admiral’s flagship; عقد ناصيته (nāṣiyatahū)
عقد جبھته؛ عقد نطاقا = (niṭāqan) to form a
cordon ( حوله around s.o.); عقد النية على
(nīyata) to resolve, make up one’s mind to
do s.th., decide on s.th.; عقد له لواء المجد
النصر ) ) ‘uqida lahū liwā’u l-majd (n-naṣr)
approx.: he was awarded the laurel of
fame (of victory); عقد على المرأة (‘alā lmar’a)
to marry a woman II to knit
(tightly), knot, tie ( ھ s.th.); to pile up,
mass together ( ھ e.g., clouds), cluster ( ھ
e.g., vapors, steam); to complicate, make
difficult, intricate, or tangled ھ (s.th.) II
and IV to congeal, coagulate, clot,
thicken, inspissate ( ھ s.th., esp. by
boiling) V to be knit (together), knotted,
tied with knots; to be or become intricate
or complicated; to congeal, coagulate,
clot, thicken; to gather (of clouds, 627
etc.) │ تعقد لسانه (lisānuhū) to express o.s.
with difficulty, speak laboringly; to be
unable to speak, be tongue-tied VI to be
interknit, interknotted, interjoined,
interlinked; to make a contract; to reach
agreement, come to mutual agreement (
على on, about) VII to be knit (together),
knotted, tied with knots, entangled; to
contract, become contracted (e.g., brows);
to be inhibited (tongue); to congeal,
coagulate, clot, thicken; to be concluded
(contract), be effected (sale); to convene,
assemble, meet (a committee, a
conference, and the like) │ الاجماع منعقد على
ان (ijmā‘) there is general conviction
that ...; لم ينعقد له زھر ولا ثمر (zahr, tamar) to
remain without blossom and fruit, be
without any effect and consequence VIII
to believe (firmly) (s.th., ب in)
عقد ‘aqd knitting, knotting, tying;
joining, junction, looking; holding,
summoning, convocation (of a session, of
a meeting); conclusion (of a contract, of a
sale); contraction (of a loan, and the like);
-- (pl. عقود ‘uqūd) contract, agreement,
arrangement; legal act, legal transaction;
document, deed; vault, arah; group of ten,
half-score; decade, decennium │ عقد الفي
(alfī) millennium; عقد الزواج ‘a. az-zawāj
contraction of marriage, marriage;
marriage certificate; عقد القران contraction
of marriage, marriage; عقد الملكية ‘a. almilkīya
title deed; انفرط عقدھم (infaraṭa)
they broke up, they went their own ways
عقد ‘iqd pl. عقود ‘uqūd chaplet, necklace
│ واسطة العقد center, focus, highlight, chief
attraction, pièce de résistance
عقدة ‘uqda pl. عقد ‘uqad knot (also =
nautical mile); inch; joint (anat.); splice;
knot, knur, knob, swelling, nodule, node,
protuberance, excrescence, outgrowth;
compact, covenant, contract; problem,
difficulty; puzzle, riddle; complex
(psychol.)
عقاد ‘aqqād a producer and seller of
cords, braiding and tassels, maker of
trimmings
عقادة ‘iqāda manufacture of trimmings,
braiding, etc.
عقيد ‘aqīd pl. عقداء ‘uqadā’2 contracting
party, contractant, contractor; a military
rank, approx.: lieutenant colonel (Ir.);
colonel (mil., U.A.R.)
عقيدة ‘aqīda pl. عقائد ‘aqā’id2 article of
faith, tenet, doctrine; dogma; creed, faith,
belief; conviction; O ideology │ عقيدة
خرافية (kurāfīya) superstition; في عقيدتي
according to my conviction, as I believe
عقائدي ‘aqā’idī O ideological
اعقد a‘qad2 (elative) knottier, more
knotted; more complicated, more difficult;
-- a‘qad2, f. عقداء ‘aqdā’ knotty, knotted,
guarded │ عصا عقداء (‘aṣan) knotty stick,
brier cane
معقد ma‘qid pl. معاقد ma‘āqid2 piece
where s.th. is knotted or tied in a knot or
knots; point where s.th. joins or meets, a
junction, a juncture, a joint, a seam │ معقد
the object on which s.o. pins his hopes; لا
يأخذ الكرى بمعقد جفنه (karā bi-m. jafnihī) no
slumber closed his lids
تعقيد ta‘qīd complication, entanglement,
involvement; complicatedness, intricacy;
complexity, tangledness; pl. -āt intricate,
complicated problems
تعقد ta‘aqqud complicatedness,
complexity, intricacy
انعقاد in‘iqād meeting, convening,
session (of a committee, and the like) │
دور الانعقاد daur al-in. session, term (parl.)
اعتقاد i‘tiqād (firm) belief, faith, trust,
confidence, conviction; -- (pl. -āt)
(religious) creed, faith; article of faith;
principle of faith, tenet; doctrine; dogma
628
اعتقاد i‘tiqād dogmatic; (pl. -ūn)
dogmatist │ المعھد الاعتقادي (madhab)
dogmatism
عاقد ‘āqid legally competent to contract
(Isl. Law)
معقود ma‘qūd knit, knotted, etc., see عقد
(of milk) curdled │ معقود اللسان tongue-tied,
incapable of speech │ كان الأعمال معقودا ان
(amalu) it was hoped that …
معقد mu‘aqqad knotted, knotty, gnarl.d;
complicated, intricate, entangled, snarled,
involved, difficult
معاقد mu‘āqad contracting party,
contractant, contractor
متعاقد muta‘āqid: متعاقدان the two
contracting parties
معتقد mu‘taqad believed; المعتقد ان it is
believed that ..., it is held that …; -- (pl.
-āt) article of faith, principle of faith,
tenet; doctrine; dogma; creed, faith;
conviction, belief, view, opinion
عقر ‘aqara i (‘aqr) to wound ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.);
-- ‘aqura u and ‘aqara i (‘uqr, ‘aqr, عقارة
‘aqāra) to be barren, sterile; to be
childless III to be addicted, be given ( ھ to
s.th., e.g., to drinking) IV to stun, stupefy
ه) s.o.)
عقر ‘uqr, ‘aqr barrenness, sterility;
middle, center │ في عقر الدار within the
house itself (not outside the house); في عقر
داره in his own house; في عقر ديارھم within
the country; in their own country, on their
own ground
عقر ‘uqr indemnity for illicit sexual
intercourse with a woman slave (Isl. Law);
childless man
عقار ‘aqār pl. -āt immovable property,
immovables, real property, real estate,
realty; piece of real estate, landed property
عقار ‘uqār residue
عقاري ‘aqārī of or pertaining to
immovable property, immovables, landed
property, or real estate; consisting in
immovable property, immovables, landed
property, or real estate; landed │ بنك عقاري
real-estate bank, land-mortgage bank; رھن
عقاري (rahn) mortgage on landed property,
landed security; القسم العقاري (qism) realestate
administration (Tun.); ملك عقاري
(milk) landed property
عقور ‘aqūr mordacious, rapacious,
voracious (animal)
عقار ‘aqqār pl. عقاقير ‘aqāqīr2 drug;
medicament, remedy
عقارة ‘aqāra barrenness, sterility
عقيرة ‘aqīra voice
عاقر ‘āqir (f.) barren, sterile (woman)
عقرب ‘aqrab pl. عقارب ‘aqārib2 scorpion; sting,
prick; hand (of a watch or clock); look,
curl; العقرب Scorpio (astron.)
معقرب mu‘aqrab crooked, curved,
curled
عقص ‘aqaṣa i (‘aqṣ) to braid, plait ( ھ the hair)
عقيصة ‘aqīṣa pl. عقائص ‘aqā’iṣ عقاص , 2
‘iqāṣ braid, plait (of hair), lock
عقعق ‘aq‘aq pl. عقاعق ‘aqā‘iq2 magpie (zol.)
عقف ‘aqafa i (‘aqf) to crook, hook, bend
sharply ( ھ s.th.) II = I
عقفة ‘uqfa pl. -āt loop, ring, eyelet (to
hold a button, the cords of the ‘iqāl, and
the like)
اعقف a‘qaf2, f. عقفاء ‘aqfā’2 crooked,
bent, hooked
O معقف ma‘qif square bracket
معقوف ma‘qūf crooked, bent, hooked;
bent at the ends, handlebar-shaped
(mustache); dual معقوفان square brackets
(typ.) │ الصليب المعقوف the swastika
منعقف mun‘aqif square bracket │ بين
منعقفين in square brackets 629
عقل ‘aqala i (‘aql) to hobble with the ‘iqāl (
عقال q.v.; البعير al-ba‘īra the camel); to
intern, confine, detain, arrest, put under
arrest ( ه s.o.); to throw ( ه s.o.) in wrestling;
to pay blood money or wergild ( ه ل for the
slain to s.o.); to be endowed with (the
faculty of) reason, be reasonable, have
intelligence; to be in one’s senses, be
conscious; to realize, comprehend,
understand ( ھ s.th.) │ عقل لسانه (lisānahū)
to tongue-tie s.o., make s.o. speechless II
to make ( ه s.o.) reasonable or sensible,
bring ( ه s.o.) to reason V to be or become
reasonable, sensible, rational, intelligent,
judicious, prudent, wise; to comprehend,
grasp ( ه s.th.) VIII to arrest, put under
arrest, apprehend, detain ( ه s.o.); to intern
ه) s.o.); to seize, impound ( ھ s.th.)
عقل ‘aql blood money, bloodwite,
wergild; (pl. عقول ‘uqūl) sense, sentience,
reason, understanding, comprehension,
discernment, insight, rationality, mind,
intellect, intelligence │ مختل العقل muktall
al-‘a. mentally deranged, demented,
insane, mad; سليم (صحيح) العقل sane; O العقل
الباطن (or اللاشعوري , or غير الواعي ) (lā-šu‘ūrī,
gairu l-wā‘ī) the unconscious, the
subliminal; O العقل الشعوري (or الواعي , or
الظاھر ) (šu‘ūrī) the subconscious, the
coconscious; O العقل المميز (mumayyiz) the
conscious; O عقل الكتروني electronic
computer
عقلي ‘aqlī reasonable, rational;
ratiocinative; mental; intellectual; (pl. -ūn)
rationalist; an intellectual; العقليات
al-‘aqlīyāt the mental world │ المذھب العقلي
(madhab) rationalism; الأمرض العقلية mental
diseases
عقلية ‘aqlīya mentality, mental attitude
عقلة ‘uqla pl. عقل ‘uqal knot, knob, node
(e.g., of a reed, cane, etc.); joint,
articulation; knuckle; layer (hort.); trapeze
عقال ‘iqāl pl. عقل ‘uqul cord used for
hobbling the feet of a camel; a headband
made of camel’s hair, holding the kūfīya
in place │ اطلق حربا من عقالھا (aṭlaqa
ḥarban) to unleash or start a war
عقول ‘aqūl understanding, reasonable,
sensible, discerning, intelligent; costive
medicine; (and عاقول ‘āqūl) a low spiny
shrub of the steppes of North Africa and
Western Asia (camel’s-thorn, Alhagi
maurorom; Alhagi manniferom Desv.;
bot.)
عقيلة ‘aqīla pl. عقائل ‘aqā’il2 the best, the
pick; wife, spouse │ السيدة عقيلته (sayyida)
his wife; عقائل الصفات ‘a. aṣ-ṣifāt the very
best qualities
اعقل a‘qal2 brighter, smarter, more
intelligent
معقل ma‘qil pl. معاقل ma‘āqil2 refuge,
sanctuary; stronghold, fortress, fort; O
pillbox, bunker, dugout (mil.); fortified
position
معقل ma‘qula pl. معاقل ma‘āqil2 blood
money, wergild
تعقل ta‘aqqul understanding,
discernment, prudence, judiciousness,
wisdom │ بتعقل sensibly, intelligently
اعتقال i‘tiqāl pl. -āt arrest, detention,
internment; cramp, spasm │ معسكر الاعتقال
mu‘askar al-i‘t. concentration camp
عاقل ‘āqil pl. -ūn, عقلاء ‘uqalā’ عقال , 2
‘uqqāl understanding, reasonable,
sensible, rational, discerning, intelligent,
prudent, judicious, wile; in full possession
of one’s mental faculties, compos mentis,
sane in mind
عاقلة ‘āqila a clan committed by
unwritten law of the Bedouins to pay the
bloodwite for each of its members
معقول ma‘qūl reasonable, sensible,
intelligible, comprehensible,
understandable, plausible, logical;
rational; apprehensive faculty,
comprehension, intellect, discernment,
judiciousness, judgment; common sense │
معقول unintelligible, 630
incomprehensible, nonsensical,
incongruous, preposterous, absurd
معقولية ma‘qūlīya, comprehensibility,
intelligibility; logicality, rationality, or
reasonable character, logicality,
rationality, reasonableness
معتقل mu‘taqal pl. -āt concentration
camp; prison camp; internment camp,
detention camp
عقم ‘aqama u and ‘aquma u (‘aqm; ‘uqm) to be
barren, sterile (womb, woman); -- aqama
i (‘aqm) to render barren ( ھ the womb) II
to render sterile or barren, sterilize ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to degerminate ( ه s.th.); to
pasteurize ( ه s.th.); to disinfect ( ه s.th.) V
to be rendered barren, be sterilized
عقم ‘aqm, ‘uqm, ‘aqam barrenness,
sterility
عقمة ‘uqma barrenness, sterility
عقيم ‘aqīm pl. عقم ‘uqum, عقام ‘iqām
barren; sterile; useless, unavailing, futile,
fruitless, ineffectual, ineffective,
unproductive (e.g., work, attempt)
تعقيم ta‘qīm sterilization, degermination,
pasteurization; disinfection
O معقم mu‘aqqim disinfector,
disinfecting apparatus
معقم mu‘aqqam sterilized, pasteurized,
disinfected, degerminated
عك ‘akka i (‘akk) to be sultry, muggy (day)
عك ‘akk sultry, muggy, sweltering
عكة ‘akka عكاء , 2 ‘akkā’2 and عكا ‘akkkā
Acre (seaport in Palestine)
عكيك ‘akīk sultry, muggy, sweltering
(day)
عكر ‘akira a (‘akar) to be or become
turbid, muddy, roily II to render turbid, to
roil, to muddy ( ھ or على s.th.); to disturb,
trouble ( ھ or على s.th.) │ عكر الصفو (ṣafwa)
to destroy the untroubled state, disturb
the order; عكر صفوه (ṣafwahū) and عكر
عليه الصفو (ṣafwa) to kill s.o.’s good spirits,
spoil s.o.’s good humor V to become
turbid, become muddy; to deteriorate, be
aggravated, become worse (situation)
عكر ‘amr turbidity, muddiness;
sediment, dregs, lees
عكر ‘akir turbid, muddy, roily;
troubled, disturbed
عكارة ‘akāra, ‘ikāra (eg.) sediment,
dregs, lees
تعكير ta‘kīr (act of) rendering turbid,
roiling, muddying; disturbance, troubling,
derangement
معكر mu‘akkar turbid, sedimentous,
roiled, muddy; disturbed, troubled
عكز V to lean ( على on a staff)
عكاز ‘ukkāz, عكازة ‘ukkāza pl. -āt, عكاكيز
‘akākīz2 staff, stick; crutch
عكس ‘akasa i (‘aks) to reverse, invert ( ھ s.th.);
to reflect, throw back, cast back, mirror ( ھ
s.th.) III to counteract, oppose, contradict (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), thwart ( ھ s.th.); to disturb,
trouble ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to molest, vex,
tease, harass ( ه s.o.) VI to be reversed, be
inverted; to be thrown back, be cast back,
be reflected, be mirrored VII to be
reversed, be inverted; to turn back ( على
against); to redound ( على to, on); to be
thrown back, be cast back ( على or عن by),
be reflected, be mirrored ( على or عن by, in)
عكس ‘aks reversal, reversion, inversion;
reflection; opposite, contract, contrary,
reverse │ عكس ذلك ‘aksa d. and على عكس
ذلك in contrast with that, contrary to that;
كان على العكس من to be in contrast to, be in
opposition to; بالعكس on the contrary,
conversely; والعكس بالعكس and vice versa;
بحث المسألة طردا وعكسا ٦٣١ (mas’alata
ṭardan) he studied the problem from all
sides or in all its aspects
عكسي ‘aksī contrary, opposite,
contrasting, antithetical, adverse
عكيس ‘akīs layer, shoot, cion (hort.)
معاكسة mu‘ākasa pl. as disturbance;
molestation, pestering, harassment;
struggle, fight, battle │ معاكسة الحالة الجوية
(jawwīya) inclemency of the weather
انعكاسي in‘ikāsī reflection; (pl. -āt)
reflex
انعكاسي in‘ikāsī reflectional, reflexive,
reflex (adj.) │ حركة انعكاسية (ḥaraka) reflex
action, reflex (physiol.)
عاكس ‘ākis screen, lamp shade; reflector
عاكسة ‘ākisa reflector; eye shade; lamp
shade
معاكس mu‘ākis counter-, contra-, anti-
ھجمة معاكسة (hajma) counterattack
متعاكس muta‘ākis contrasting, opposite,
opposed, conflicting
منعكس mun‘akis reflected │ صورة منعكسة
(ṣūra) mirror image, reflected image,
reflection, reflex; افعال منعكسة reflex actions
عكاشة ‘akāša awkwardness, clumsiness
عكاشة ‘ukāša, ‘ukāša spider; spider web,
cobweb
عكف ‘akafa u i ( عكف ‘ukuf) to adhere, cling,
stick, keep ( على to); to give o.s. over,
apply o.s., devote o.s., be addicted ( على to
s.th.), indulge ( على in s.th.), be obsessed (
على by), be bent, be intent ( على on s.th.); to
be busily engaged ( على in), busy o.s. ( على
with); to remain uninterruptedly ( في in); to
seclude o.s., isolate o.s. ( في in, at a place),
withdraw, retire ( في into, to a place); --
‘akafa u i (‘akf) to hold back, restrain,
keep ( ه عن s.o. from) II to hold back,
restrain, keep ( عن ه s.o. from) V to remain
uninterruptedly ( ھ in); to seclude o.s.,
isolate o.s. ( في in, at a place; عن from),
withdraw, retire ( في into, to a place; عن
from); to live in seclusion. in retirement (
عن from) VIII = V; to devote o.s., apply
o.s. assiduously ( الى to s.th.), busy o.s. ( الى
with)
عاكف pl. -ūn, عكوف ‘ukūf, عكف ‘ukkaf
given, addicted ( على to s.th.); obsessed (
على by), bent, intent ( على on); busily
engaged ( على in), busy ( على with)
عكم ‘akama i (‘akm) to bundle up, pack, tie in
a cloth, and the like ( ھ s.th.)
عل 1 ‘alu see علو
عل 2 ‘alla, لعل la-‘alla (particle; with accusative
noun immediately following) perhaps,
maybe │ من يدري لعل (man yadrī) who
knows if …
عل 3 ‘alla i and pass. ‘ulla to be or fall ill II to
occupy, busy, keep busy, entertain,
distract ( ب ه s.o. with); to justify,
motivate, explain ( ب ه s.th. with) │ علل
نفسه (النفس) ب to indulge in the hope that
…, entertain or cherish the hope of or that
…, be given to the illusion that ...; علل نفسه
بآمال to indulge in hopes; to entertain vain
hopes; علل الآمال ب to cherish the hope
of ...; علله بالوعود to put s.o. off with
promises V to occupy o.s., busy o.s.,
amuse o.s., distract o.s., divert o.s. ( ب
with); to make an excuse, offer a pretext;
to offer or use as an excuse, offer a pretext
ب) s.th.); to use as an expedient, as a
makeshift ( ب s.th.) │ تعلل بعلة (bi-‘illatin)
to make a pretext, plead s.th. as an excuse
VIII to be or fall ill; to be weak, defective;
to make an excuse, offer a pretext; to
adduce, give, offer ( ب a reason or excuse,
على for s.th.); to pretend, purport, allege,
feign, dissimulate, offer as a pretext or
excuse ( ب s.th.) 632
علة ‘illa pl. -āt, علل ‘ilal illness,
sickness, disease, malady; deficiency,
defect, weakness; weakness, defectiveness
(of a letter or word; gram.); metrical
variation or irregularity (prosody); -- (pl.
علل ‘ilal) cause, reason, occasion; excuse,
pretense, pretext, plea │ حروف العلة the
weak letters ( ا، ي، و ; gram.); على علاته in
spite of his weaknesses, such as he is; العلة
والمعلول cause and effect; علة العلل في the
principal cause of ..., the deeper reason
underlying ...
علة ‘alla pl. -āt concubine │ بنو العلات
banū l-‘a. sons of a man by different
mothers
عليل ‘alīl pl. اعلاء a‘illa’ sick, ill, ailing;
sick person, patient; soft, gentle, mild,
pleasant
علية ‘illīya causality
علية ‘ilya, ‘ullīya and عليون ‘illīyūn see
علو
علالة ‘ulāla comfort, consolation;
remainder, remnant, rest
تعليل ta‘līl pl. -āt entertainment,
diversion, distraction; argumentation,
justification, motivation, explanation
تعلة ta‘illa pl. -āt pretext, pretense,
excuse; makeshift, expedient, substitute,
surrogate
اعتلال i‘tilāl illness, sickness, disease,
malady; weakness, defectiveness
معلول ma‘lūl ill, sick, ailing; effect │
العلة والمعلول (‘illa) cause and effect; اتخذ
المعلول علة ittakada l-ma‘lūla ‘illatan to
mistake cause and effect
معل mu‘all ill, sick, ailing
معتل mu‘tall ill, sick, ailing; weak
(letter; gram.); defective (word; gram.)
علب II to can, tin, preserve in cans ( ھ s.th.)
علبة ‘ulba pl. علب ‘ulab, علاب ‘ilāb box,
case; can, tin; etui
علج III to treat ( ه s.o., a patient; ھ a disease,
also a subject); to occupy o.s., concern
o.s., have to do, deal ( ھ، ه with s.o., with
s.th.), attend, turn ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.); to
cultivate ( ھ s.th., e.g., a literary genre); to
take up ( ھ s.th.), go in ( ھ for s.th.), apply
o.s. ( ھ to s.th.); to take upon o.s. ( ھ s.th.),
undergo ( ھ s.th.); to work ( ھ s.th. or on
s.th.), process, treat, manipulate, handle ( ھ
s.th.); to endeavor, take pains, try hard ( ان
or ھ to do s.th.); to palpate, paw, finger,
touch ( ه s.o.), fumble around ( ه on s.o.); to
influence ( ه s.o.), work ( ه upon s.o. by
arguments or persuasions), prevail ( ه on
s.o.) │ عالج الرمق الأخير (ramaqa) to be on
the verge of death, be dying; عالجه بطعنة
(bi-ṭa‘natin) to land a stab on s.o., stab
s.o. VI to be under medical treatment,
receive or undergo medical treatment VIII
to wrestle, struggle, fight (with one
another); to be in violent commotion or
agitation, heave, surge, tremble
علج ‘ilj pl. علوج ‘ulūj infidel; uncouth
fellow, lout
معالجة mu‘ālaja treatment (of a patient,
also of a subject); nursing (of a patient);
cultivation (of an art); manipulation,
handling, processing, treatment (of a
material, etc.)
علاج ‘ilāj medical treatment; remedy;
cure, therapy
تعالج ta‘āluj curative, therapeutic
علف ta‘āluj medical treatment (which one
undergoes)
علف ‘alafa i (‘alf) to feed, fodder ( ھ livestock)
علف ‘alaf pl. اعلاف a‘lāf, علاف ‘ilāf,
علوفة ‘ulūfa fodder, forage, provender
علاف ‘allaf pl. ة seller of provender
علوفة ‘alūfa pl. علائف ‘alā’if2 stall-fed
animal; -- (pl. علف ‘uluf) fodder, forage,
provender 633
معلف mi‘laf pl. معالف ma‘ālif2 manger,
trough
معلوف ma‘laf stall-fed, fattened
(animal)
علق ‘aliqa a (‘alaq) to hang, be suspended,
dangle; to stick, cling, cleave, adhere ( ب
to); to catch ( ب on, في in), get caught or
stuck ( ب on, في in); to be attached, affixed,
subjoined ( ب to s.th.); -- ( علوق ‘ulūq, علاقة
‘alāqa) to keep ( ب to s.o.), he attached, be
devoted ( ب to s.o.), be fond ( ب of s.o.);
(with foll. imperf.) to begin, commence
to ..., start doing s.th.; -- ‘aliqat ( علوق
‘ulūq) to become pregnant, conceive
(woman) II to hang, suspend ( على or ب ه
s.th. on), attach, hitch, fasten, affix, tie ( ھ
s.th. على or ب to); to leave undecided, keep
pending, keep in abeyance ( ھ s.th.); to
make dependent or conditional ( ھ s.th. ب
or على on); to comment ( على on s.th.);
annotate, gloss, furnish with notes or a
commentary ( على s.th.), remark, state ( على
with regard to); to make notes ( ھ of s.th.),
jot down ( ھ s.th.) │ علق الآمال على to set
one’s hopes on; علق اھمية (خطورة) على
(ahammīyatan) to attach importance to
s.th. IV to hang, suspend ( ب ھ s.th. on),
attach, hitch, fasten, affix, tie ( ب ھ s.th.
to); to apply leeches V to hang, be
suspended, dangle ( ب from); to cling,
cleave, adhere ( ب to); to keep, stick, hang
on ( ب to); to be attached, be devoted ( ب
to), be fond ( ب of s.o.); to depend, be
dependent or conditional ( على or ب on); to
refer, pertain, belong,
be related ( ب to), be connected, have to
do ( ب with), concern ( ب s.th.) │ تعلق بحبه
(bi-ḥubbihī) to be fond of s.o., be
affectionately attached to s.o.; فيما تعلق ب
with regard to, as to, regarding,
concerning
علق ‘ilq, ‘alq pl. اعلاق a‘lāq precious
thing, object of value
علق ‘alaq (con.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt
medicinal leech; leech; (coagulated)
blood, blood clot
علقة ‘alqa (eg.) beating; bastinado; a
thrashing, spanking
عليق ‘alīq pl. علائق ‘alā’iq2 fodder,
forage, provender
علق 'ullaiq twining and creeping plants
or shrubs (of various kinds); the lesser
bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis; bot.;
common English blackberry, bramble
(Rubus fruticosus; bot.); blackberry;
raspberry
عليقة ‘ullaiqa: عليقة موسى ‘u. mūsā the
Burning Bush
علاق ‘allāq cost hanger
علاقة ‘alāqa attachment, devotion,
affection, bond; (pl. -āt, علائق ‘alā’iq2)
relation, affiliation, association, contact,
bond, connection ( ب with) │ العلاقات العامة
public relations; ذو علاقة ب connected with,
related to; السلطات ذات العلاقة (sulṭāt) the
competent authorities; (قطع العلاقات (العلائق
qaṭ‘ al-‘a. severance of relations; توتر
العلاقات (العلائق ) tawattur al-‘a. tenseness of
relations, tension in the relations
علاقة ‘ilāqa pl. علائق ‘alā’iq2 a strap,
and the like, for suspending s.th.
علاقة ‘allāqa coat hanger
اعلق a‘laq اعلق بالذھن : 2 (dihn) that to
which the mind is more inclined
معلاق mi‘lāq pl. معاليق ma‘ālīq2 pluck
(of an animal)
تعليق ta‘līq hanging, suspending;
temporary stay, remission or abrogation,
suspension; the oblique, “hanging” ductus
(in Arabic calligraphy); (pl. -āt, تعاليق
ta‘ālīq2) commentary, comment(s),
explanatory remarks; suspended lamp │
تعليق الطلاق t. aṭ-ṭalāq conditional
repudiation, conditional pronunciation of
the talak (Isl. Law); تعليق على الأنباء (anbā’)
news commentary (radio) 634
تعليقة ta‘līqa pl. -āt, تعاليق ta‘ālīq2
marginal note, annotation, note, gloss,
scholium
تعلق ta‘alluq attachment, devotion ( ب
to), affection ( ب for); linkage, connection,
relationship ( ب with)
معلق mu‘alliq commentator (radio,
press)
معلق mu‘allaq suspended, hanging; in
suspense, in abeyance, pending,
undecided; hinging ( ب on); depending,
dependent, conditional ( ب or على on),
conditioned ( ب or على by) │ جسر معلق (jisr)
suspension bridge; حساب معلق suspense
account; قاطرات معلقة suspension railways;
مسائل معلقة pending questions; رغبته معلقة ب
(ragbatuhū) his desire is directed toward
…
معلقة mu‘allaqa pl. -āt placard, poster,
bill; المعلقات the oldest collection of
complete ancient Arabic kasidas
متعلق muta‘alliq attached, devoted ( ب
to); connected ( ب with), related, pertaining
ب) to), concerning ( ب s.o. or s.th.) │ متعلق
بحبه (bi-ḥubbihī) affectionately attached to
s.o.; من متعلقاته depending on s.o. or s.th.,
pertaining to s.o.’s authority
علقم ‘alqam pl. علاقم ‘alāqim2 colocynth (bot.)
│ ذاق العلقم to taste bitterness suffer
annoyance, vexation, chicanery or
torments ( من from)
علك ‘alaka u i (‘alk) to chew, champ ( ھ s.th.,
esp. اللجام the bit, of a horse)
علك ‘ilk mastic
علم ‘alima a (‘ilm) to know ( ب or ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), have knowledge, be cognizant, be
aware ( ب or ھ of s.th.), be informed ( ب or
ھ about or of s.th.), be familiar, be
acquainted ( ب or ھ with s.th.); to perceive,
discern ( ب or ھ s.th.), find out ( ب or ھ
about s.th., من from), learn, come to know
ب) or ھ s.th. or about s.th., من from); to
distinguish, differentiate ( من ھ s.th. from)
II to teach ( ب ه or ھ ه s.o. s.th.), instruct,
brief ( ب ه or ھ ه s.o. in s.th.); to train.
school, educate ( ه s.o.); to designate,
mark, earmark, provide with a distinctive
mark ( على s.th.); to put a mark ( على on) IV
to let ( ه s.o.) know ( ب or ھ s.th. or about
s.th.), tell ( ب or ھ ه s.o. about), notify,
advise, apprise, inform ( ب ه or ھ ه s.o. of
or about s.th.). acquaint ( ب ه or ھ ه s.o.
with) V to learn, study (A s.th.); to know (
ھ s.th.) X to inquire ( عن ه or ھ ه of s.o.
about), ask, query ( عن ه or ھ ه s.o. about),
inform o.s. ( ھ ه or ھ ه through s.o. about).
gather information ( عن ه or ھ ه from s.o.
about)
علم ‘ilm knowledge, learning, lore;
cognizance, acquaintance; information;
cognition, intellection, perception,
knowledge; (pl. علوم ‘ulūm) science; pl.
العلوم the (natural) sciences │ علما وعملا
‘ilman wa-‘amalan theoretically and
practically; ليكن في علمه (li-yakun) be it
known to him, may he know, for his
information; كان على علم تام ب (tāmm) to
know s.th. inside out, be thoroughly
familiar with s.th.; to have full cognizance
of s.th.; علم الجراثيم bacteriology; علم الاجتماع
sociology; علم الحساب arithmetic; علم الحياة
‘i. al-ḥayāh biology; علم الأحياء do.; علم
الحيوان ‘i. al-ḥayawān zoology; علم الأخلاق
ethics; علم الذرات ‘i. ad-darrāt nuclear
physics; علم التربية ‘i. at-tarbiya pedagogy;
علم الصحة ‘i. aṣ-ṣiḥḥa hygiene; علم الأصوات
phonetics; علم المعادن ‘i. al-ma‘ādīn
mineralogy; علم اللغة ‘i. al-luga
lexicography; علم النباتات ‘i. an-nabātāt
botany; علم النفس ‘i. an-nafs psychology;
علم وظائف الأعضاء ‘i. w. al-a‘ḍā’
physiology; طالب علم ṭālib ‘ilm student; كلية
العلوم kullīyat al-‘u. the Faculty of Science
of the Egyptian University
علمي ‘ilmī scientific; erudite (book);
learned (society) 635
علم ‘alam pl. اعلام a‘lām sign, token,
mark, badge, distinguishing mark,
characteristic; harelip; road sign, signpost,
guidepost; flag, banner; a distinguished,
outstanding man; an eminent personality,
au authority, a star, a luminary; proper
name (gram.) اشھر من نار على علم very
famous; اسم العلم ismun ‘alamun or ism
‘alamin pl. اسماء الأعلام proper name
(gram.); علم الوصول receipt
عالم ‘ālam pl. -ūn, عوالم ‘awālim2 world;
universe, cosmos; العالمان al-‘ālamān the
two worlds = Europe and America; عالمون
‘ālamūn inhabitants of the world, specif.
human beings │ عالم الحيوان ‘a. al-ḥayawān
the animal kingdom; عالم المعادن ‘ā. alma‘
ādin the mineral kingdom; عالم النبات
‘ā. an-nabāt the vegetable kingdom; عالم
الوجود this world, this life
عالمي ‘ālami worldly, secular, world
(adj.); international; world-wide, worldfamous,
enjoying world-wide renown
عالمية ‘ālamīya internationality;
‘ālimīya see after ‘ālim
علماني ‘almānī, عالماني laic, lay; (pl. -ūn)
layman (in distinction from the clergy)
علم ‘alīm pl. علماء ‘ulamā’ knowing;
cognizant, informed; learned, erudite; العليم
the omniscient (one of the attributes of
God)
علام ‘allām knowing thoroughly (with
foll. genit.: s.th.), completely familiar
(with)
علام ‘alāma see على (prep.) under علو
علامة ‘allāma most erudite, very
learned
علامة ‘alāma pl. -āt, علائم ‘alā’im2 mark,
sign, token; badge, emblem;
distinguishing mark, characteristic
indication,
syptom │ علامة ھذا (‘alāma) in token of
that, as a sign of that; علامة تجارية (tijārīta)
trade-mark; علامة الرتبة ‘a. rutba insignia of
rank; O علامة التأثر ‘a. at-ta’attur and علامة
التعجب ‘a. at-ta‘ajub exclamation point;
علامة الاستفھام question mark; O علامة
التنصيص quotation mark
عيلم ‘ailam tender; (pl. عيالم ‘ayālim2)
well with abundant water; sea
اعلومة a‘lūma pl. اعاليم a‘ālim2 road sign,
signpost, guidepost
تعلامة ti‘lāma moot erudite, very
learned
معلم ma‘lam pl. معالم ma‘ālim2 place,
abode, locality, spot; track, trace;
landmark, mark, distinguishing mark,
characteristic; road sign, signpost,
guidepost; peculiarity, particularity; pl.
sights, curiosities; characteristic traits;
outlines, contours (e.g., of the body),
lineaments, features (of the face)
معلمة ma‘lama pl. -āt encyclopedia
تعليم ta‘līm pl. -āt, تعليماتا ta‘līm2
information, advice, instruction, direction;
teaching, instruction; training, schooling,
education; apprenticeship; pl. تعليمات
instructions, directions, directives;
information, announcements │ تعليم مختلط
(muktaliṭ) coeducation; تعليم عال (‘ālin)
higher education, academic studies, مراقب
تعليم murāqib t. a military rank, approx.:
master sergeant (Eg. صول تعليم ;( 1939 ṣol t.
do. (Eg.); O فن التعليم fann at-t. pedagogy,
pedagogics
تعليمي ta‘līmī instructional, educational
اعلام i‘lām notification, advice;
information; notice
تعلم ta‘allum learning, studying, study;
education
استعلام isti‘lām inquiry ( عن about); (pl.
-āt) Information │ مكتب الاستعلامات maktab
al-i. information office, information desk;
news agency, press agency, wire service
عالم ‘ālim knowing; familiar, acquainted
ب) with), cognizant ( ب of); expert,
connoisseur, professional, (pl. علماء 636
‘ulamā’2) learned, erudite; scholar, savant,
scientist │ عالم طبيعي (ṭabī‘ī) physicist,
natural scientist; العلماء المختصون
(muktaṣṣūn) the specialists, the experts
عالمة ‘ālima woman of learning, woman
scholar; (eg.) singer, chanteuse
عالمية ‘ālimīya learnedness,
scholarliness, erudition, rank or dignity of
a ‘ālim; rank of scholarship, conferred by
diploma, of the Great Mosque in Tunis
and of Al Azhar in Cairo
اعلم a‘lam2 having more knowledge;
more learned │ لله اعلم God knows best
معلوم ma‘lūm known; fixed, determined,
given; of course! certainly! sure! no
doubt! (as an affirmative reply); known
quantity (math.); المعلوم the active voice
(gram.); -- (pl. معاليم ma‘ālim) fixed sum,
fixed rate (money); fixed income; tax,
duty; fee; sum, amount, cost(s) │ معلوم
الحيوانات m. al-ḥayawānāt impost on
livestock (Tun.); -- pl. معلومات ma‘lūmāt
knowledge, lore, learning, perceptions,
discoveries, findings; known facts;
information, data; news, tidings
معلم mu‘allim pl. -ūn teacher, instructor;
master (of a trade, etc.) │ معلم الاعتراف
father-confessor, confessor
معلمة mu‘allima pl. -āt woman teacher,
woman instructor
معلم mu‘allam taught, instructed,
trained, schooled; معلم عليه designated,
marked │ معلم عليه بالأحمر marked with red
pencil
متعلم muta‘allim apprentice; educated;
an educated person
علن ‘alana u, ‘aluna u ( علن ‘alāniya) to be or
become known, manifest, evident III to
indicate, make known, reveal, disclose ( ه
ب to s.o. s.th.) IV to manifest, reveal,
make known ( ھ s.th.); to make public,
publicize, publish, disclose, declare,
announce, proclaim, promulgate ( ھ s.th.);
to state frankly ( ھ الى to s.o. s.th.); to
announce ( ان that); to issue a summons (
الى to s.o.); to give notice ( عن of); to
advertise ( عن s.th., e.g., the rent or sale of
s.th. in a newspaper); to give evidence ( عن
of), indicate, show, betray, bespeak ( عن
s.th.) │ اعلن الحرب عليه (ḥarba) to declare
war on s.o. VIII = I; :x: - I; to seek to
bring out or to disclose ( ھ s.th.); to bring
to light ( ھ s.th.)
علنا ‘alanan openly, overtly, publicly, in
public
علني ‘alanī open, overt, public
علن ‘alin open, overt, public; evident,
patent
علانية ‘alānīya openness, overtness,
publicness, publicity (as opposed to
secrecy); ‘alāniyatan openly, overtly,
publicly, patently, in public
اعلان i‘lān pl. -āt publication,
promulgation; revelation, manifestation;
proclamation; declaration, statement,
pronouncement; announcement, notice;
advertising, publicity ( عن for);
advertisement, ad; poster, bill, placard │
اعلان حضور i. ḥuḍūr summons; اعلان الحرب
i. al-ḥarb declaration of war; اعلان عدم الثقة
i. ‘adam at-tiqa vote of “no confidence”;
اعلانات مبوبة (mubawwaba) classified ads;
اعلانات ضوئية (ḍau’īya) electric signs, sky
signs
معلن mu‘lin announcer, master of
ceremonies (e.g., in a cabaret)
معلن mu‘lan: معلن اليه summoned (before
a court)
علو ) and على) علا ‘alā u (‘ulūw) to be high,
elevated, rise high, loom, tower up; to
rise, ascend; to ring out (voice); to heave
(chest); to be higher or taller ( عن or ھ، ه
than s.o., than s.th.), (over)top ( عن or ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.), tower ( عن or ھ، ه over s.o., 637
over s.th.), be located or situated higher (
عن or ھ than s.th.); to be attached, fixed or
fastened above or on top of s.th. ( ھ ); to
rise ( عن or ھ above s.th.); to exceed,
excel, surpass ( ھ، ه or عن s.o., s.th.); to be
too high ( ھ، ه or عن for s.o., for s.th.); to
overcome, overwhelm ( على or ه s.o.), get
the better of s.o. ( ه); to turn upward; to
ascend, mount, climb, scale ( ھ s.th.); to
overspread, cover ( ھ s.th.), come, descend
ھ، ه) upon s.o., upon s.th.), befall, seize (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) │ علا به to raise s.th. or s.o.;
to exalt, extol s.o.; علت به السن (sinnu) be
bad attained great age, he was an old man;
علا صوته ب (ṣautuhū) hie voice rang out
with ..., he exclaimed ... aloud; -- على
‘aliya a ( علاء ‘alā’) to be high, elevated; to
excel, stand out, surpass; -- على ‘alā i
(‘aly) to climb ( السطح as-saṭḥa to the roof)
│ علا الأداة الصدأ (adāta, ṣada’u) rust has
covered the tool; علت وجھه صفرة الأموات
‘alat wajhahū ṣufrat l-a. deathly pallor
suffused his face; علته السآمة ‘alathu ssa’āma
he was overcome by fatigue; علت
شفتيه رغوة ‘alat šafataihi ragwa foam
appeared on his lips II to raise, raise aloft,
lift, hoist, lift up, elevate, uplift, exalt ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.) IV = II │ اعلى شأنه (ša’nahū) to
play up, stress, emphasize s.th., put
emphasis on s.th.; to further, promote,
advance s.th.; to raise s.o.’s prestige V to
rise, become high VI to rise, lift, ascend,
rise aloft; to resound, ring out; to be high,
exalted, sublime (esp. of God); to deem
o.s. above s.o. or s.th. ( على ), look down (
على on s.o. or s.th.); to stay away ( عن
from); تعال ta‘āla come (here)! come on!
Let’s go! forward! VIII to rise, lift,
ascend, rise aloft; to rise high, tower up; to
mount, ascend, climb, scale ( ھ s.th.); to
step (up) ( ھ on s.th.); to be enthroned, be
perched ( ھ on s.th.); to tower ( ھ above
s.th.); to ascend the throne; to accede to a
high office X to rise, to tower ( على above);
to master ( على s.th.); to take possession (
على of s.th.), appropriate ( على s.th.)
عل ‘alu: من عل min ‘alu from above
علو ‘ulūw height, tallness, elevation,
altitude; greatness, grandeur, highness,
exaltedness, sublimity │ علو الصوت ‘u. aṣ-
ṣaut sound volume, sound intensity; علو
الكعب ‘u. al-ka‘b high, outstanding position
علوي ‘ulwī upper; heavenly, divine │
ارادة علوية (irāda) supreme will, divine
decree
علوي ‘alawī upper; heavenly, celestial;
Alawi (adj. and n.); pl. العلويون the Alawis
(official name of the Nusairis inhabiting
the coastal district of Latakia in NW
Syria)
على ‘ulan height, tallness, elevation,
altitude; highness, exaltedness,
augustness, sublimity; high rank
على ‘alā (prep.) on, upon, on top of,
above, over (place, rank); at, on, by; in, in
the state of, in the manner of, in
possession of; to, toward, for; in addition
to; to the debit of, to the disadvantage of;
against, in spite of, despite; on the basis
of, on the strength of, by virtue of, due to.
upon; by, through; according to. in
accordance with, pursuant to; to (one’s
taste, one’s mind, one’s liking, etc.);
during; (as to syntactical regimen see
under respective verb) │ من على from
above from upon ..., from the top of …;
على ان (an, anna) on the condition that …,
provided that ...; although, though, albeit;
على ان (anna) (introducing a main clause)
however, but, on the other hand,
nevertheless, yet, still, ... though; على انه
(in the subjective notion or view that …,
i.e.) as, e.g.: جنى ثمرات الأرض على انھا نعمة
الآلھة ٦٣٨ janā tamarāti l-arḍi ‘alā annahā
ni‘matu l-āliha he reaped the fruits of the
earth (accepting them) as a boon bestowed
by the grace of the gods; على ظھر الخيل
(ẓahr l-kail) on horseback; على ظھر الباخرة
aboard the steamer; السلام عليكم (salāmu)
may peace be upon you │ على الرأس والعين
‘alā r-ra’s wa-l-‘ain very gladly! with
pleasure! على رؤوس الأشھاد publicly, for
everyone to see; جلس على النار he was
sitting by the fire; على يمينه (yamīnihī) to
(at) his right; على كل حال (kulli) or على كل
(kullin) in any case, at any rate; على
الخصوص especially, particularly,
specifically; على الإطلاق (iṭlāq) absolutely,
unrestrictedly, without exception, in any
respect, under any circumstances; على
التقريب approximately, almost, nearly,
about, circa; على التوالي (tawālī)
continuously, incessantly, in uninterrupted
succession; على ضوء (ḍau’i) or على نور
(nūri) in the light of ...; كان على حق
(ḥaqqin) or كان على الحق to be on the right
way, have hit on the right thing, be right;
كان على الباطل or كان على خطأ (kaṭa’in) to be
on the wrong way, be wrong, be mistaken;
ھو على احسن ما يرام (aḥsani, yurām) he is as
well as you can possibly wish (for him);
ھو على شيء من ... he has certain ...; ھو على
شيء من الذكاء (dakā’) he has a good deal of
intelligence; ليس ھذا على شيء there is
nothing in it, it’s worthless; ليس من ھذا كله
على شيء all this is unfamiliar to him; he
doesn’t understand a thing about it; كان على
دين المسيح (dīni l-m.) to belong to the
Christian religion, be a Christian; كان على
علم ب (‘ilmin) to be informed about. be
acquainted with ...; كان على انتظاره to wait
for s.o. or s.th.; على غير شيء for no reason;
على بصيرة من الأمر in cognizance of the
matter, knowing the matter; على غير معلافة
منه (ma‘rifatin) without his knowing about
it, without his knowledge, unwittingly;
عليك ب (ھ، ه or) take ...! help yourself
to ...! make use of ...! عليك بالصبر (bi-ṣ-
ṣabr) you must have patience! علينا به he is
the one we must have! علي به (‘alayya)
bring, give him (or it) to me! I must have
him (or it)! عليه ان it is incumbent on him
to …; it’s his duty to ...; he must …, he
will have to ...; لا عليك don’t worry! لا عليه
never mind! It’s nothing! no harm done!
(indicating forgiveness, indulgence); ماعلينا
what of it! what does it matter! let’s forget
it! ما عليك من don’t worry about ..., don’t
mind …’ don’t give … a thought; ما عليه ان
he doesn’t care if ; it’s of little importance
to him that …; علي حساب (ḥisābihī) at his
expense; عليه دين (dain) he is in debt(s); ھو
على سنه قوي (sinnihī qawīy) he bears his
years well; علام ‘alāma wherefore? what
for? why? استيقظ علي الاذان istaiqaẓa ‘alā ladān
he awoke over the call to prayer, he
was awakened by the azan; قيل على لسانه ما
(qīla, lisānihī) he was supposed to have
said things which …, statements were
ascribed to him which ...; على يده (yadihī)
through him, by him, at his hand; على ذلك
in this manner, thus; accordingly, hence;
على ما يقال (yuqālu) as they say, as it is
said; على حسب ‘alā ḥasabi (prep.)
according to, in accordance with,
commensurate with, depending on; علي
طوع منھا (‘alā) with her obeying, without
opposition on her part; على عادته according
to his habit, as was his wont, as he used to
do; علي ما يقال (yuqālu) suddenly, all of a
sudden, unawares, unexpectedly; على عھد
(‘ahdi) at the time of
علي ‘alīy high, tall, elevated: exalted,
sublime, lofty, august, excellent: العلي the
Most High, the Supreme (one of the
attributes of God) │ الدولة العلية (daula)
name of the old Ottoman Empire
علية ‘ilya (pl. of علي ‘alīy): علية الناس, علية
القوم upper class, people of distinction,
prominent people 639
علية ‘ullīya, ‘illīya pl. علالي ‘alālīy
upper room, upstairs room
عليون ‘illīyūn the uppermoot heaven;
loftiest heights
علاء ‘alā’ high rank, high standing,
nobility
علاة ‘alāh pl. علا ‘alan anvil
علياء ‘alyā’2 loftiness, exaltedness,
sublimity, augustness; lofty height;
heaven(s) │ اھل العلياء ahl al-‘a. people of
highest social standing
علاوة ‘ilāwa addition; increase, raise,
extra allowance, subsidy │ علاوة على
(‘ilāwata) in addition to
علاية ‘alāya height, loftiness
اعلى a‘lā, f. عليا ‘ulyā, pl. على ‘ulan, اعال
a‘ālin higher, highest; upper, uppermost;
اعال a‘ālin the highest portion of s.th.;
heights, peaks (fig.) │ اعلاه a‘lāhu further
up, above; مذكور اعلاه above-mentioned;
مؤتمر (منعقد) على اعلى مستوى (mu’tamar
mun‘aqid, mustawan) top-level
conference; بأعلى صوت bi-a‘lā ṣautin very
loud, at the top of one’s voice; سفينة اعالي
البحار seagoing vessel; اعالي النيل a. n-nīl the
upper course of the Nile
معال ma‘ālin (pl.): معالى الأمور noble
things; صاحب المعالي or معاليه ma‘ālīhi His
Excellency, معالي الوزير His Excellency the
Minister (title of cabinet ministers)
تعلية ta‘liya elevation, enhancement,
uplift, exaltation; raising (e.g., of the
voice)
اعلاء i‘lā’ elevation, enhancement,
uplift, exaltation; raising, lifting │ اعلاء
شأن الشيء i. ša’ni š. boosting, furtherance,
promotion, or advancement of s.th.
اعتلاء i‘tilā’ ascension (e.g., to the
throne); accession to office (e.g., of a
cabinet minister)
استعلاء isti‘lā’ superiority
عال ‘ālin high, tall, elevated; loud,
strong (voice); higher (as opposed to
elementary); lofty, exalted, sublime, highranking,
of high standing; excellent, firstclass,
first-rate, outstanding, of top quality
(commodity) │ الباب العالي the Sublime
Porte; ضغط عال (ḍagṭ) high voltage, high
tension (el.); تواتر عال (tawātur) high
frequency (el.); عاليه ‘āliyahū above,
above-mentioned (in letters; esp. in
official and business style); مذكور بعاليه
(bi-‘ālīhi) above-mentioned; (eg.) عال العال
‘āl al-āl excellent, first-rate, top-quality,
A-l (merchandise)
متعال muta‘ālin high, elevated, lofty,
exalted; resounding, ringing; المتعالي the
Most High, the Supreme Being (one of the
attributes of God)
علوان = عنون
علوان = عنوان
على، علية، عليون، علياء، علاية see علو
عم 1 abbreviation of the formula عليه السلام
(salāmu) may peace be upon him!
عم 2 ‘amma = ( عن ما>) عما
عم 3 ‘amma u ( عموم ‘umūm) to be or become
general, universal, common, prevalent,
comprehensive, all-embracing, to spread,
prevail; -- ‘amma u to comprise, include,
embrace, encompass, pervade ( ھ s.th.),
extend, stretch, be spread, be diffused, be
prevailing ( ھ all over s.th.) عمت البلوى به
(balwā) it has become a general necessity
II to generalize ( ھ s.th.); to spread
universally, universalize, popularize,
democratize ( ھ s.th.); to make ( ھ s.th.)
universally accessible, open ( ھ s.th.) to
the public at large; to introduce ( ھ s.th.)
universally; to attire ( ه s.o.) with a turban
V to put on or wear a turban VIII = V
عم ‘amm pl. عموم ‘umūm, اعمام a‘mām
father’s brother, paternal uncle │ ابن العم
٦٤٠ ibn al-‘amm cousin on the father’s
side; بنت العم bint al-‘amm female cousin
on the father’s side
عمة ‘amma pl. -āt paternal aunt
عمة ‘imma turban
عميم ‘amīm general, universal, common,
prevalent; all-comprehensive
عموم ‘umūm generality, universality,
prevalence; whole, total, totality,
aggregate; العموم the (general) public, the
public at large; عموما ‘umūman in general,
generally │ عموما -- خصوصا in general in
particular; علي العموم in general, generally;
بوجه العموم bi-wajhi l-‘u. generally
speaking, in general; في عموم القطر (‘u. ilquṭr)
throughout the country; مجلس العموم
majlis al-‘u. the House of Commons, the
Lower House; ‘umūm frequently replaces
عمومي ‘umūmī in compound terms of
administrative language, e.g.: جامعة عموم
العمال j. ‘u. al-‘ummāl general federation of
labor; ادارة عموم الجمارك General
Administration of Customs and Tariffs
(Eg.); ديوان عموم المصلحة (dīwān ‘u. almaṣlaḥa)
administration headquarters,
chief administration office; ديوان عموم المالية
d. ‘u. al-mālīya General Administration of
Finances (Eg.); تفتيش عموم الري t. ‘u. arriyy
General Inspectorate of Irrigation
(Eg.); مفتش عموم النيل الجنوبي mufattiš ‘u. annīl
al-janūbī Inspector General for the
Southern Nile (Eg.)
عمومي ‘umūmī public; universal;
general; common; state, civil, public │
جمعية عمومية (jam‘īya) plenary session;
general assembly; دار الكتب العمومية (dār alkutub)
public library; اشغال عمومية public
works; الصندوق العمومي (ṣundūq) public
treasure
عمومة ‘umūma uncleship, unclehood;
pl. of عم ‘amm
عمامة ‘imāma pl. عمائم ‘amā’im2 turban
تعميم ta‘mīm generalization,
universalization, general propagation or
diffusion, popularization, democratization;
vulgarization
عام ‘āmm public; universal, prevalent;
general; common │ الأمن العام (amn) public
security; مدير عام (mudīr) director general,
general manager; الرأي العام (ra’y) public
opinion; الصالح العام or المصلحة العامة
(maṣlaḥa) public welfare, the
commonweal; الخاص والعام (kāṣṣ) high and
low, all men, all, everybody (also العام
(والخاص
عامة ‘āmma generality; commonalty;
the masses, the people; عامة ‘āmmatan in
general; genera.lly; oommonly, altogether,
in ths aggregate, collectively │ -- خاصة
عامة (kāṣṣatan) in particular -- in general;
عامة الناس the common people, the masses,
the populace; الخاصة والعامة (kāṣṣa) high
and low, all men, all, everybody
العوام al-‘awāmm (pl. of عامة ‘āmma) the
common people, the populace; the laity
(Chr.)
عامي ‘āmmī common, vulgar, plebeian,
ordinary, popular: ordinary person, man in
the street; العامية al-‘āmmīya popular
language, colloquial language
معمم mu‘ammam wearing a turban,
turbaned
عما 4 ‘ammā = عن ما
عمد ‘amada i (‘amd) to support, prop,
shore, buttress ( ھ s.th.); to intend, purpose
ل) or الى or ھ s.th.); to betake o.s., repair,
go ( ل or الى or A to); to approach,
undertake ( ل or الى s.th.), go, set ( ل or الى
about s.th.), proceed, apply o.s., turn,
attend ( ل or الى to), embark ( ل or الى upon);
to take up ( الى s.th.); to be intent ( الى on
s.th.): -- ‘amada i to baptize, christen ( ه
s.o.) II to baptize, christen ( ه s.o.) IV to
support, prop, shore, buttress ( ھ ٦٤١
s.th.); to baptize, christen ( ه s.o.) V to
intend, purpose, do intentionally, do on
purpose ( ھ s.th.); to approach ( ھ s.th.)
with a definite aim in mind; to single out (
ھ s.o.), aim ( ھ، ه at); to be baptized, be
christened │ ما تعمدھا باھانة (ihāna) he was
not out to insult her, he had no intention of
offending her VIII = V; to lean ( على
against), support one’s weight ( على on); to
rely, depend ( ھ or ه on s.o., on s.th.); to
use as a basis ( ھ or على s.th.); to employ,
use, apply ( ھ s.th., e.g., a new method); to
confirm ( ھ s.th.); to sanction, authorize ( ھ
s.th.); to loan, give on credit ( ھ ل to s.o. a
sum)
عمد ‘amd intention, intent, design,
purpose; premeditation, willfulness (jur.);
عمدا ‘amdan intentionally, deliberately, on
purpose; willfully, premeditatedly (jur.) │
شبه العمد šibh al-‘a. quasi-deliberate intent
(Isl. Law)
عمدي ‘amdī intentional, deliberate;
premeditated, willful (jur.)
عمدة ‘umda support, prop, shore; main
subject, main issue, basic issue (e.g., of a
controversy); (pl. عمد ‘umad) chief of a
village, chief magistrate of a small
community (eg.); mayor
عماد ‘imād pl. عمد ‘amad support, prop,
stay (also fig.); bracket, buttress, post,
pole, pillar; -- ‘imād baptism
عميد ‘amīd pl. عمداء ‘umadā’2 support;
head, chief; dean (of a faculty); principal,
headmaster, director (of a secondary
school); doyen, dean (as, of a diplomatic
corps); high commissioner (also العميد
السامي ), resident general; military ranks,
approx. major (Eg. 1939), approx.
lieutenant commander (Eg. 1939), approx.
commanding) general (Ir.), lieutenant
colonel (U.A.R.) │ عميد ثان (tānin) a
military rank intermediate between those
of major and captain, Brit.: adjutant-major
(Eg. 1939); a naval rank intermediate
between those of lieutenant commander
and lieutenant (Eg. 1939)
عميدة ‘amīda principal, headmistress,
directress (of a secondary school for girls)
عمود ‘amūd pl. اعمدة a‘mida, عمد ‘umud
flagpole, shaft (of a standard); pale, post,
prop, shore, pier, buttress; lamppost;
(telephone, telegraph) pole; column,
pillar, pilaster; stem (of a glass); -- (pl.
اعمدة ) column (of a newspaper); O
element, cell (el.) │ العمود الشوكي (šaukī)
the vertebral column, the spine; العمود
الفقري (faqrī) do.; O عمود كھربائي
(kahrabā’ī) electrode
عامود ‘āmūd pl. عواميد ‘awāmīd عمود = 2
‘amūd │ O عامود القيادة steering column,
steering mechanism (of an automobile)
عمودي ‘amūdī columnar, pillar-shaped;
vertical, perpendicular, upright │ طائرة
عمودية helicopter
يوحنا المعمدان yūḥannā l-ma‘madān John
the Baptist
تعميد ta‘mād baptism
تعمد ta‘ammud intention, intent, design;
resolution, determination, purpose; تعمدا
ta‘ammudan and بتعمد intentionally,
deliberately, willfully, on purpose,
premeditatedly
تعمدي ta‘ammudī intentional, deliberate,
premeditated, willful
اعتماد i‘timād reliance, dependence ( على
on), confidence, trust ( علي in);
confirmation; sanction, approbation,
authorization; accreditation (of
diplomats); (pl. -āt) credit, loan │ الاعتماد
على النفس (nafs) self-confidence, selfreliance;
كتب الاعتماد kutub al-i‘t. or اوراق
الاعتماد aurāq al-i‘t. credentials (of
diplomats); اعتماد اضافي (iḍāfī)
supplementary loan 642
معمودية ma‘mūdīya baptism; baptismal
font
معمد mu‘ammad baptizee, one receiving
baptism
متعمد muta‘ammid deliberate,
premeditated, willful; intentional
معتمد mu‘tamad reliable, dependable;
object of reliance, support; sanctioned,
approved, authorized; accredited;
commissioner, authorized agent, proxy,
envoy, representative; commissary,
commissar │ المعتمد السامي (sāmī) the High
Commissioner; معتمد قنصلي (qunṣulī)
consular agent (dipl.)
معتمدية mu‘tamadīya legation (dipl.)
عمر ‘amara u i (‘amr, ‘umr) to live
long, be longevous; -- u i, ‘amura u ( عمارة
‘amāra) to thrive, prosper, flourish,
flower, bloom; to be or become inhabited,
peopled, populated, civilized, cultivated;
to be full, filled, filled up; -- ‘mara u to
fill with life, cause to thrive, make
prosperous; to inhabit ( ھ s.th.), live, dwell
ھ) in s.th.); to fill, pervade ( جوانحه s.o.’s
heart), reign ( جوانحه in s.o.’s heart); to
build, erect, construct, raise, rebuild,
reconstruct, restore ( ھ s.th.) II to let ( ه
s.o.) live, preserve ( ه s.o.) alive; to prolong
s.o.’s ( ه) life, grant long life ( ه to s.o.; of
God); to populate, people ( ه s.th.); to
build, erect, construct, raise, rebuild,
reconstruct, restore, repair, overhaul,
refurbish, recondition ( ھ a building); to
provide, furnish, supply, fill ( ب ھ s.th.
with, e.g., the lamp with oil, the censer
with charcoal, the goblet with wine); to
load ( ھ a gun); to fill ( ھ a pipe); to fill in (
ھ a form, a blank; tun.) │ عمر وقته
(waqtahū) to take up, or claim, s.o.’s time
IV to populate, people ( ھ s.th.); to
perform the ‘umra (q.v.) VIII to visit ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to perform the ‘umra (q.v.) X
to settle ( في s.o. in); to settle, colonize ( ھ
s.th.); to turn ( ھ a country) into a colony
عمر ‘umr (‘amr in oaths) pl. اعمار
a‘mār life, duration of life, life span,
lifetime; age (of a person) │ لعمري
la-‘amrī upon my life! لعمر لله la-‘amru
llāhi by the everlasting existence of God!
by the Eternal God! ذات العمرين dāt
al-‘umrain amphibian (n.); عمره عشرين سنة
(‘išrīna sanatan) he is twenty years old
عمرة ‘amra headgear (e.g., turban);
(eg.) repair, repair work
عمرة ‘amra pilgrimage to Mecca (the
so-called “minor hadj” which, unlike the
hadj proper, need not be performed at a
particular time of the year and whose
performance involves fewer ceremonies)
عمرى ‘umrā donation for life (Isl. Law)
عمارة ‘amāra (naval) fleet
عماارة ‘imāra pl. -āt, عمائر ‘amā’ir2
building, edifice, structure; real estate,
tract lot; العمارة or فن العمارة fann al-‘i. or
ھندسة العمارة handasat al-‘i. architecture, art
of building
عمران ‘umrān inhabitedness, activity,
bustling life, thriving, flourishing,
prosperity (as opposed to خراب karāb);
populousness and prosperity (of a
country); culture, civilization; building,
edifice, structure
عمراني ‘umrānī cultural, civilizational;
serving, or pertaining to, cultural
development
عمارية ‘ammārīya camel-borne sedan
and the virgin riding in it into battle
اعمر a'mGrl more inhabited, more
populated, more populous; more
cultivated, more civilized; more
flourishing, more thriving
معمار mi‘mār builder, architect; mason
643
معماري mi‘mārī architectonic,
architectural; - (pl. .IIP) builder, architect;
mason │ مھندس معماري (muhandis) builder,
architect; الفن المعماري (fann) art of
building, architecture
تعمير ta‘mīr building, construction,
election; restoration, repair, overhauling,
refurbishing, reconditioning; filling,
filling-up
تعميرة ta‘mīra filling, fiIling-up
استعمار isti‘mār colonizing,
colonization, foundation of colonies;
imperialistic exploitation; imperialism,
colonialism
استعماري isti‘mārī colonial; colonizer;
imperialistic
استعمارية isti‘mārīya imperialism,
colonialism
عامر ‘āmir inhabited; peopled,
populated, populous; full, filled, filled up;
jammed, crowded, filled to capacity ( ب
with); amply provided, splendidly
furnished; civilized; cultivated (land);
flourishing, thriving, prosperous; العامر is a
frequent epithet of castles, palaces, etc., of
ruling houses │ عامر بالأمل (amal) full of
hope; عامر الجيب ‘a. al-jaib with a full
pocket; عامر الذمة ل (‘ā. ad-dimma) obliged
to s.o., committed to s.o.; عامر النفس (‘ā.
an-nafs) obsessed by, possessed by; ام عامر
umm ‘āmir hyena (zool.); نھوض عامر
voluptuous bosoms
معمور ma‘mūr inhabited, populated,
populous; المعمور or المعمورة the (inhabited)
world │ في كل انحاء المعمور (المعمورة ) all
over the world, throughout the world
معمر mu’ammir pl. -ūn colonist
معمر mu‘ammar pl. -ūn senior (in
sports)
مستعمر musta‘mir colonial,
imperialistic; settler, colonist; foreign
conqueror, invader; imperialist
مستعمرة musta‘mara pl. -āt colony,
settlement │ O مستعمرة مستقلة (mustaqilla)
dominion
اعمش a‘maš2 affected with an eye disease,
blear-eyed
عماص ‘umāš (eg.) mucous discharge of the
eye, rheum
عمق ‘amuqa u (‘umq, عماقة ‘amāqa) to be or
become deep, profound II to deepen, make
deep or deeper ( ھ s.th.) IV = II V to
penetrate deeply, go deeply ( ھ or في into
s.th.), become absorbed ( ھ or في in)
عمق ‘amq, ‘umq pl. اعماق a‘māq depth,
profoundness, profundity; bottom │ من
اعماق قلبه (a. qalbihī) from the bottom of
his heart, from the depth of his soul; من
اعماق النفس (a. in-nafs) do.
عميق ‘amīq deep (also of feelings),
profound
عمل ‘amila a (‘amal) to do, act, operate, be
active, work (also: في in a field); to make,
produce, manufacture, fabricate, perform,
carry out, execute ( ھ s.th.); to act ( ب
according to, in accordance with, on the
strength of, on the basis of); to operate,
put into operation, set going ( ب s.th.); to
plan, contrive, seek to accomplish,
practice, pursue ( على s.th.), aim, work
away ( ل or على at), be out, strive ( ل or على
for), apply o.s. ( على to), take pains,
endeavor, exert o.s. ( على to do s.th.), be
active ( على in the service of s.th.); to
process, work, treat ( في s.th.); to act ( في
upon s.th.), affect ( في s.th.); (gram.) to
govern ( في a syntactical member) │ يعمل به
(yu‘malu) it is valid, is effective, is in
force (e.g., an ordinance); عمل ترتيبات to
make arrangements or preparations; عمل
اعماله (a‘mālahū) to behave, or act, like
s.o.; لا به يعمل ولا علي يعول (yu‘malu,
yu‘awawalu) null and void II to appoint as
vicegerent or governor ( ه على s.o. over,
of); to fester, suppurate, be purulent
(wound) 644 III to apply ( ه ب toward s.o.
s.th.); to treat ( ب ه s.o. in a manner),
proceed, deal ( ب with s.o. in a manner); to
trade, do business ( ه with s.o.) │ عامله بالمثل
bi-l-mitl) to repay s.o. like for like, treat
s.o. in like manner IV to make ( ھ s.th.)
work, put to work, operate, put into
operation, bring to bear, employ, woe ( ھ
s.th.); ب or اعمل ھ في to putter, or tinker,
with s.th. about s.th. else, work with s.th.
on s.th. else │ اعمل الفكر (fikra) to busy the
mind, think, reflect, ponder, muse; اعمل
السيف في رقابھم (saifa) he caused a massacre
among them, had them massacred V to go
to a lot of trouble, take great pains, spend
much effort VI to trade, do business (with
one another); to trade, do business ( مع
with) VIII to work, be active, operate X to
apply ( ھ s.th.), use, employ ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to put into operation, operate, run (
ھ s.th.); to place s.o. ( ه) at the head of s.th.
على) ), install, instate ( على ه s.o. over) │
استعمل معه وسائل القسوة (wasā’il l-qaswa) he
brought severe measures to bear upon him
عمل ‘amal doing, acting, action,
activity; work, labor; course of action,
way of acting, practice; achievement,
accomplishment; activity ( على for), work (
على in the service of s.th.); making,
production, manufacture, fabrication;
performance, execution; make,
workmanship; practical work, practice; --
(pl. اعمال a‘māl) act, action; operation
(mil.); work, job, chore, labor; deed, feat,
achievement, exploit; occupation,
business; trade, craft, handicraft;
vicegerency, province, district;
administrative district (e.g., Eg., Tun.);
العمل ب validity, effectiveness of s.th. (e.g.,
of an ordinance, and the like) │ اجراء العمل
ب (ijrā’ al-‘a.) enforcement,
implementation of s.th.; ما العمل what’s to
be done now! what’s there to be done?
what can you do? عملا ب (‘amalan) in
execution of, in pursuance of, according
to, pursuant to, is stipulated by; اعمال حربية
(ḥarbīya) belligerent, or warlike, acts,
military operations; الأعمال الأربعة (arba‘a)
the first four rules of arithmetic; اعمال
منزلية (manzilīya) household chores,
household work; اعمال يدوية (yadawīya)
handiwork(s), manual work; صاحب العمل
employer
عملي ‘amalī work-, working- (in
compounds); serving practical purposes,
practical; applied; عمليا ‘amalīyan
practically, in practice │ الحياة العملية
practical life, workaday life, professional
life; المذھب العملي (madhab) pragmatism;
السياسة العملية practical policy, “Realpolitik”
عملية ‘amalīya pl. -āt work, job; action,
activity; making, manufacture, fabrication,
production; procedure, method, technique;
operation (as an action done as part of
practical work; med.; mil.); process │
عملية قيصرية (qaiṣarīya) Caesarean section
عملة ‘amla evil deed │ بعملة in the very
act, red-handedly, flagrante delicto
عملة ‘umla wages, pay; currency;
current money, currency in circulation;
money │ عملة زائفة counterfeit money; عملة
سھلة (sahla) soft currency; عملة صعبة
(ṣa‘ba) hard currency; مزيف العملة muzayyif
al-‘u. counterfeiter; تھريب العملة currency
smuggling
عميل ‘amīl pl. عملاء ‘umalā’2 (business)
representative; agent (also pol.);
commission merchant (com.); customer,
patron; patient; client
عمي ‘amīla woman customer, woman
client
O عميلة ‘umaila pl. -āt erg (unit of
energy or work; phys.)
عمالة ‘amāla pl. -āt wages, pay;
brokerage, commission; department,
district, province; (Alg.) prefecture,
administrative district 645
عمولة ‘amūla brokerage, commission
عمالي ‘ummālī labor, workers’ (in
compounds) │ صحيفة عمالية labor organ,
labor (news)paper
معمل ma‘mal pl. معامل ma‘āmil2 factory,
mill; workshop, plant, works,
establishment; institute; laboratory; pl.
معامل industrial plant │ معمل البحث ma‘mal
al-baḥt research institute; معمل التكرير
refinery; معمل اللبن m. al-laban dairy
معاملة mu‘āmala pl. -āt treatment;
procedure; social intercourse, social life,
association (with one another); behavior,
conduct (toward others); business;
transaction; (esp. in pl.) mutual relations,
business relations; pl. معاملات handling (of
freight, luggage, etc.) │ المعاملة بالمثل (mitl)
reciprocity (in international trade); شرط
معاملة الدول الأكثر رعاية m. id-duwali lakaṭari
ri‘āyatan most-favored nation
clause (dipl.)
تعمل ta‘ammul affectedness, affectation,
finicality, mannerism
تعامل ta‘āmul commercial intercourse,
trade relations, trade, dealings,
transactions; business transactions (stock
exchange); (pl. -āt) O reaction (chem..)
استعمال isti‘māl application, use,
employment; utilization, exploitation;
operation, handling (e.g., of a machine) │
سھل الاستعمال sahl al-ist. easy to handle; سوء
الاسعتمال sū’ al-ist. abuse, misuse; شائع
الاستعمال in general use, commonly used,
generally accepted; اساء استعماله asā’a
sti‘mālahū to abuse, misuse, misemploy
s.th.
عامل ‘āmil active; effective; -- (pl. عوامل
‘awāmil2) factor, constituent, element,
(causative) agent, motive power; word
governing another in syntactical regimen,
regent (gram.); -- (pl. عمال ‘ummāl) maker,
producer, manufacturer; doer, perpetrator,
author; worker, workman, workingman,
laborer; wage earner, employee; governor,
vicegerent, lieutenant; administrative
officer at the head of a ‘amal (Tun.);
(Alg.) district president, prefect (of a
‘amala) │ الجيش العامل (jail) the regular, or
active, army; تحت عامل الغضب (‘a. il-gadab)
in wrathful agitation, infuriated; حزب العمال
ḥizb al-‘u. labor party (specif., the Brit.
Labour Party); عضو عامل (‘uḍw) active
member
معمول به ma‘mūl bihī in force, effective,
valid; in use, applied
المعاميل al-ma‘āmīl the coffee
implements (Bedouin)
معامل mu‘āmil O coefficient (math.)
مستعمل musta‘mil user
مستعمل musta‘mal employed, used also
= not new, secondhand); in use applied
عملاق ‘imlāq pl. عمالقة ‘amāliqa Amalekite;
gigantic, giant, huge; a giant │ عمالقة البحار
huge ocean liners
عمن 1 ‘ammān = عن من ‘an man
عمان 2 ‘umān Oman, sultanate in SE Arabia
عماني ‘umānī Omani, Oman (adj.)
عمان 3 ‘ammān2 Amman (the ancient
Philadelphia, capital city of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan)
عمه ‘amiha a (‘amah) to wander about, stray,
rove; to stray ( عن from)
عمي ‘amiya a (‘aman) to be or become blind,
lose one’s eyesight; to be blind ( عن to
s.th.); to be obscure ( على to s.o.) II to
blind, render blind ( ه s.o.); to blindfold ( ه
s.o.); to obscure, render cryptic, enigmatic
or mysterious, mystify ( ھ s.th.) IV to
blind, render blind ( ه s.o.); to blindfold ( ه
s.o.); to make ( ه s.o.) blind ( عن to a fact) V
to be or become 646 blind, lose one’s
eyesight VI to shut one’s eyes ( عن on
s.th.), pretend not to see ( عن s.th.); to be
blind ( عن to)
عمى ‘aman blindness
عمية ‘amīya ignorance, folly
عماء ‘amā’ heavy clouds
عماية ‘amāya ignorance, folly
اعمى a‘mā, f. عمياء ‘amyā’2, pl. عمي
‘umy or عميان ‘umyān blind
معماة ma‘māh pl. معام ma‘āmin roadless
desert, roadless area
تعام ta‘āmin blindness, (state of)
delusion
معمى mu‘amman pl. معميات
mu‘ammayāt riddle, puzzle
عن 1 ‘an (prep.) off, away from; from
(designating the source); out of (a
feeling); about, on (a topic); according to,
as attested or declared by, from what ...
says, on the authority of; on the basis of,
on the strength of; for, in defense of; as a
substitute for; (as to syntactical regimen
see under respective verb) │ عن يمينه
(yamīnihī) to (or at) his or its right, at (or
on) his or its right side, to the right of him
or it; على ارتفاع الف قدم عن سطح البحر (alfi
qadamin, saṭḥI l-baḥr) 1000 feet above
see level; عن طريق (ṭarīqi) by way of, via;
by means of, through; اليك عني ilaika ‘annī
away from me! عن امره (amrihī) by s.o.’s
order(s). at s.o.’s instigation, on s.o.’s
initiative; عن بصيرة consciously, fully
aware of the situation; عن حسن نية (ḥusni
nīya) in good faith, bona fide; عن حق
(ḥaqq) justly, rightly, by rights; عن حوف
(kauf) for fear; عن دراية، عن علم (‘ilm) on
the basis of sound knowledge, in full
cognizance of the situation; عن سرور
gladly, happily, joyfully; عن قناعة وجدانية
(qanā‘atin wijdānīya) out of absolute
inner conviction; عن قريب or عما قريب، عن
قليل or عما قليل (‘ammā) shortly, presently,
after a (little) while, soon; عن وساطة فلان
through the good offices of ...; يوما عن يوم
(yauman) day after day, from day to day;
قتلوا عن آخرھم (qutilū) they were killed to
the last man; مات عن ثمانين سنة (tamānīna
sanataan) he died at the age of eighty; مات
عن تركة كبيرة (tarika) he died leaving a
large fortune
عن 2 ‘anna i u (‘ann, عنن ‘anan) to present
itself, offer itself ( ل to s.o.); to take shape,
to form, arise, spring up ( ل in s.o.’s mind),
suggest itself ( ل to s.o.; of an opinion); to
appear ( ل to, before) │ عن له ان it occurred
to him that ...
عنة ‘unna impotence (of the male)
عنان ‘anān (coll.; n. un. ة) clouds
عنان ‘inān pl. اعنة a‘inna rein(s); bridle
│ اطلق له العنان (aṭlaqa, ‘inān) to give free
rein to s.o. or s.th., give vent to s.th.; جرت
الأمور في اعنتھا (jarat, a‘innatihā) things
took a normal course, developed as
scheduled
عنين ‘anīn impotent (male)
عنب ‘inab (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اعناب a‘nāb
grape(s) │ عنب الذئب ‘i. ad-di’b black
nightshade (Solanum nigrum; bot.)
عناب ‘unnāb (coll.; n. un. ة) jujube
(Zizyphus vulgaris Lam.; bot.); (its fruit)
jujube
عنبر ‘anbar ambergris; (pl. عنابر
‘anābir2) sperm whale, cachalot (zool.)
عنبري ‘anbarī perfumed with
ambergris; liqueur (also نبيذ عنبري ); a
variety of pigeon
عنبرة الشتاء ‘anbarat aš-šitā’ the severity
of winter
عنبر 2 ‘anbar pl. عنابر ‘anābir2 storehouse,
magazine, depot, warehouse; factory hall;
hold (of a ship); ward. section (of a
hospital); quarters (of a ship’s crew);
barrack(s) 647
عنت ‘anita a (‘anat) to fall on evil days, come
to grief, meet with hardship, be in distress,
suffer adversity; to commit a sin, specif.,
commit fornication II to force s.o. ( ه) to
perform a difficult task IV to distress,
afflict, harass ( ه s.o.), bring hardship ( ه
upon s.o.); to treat s.o. ( ه) harshly, deal
with s.o. ( ه) roughly V to cause vexation,
annoyance or distress ( ه to s.o.), bring
trouble ( ه upon s.o.), harass, pre molest ( ه
s.o.); to seek to confuse s.o. ( ه) with
questions; to pick a quarrel, be out for a
fight ( مع with s.o.); to stickle, be
pigheaded, insist stubbornly
عنت ‘anal distress, affliction, hardship,
misery, adversity; pains, trouble,
inconvenience; constraint, coercion
اعنات i‘nāt torment, harassment,
molestation, chicanery, constraint,
coercion
تعنت ta‘annut obstinacy, obduracy,
pigheadedness, stubborn zeal, stickling
متعنت muta‘annit obstinate, obdurate,
pigheaded, stubborn
عنتر ‘antara to display heroism
عنتر ‘antar Antar (the hero of a wellknown
romance of chivalry)
عنترى ‘antarī pl. -īya popular reciter of
the Antar romance
عنترى ‘antarī pl. عناترة ‘anātira
brassiere; bodice, corsage
عنترية ‘antarīya Antar, the romance of
Antar, cycle of stories relating the deeds
of Antar
عنجھية ‘unjuhīya haughtiness, self-importance,
pride
عند ‘anada u i ( عنود ‘unūd), ‘anida a (‘anad)
and ‘anuda u to swerve, deviate, diverge,
depart ( عن from); to resist stubbornly; to
be headstrong, obstinate, stubborn III to
resist or oppose ( ه s.o., doggedly), offer
(stubborn) resistance ( ه to s.o.) X to cling
stubbornly ( ه to s.th.)
عند ‘inda (prep.) at, near, by, with, on
(of place, time and possession); upon; in
the opinion of, in the view of; من عند min
‘indi from; from the home of; away from;
من عنده in his turn, for his part; اضاف شيئا
من عنده he added s.th. of his own; عندھا
then, at that moment, with these words;
على عندي (‘indī) against me; عند البيت (bait)
near the house, at the house; عند التحقيق to
be exact …, strictly speaking …; عند طلوع
الشمس (ṭ. iš-šams) at sunrise; عندي دينار واحد
(‘indī dīnār) I have only one dinar (with
me); عند ذلك then, thereupon, at that
moment; ملوك الأرض عند لله تراب (m. ul-arḍ,
turāb) the kings of this world are mere
dust in comparison with God; عندي in my
opinion, as I think; ما عندك what do you
think? what is your opinion? لم يكن عند رأيھم
(yakun, ra‘yihim) he was not what they
had expected; كان عند حسن ظنه (ḥusni
ẓannihī) to meet, or be up to, s.o.’s high
expectation; كان عند حسن الظن به (ḥusni ẓ-
ẓanni) to have a good opinion of s.o.; كان
عند نصحه (nuṣḥihī) to follow s.o.’s advice
عندما ‘indamā as soon as, whenever;
when, as
من عندياته min ‘indīyātihī sprung from
his own mind, his own brain child; of
one’s own accord, on one’s own initiative
عندئذ ‘inda’idin then, at that time; at that
moment, thereupon, then; with that,
thereby
عنيد ‘anīd pl. عند ‘unud resisting
stubbornly ( ل s.o., s.th.); stubborn,
obstinate, obdurate, pigheaded,
headstrong, opinionated, willful,
pertinacious
عناد ‘inād resistance, opposition;
stubbornness, obstinacy, obduracy,
pigheadedness, headstrongness,
opinionatedness, willfulness, pertinacity
648
معاندة mu‘ānada resistance, opposition;
stubbornness, obstinacy, obduracy,
pigheadedness, headstrongness,
opinionatedness, willfulness, pertinacity
معاند mu‘ānid resisting stubbornly ( ل
s.o., s.th.); stubborn, obstinate, obdurate,
pigheaded, headstrong, opinionated,
willful, pertinacious
عندلة ‘andala song of the nightingale
عندليب ‘andalīb pl. عنادل ‘anādil2 nightingale
عندم ‘andam brazilwood, sapanwood (used for
dyeing); red dyestuff
عندم ‘andamī deep-red
عنز ‘anz pl. اعنز a‘nuz, عنوز ‘unūz, عناز ‘ināz
goat
عنزة ‘anza (n. un.) pl. -āt goat
عنزة ‘anaza a short spear, iron-tipped at
its lower end
عانس ‘ānis pl. عوانس ‘awānis spinster, old maid
عنصر ‘unṣur pl. عناصر ‘anāṣir2 origin; race,
stock, breed; ethnic element; element
(chem., pol.); component, constituent,
ingredient; pl. also: nationalities
عنصري ‘unṣurī race, racial; ethnic;
elemental, of or pertaining to the elements
│ التباغض العنصري (tabāguḍ) or الأحقاد
العنصرية race hatred المسألة العنصرية
(mas’ala) the nationality problem, the
problem of ethnic minorities
عنصر ‘unṣurīya race, nationality; racial
theory
العنصرة al-‘anṣara Whitsuntide;
Whitsunday, Pentecost (Chr.) │ عيد العنصرة
īd al-‘a. Whitsuntide, Pentecost (Chr.);
Shabuoth, Feast of Weeks, Pentecost
(Jud.)
عنصل ‘unṣul pl. عناصل ‘anāṣil2 squill,
sea onion
عنعنات ‘an‘anāt (pl.) traditions
معنعن mu‘an‘an transmitted, handed
down
عنف II to treat severely, harshly, with rigor ( ب
or على or ه s.o.), deal with s.o. ( ب or على or
ه) roughly; to reprimand, rebuke, censure
sharply, berate, chide, scold ( ب or ه s.o.)
IV to treat severely, harshly, with rigor ( ه
s.o.), deal with s.o. ( ه) roughly
عنف ‘unf, ‘anf sternness, severity, rigor;
harshness; bluntness, gruffness;
ruggedness, roughness; violence,
vehemence; fierceness, bitterness,
embitterment, toughness; use of force
عنيف ‘anīf stern, severe, drastic,
rigorous; harsh, hard; ungentle, rough,
rude; blunt, gruff; rugged, rough; violent,
vehement; fierce, embittered, tough;
strenuous, exacting, difficult (e.g.,
reading)
عنفوان ‘unfuwān vigor, prime, bloom │
في عنفوان شبابه (‘u. šabābihī) in the prime of
his youth
اعنف a‘naf2 sterner, severer, harsher,
harder, fiercer
تعنيف ta‘nīf stern censure, reprimand,
rebuke
عنق II to grab by the neck, to collar ( ه s.o.) III
to embrace, hug ( ه s.o.); to associate
closely ( ه with), attach o.s. closely ( ه to)
VI to embrace each other VIII to embrace,
hug ( ه s.o.); to adopt, embrace ( ھ s.th.,
esp. a religion or doctrine), be converted (
ھ to s.th.), take up ( ھ s.th.); to combine ( ھ
with s.th.; chem.); to embrace each other
عنق unuq, unq pl. اعناق a‘nāq neck,
nape
عناق ‘anāq pl. اعنق a‘nuq, عنوق ‘unūq
she-kid, young she-goat │ عناق الأرض ‘a.
al-arḍ caracal, desert lynx (Lynx caracal;
zool.) 649
عنقاء ‘anqā’2 a legendary bird, griffon
عناق ‘ināq embrace, hug, accolade
معانقة mu‘ānaqa embrace, hug, accolade
اعتناق i‘tināq embracement (of a
religion or doctrine), adoption, acceptance
(of a doctrine)
عنقود ‘unqūd pl. عناقيد ‘anāqīd2 cluster, bunch;
bunch of grapes
عنقاش ‘inqāš peddler, hawker
عنكبوت ‘ankabūt pl. عناكب ‘anākib2 spider │ بيت
نسيج) العنكبوت ) bait al-‘a. cobweb, spider
web
عنا (عنو ) ‘anā u (‘unūw) to be humble,
submissive, subservient, servile ( ل toward,
before), be obedient, yield, submit ( ل to
s.o.), obey ( ل s.o.); -- u ( عنوة ‘anwa) to
take by force ( ھ s.th.); -- u to be on s.o.’s (
ه) mind, disquiet, discomfort, worry,
preoccupy ( ه s.o.); to concern, affect,
regard, interest ( ه s.o.)
عنوة ‘anwa force, compulsion;
forcibleness, violence; ‘anwatan forcibly,
by force
معنوي see عنى
عان ‘ānin humble, subservient,
submissive, servile, obedient; captive;
miserable, distressed, in trouble
عنون ‘anwana to furnish with an
address or title, entitle, address ( ھ s.th.)
عنوان ‘unwān pl. عناوين ‘anāwīn2
address; title, heading; model, epitome;
sign, token │ على or عنوانا ل in token of
s.th., as a sign of s.th.
معنون mu‘anwan addressed ( الى to),
inscribed; entitled ( ب as)
عنى ‘anī i ( عناية ‘ināya) to be on s.o.’s ( ه) mind;
to disquiet, discomfort, worry, preoccupy
ه) s.o.); to concern, affect, regard, interest
ه) s.o.); -- ‘aniya a ( عناء ‘anā’) to be
worried, concerned, anxious; to toil, labor,
drudge; -- ‘anī i (‘any) to have in mind ( ھ
s.th.), mean ( ب ھ، ه s.o., s.th. by); يعني
ya‘nī or اعني a‘nī that is, i.e.; -- pass.
‘uniya ( عناية ‘ināya) to worry, be
concerned ( ب about), take an interest ( ب
in); to take care ( ب of), see ( ب to) II to
torment, agonize, distress, harass, ( ه s.o.)
III to be preoccupied ( ھ with s.th.); to take
pains ( ھ with s.th., in doing s.th.), spend
effort ( ھ on s.th.); to see to it, make
efforts, bear in mind, make sure ( ان that);
to undergo, incur, endure, suffer, sustain,
bear ( ھ s.th.); to suffer ( ھ from), be
afflicted ( ھ with) V to toil, labor. drudge
VIII to be solicitous ( ب about, for, of), go
to trouble ( ب for), be concerned, anxious (
ب about), feel concern ( ب for); to take care
ب) of), care. provide ( ب for), look ( ب
after), see ( ب to), tend ( ب s.th.), put one’s
mind, devote one’s attention ( ب to); to
attend ( ب to), nurse ( ب s.o., s.th., e.g., a
patient)
عناء ‘anā’ pains, trouble, toil, hardship,
difficulty, distress
عناية ināya concern; care, solicitude,
providence ( ب for); care(fulness),
painstaking, meticulousness ( ب in); heed,
notice, regard, attention ( ب to); interest ( ب
in) │ العناية الإلھية (ilāhīya) divine
providence; عناية طبية (ṭibbīya) medical
care
معنى ma‘nan pl. معان ma‘ānin sense,
meaning, signification, import; concept,
notion, idea, thought; thematic purport
(e.g., of a work of art, as distinguiohed
from its form); a rhetorical, figurative, or
allegorical expression; المعاني the good
qualities (of a person) │ اسم معنى ism
ma‘nā abstract noun (gram.); علم المعاني
‘ilm al-m. rhetoric; ذو معنى significant,
meaningful, telling, tell-tale; بكل معنى الكلمة
bi-kull m. l-kalima in the full sense of the
word; لا معنى له ٦٥٠ (ma‘nā) meaningless,
without meaning; وما في معناه and the like;
نظرات كلھا معان (naẓarāt kulluhā) telling
glances, glances full of meaning
معنوى ma‘nawī relating to the sense or
import (of a word or expression; as
opposed to لفظي lafẓī); semantic,
significative, of or pertaining to meaning;
ideal, ideational, ideative; abstract;
mental; spiritual (as opposed to material)
│ شخص معنوى (šakṣ) artificial,
conventional, or juristic, person, a body
corporate as a subject of rights and duties
معنوبات ma‘nawīyāt ideal, immaterial
thing.; morale, spirit (of an army)
معاناة mu‘ānāh effort(s)
تعن ta‘annin pains, trouble, toil,
drudgery
اعتناء i‘tinā’ providing, solicitude,
concern ( ب for), attendance ( ب to),
maintenance, nursing, cultivation ( ب of),
care ( ب of, for), carefulness, painstaking (
ب in); attention ( ب to), interest ( ب in)
عان ‘ānin miserable, distressed, in
trouble
معني ma‘nīy concerned, affected;
interested ( ب in)
معنى mu‘annan (syr.) unmetrical poem
with end rhyme
معتن mu‘tanin concerned, solicitous,
careful, heedful, mindful, thoughtful,
attentive
عھد ‘ahida a (‘ahd) to know ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.; ھ
s.th., e.g., a quality, a trait, ب of
s.o.), be acquainted, familiar ( ھ، ه
with); to observe closely, heed ( ھ s.th.),
adhere ( ھ to s.th.); to attend ( ھ to), look
after s.th. ( ھ ); to delegate, entrust, assign,
commit ( ب الى to s.o., s.th.), vest ( ب الى in
s.o. s.th.), communion, charge, authorize,
empower. entrust ( ب الى s.o. with, or s.o.
with the task of ...); to impose, enjoin ( ب
الى on s.o s.th., or on s.o. the obligation
to ...), obligate, commit ( ب الى s.o. to do
s.th.) │ فيما اعھد (a‘hadu) to my
knowledge, as far as I know; عھد ووعد
(wa‘dahū) to fulfill, or keep, one’s
promise III to make a contract, compact,
or covenant ( على ه with s.o. concerning);
to promise ( على ه to s.o. s.th. also ب s.th.);
to engage, undertake, bind o.s. pledge o.s.
commit o.s. obligate o.s. ( على ه to s.o. to
do s.th.) V to advocate, support (s.th.),
stand up ( ھ for s.th.); to observe, heed,
keep in mind ( ھ s.th.), pay attention, see,
attend ( ھ to s.th.), take care ( ھ of s.th.); to
care ( ھ for s.th.), maintain, keep up,
service ( ھ s.h.); to be liable for the
maintenance or upkeep ( ھ of s.th.); to
assume. take upon o.s. ( ب s.th.); to
engage, undertake, bind o.s. pledge o.s.,
commit o.s. obligate o.s. ( ب ل to s.o. to do
s.th., also ان على to do s.th.); to promise ( ب
ل to s.o. s.th.) X to exact a written pledge
or commitment ( من from s.o.); to have s.o.
من) ) sign a contract
عھد ‘ahd knowledge; acquaintance,
contact ( ب with); the well-known, familiar
nature (of s.o.); close observance, strict
adherence (to), keeping, fulfillment (of a
promise); delegation, assignment,
committing ( الى ب of s.th. to s.o.), vesting
ب الى) in s.o. of s.th.), commissioning,
charging, entrusting ( ب الى of s.o. with
s.th.); commission; -- (pl. عھود ‘uhūd)
commitment, obligation, liability;
responsibility; pledge, vow; promise;
oath; contract, compact, covenant, pact,
treaty, agreement; time, epoch, era │ بعد
العھد bu‘d al-‘a. the fact that s.th. is long
pact, that s.th. belong, to the remote past;
حديث العھد recent, late, new, young; قريب
العھد do.; حديث العھد or حديث عھد ب (ḥ.
‘ahdin) having adopted or acquired 651
(s.th.) recently; not long accustomed to
(s.th.), inexperienced at (s.th.), new at
(s.th.), newly, e.g., حديث عھد بعرس
(bi-‘ursin) newly wed, حديث العھد بالولادة
newborn; كان حديث عھد بأوربا he had not
known Europe until recently; قديم العھد of
an early date, long past, long-standing; قديم
العھد ب of long experience in, long
acquainted with; قريب عھد ب (q. ‘ahdin),
قريب العھد ب = حديث عھد ب، حديث العھد ب؛
قريب عھد بالفطام (fiṭām) just weaned. newly
weaned; ...-I,} ¥ <J- for a abort time
(past), of late; recent, late; recently, lately,
the other day; منذ عھد بعيد a long time ago;
لا عھد له (‘ahda) not to know s.th.; not
having experienced s.th., being
unacquainted with ...; عھدنا بھذه المسألة
(‘ahdunā, mas’ala) our long-standing
knowledge of this question; اخذ عھدا عليه to
exact a promise from s.o., pledge s.o.; قطع
عھدا to conclude a treaty, make a contract;
to make a promise; قطع نفسه عھدا على to
assume an obligation, commit o.s. obligate
o.s. pledge o.s.; to vow, make a vow ( ب to
do s.th.); عھد الأمان ‘a. al-amān (formerly:)
an order bestowed by the Bey of Tunis;
عھد الأمان المرصع (muraṣṣa‘) a higher class
of the afore-mentioned order; العھد الجديد
the New Testament; العھد القديم the Old
Testament; ولي العھد walīy al-‘a. heirapparent,
crown prince; على عھده at or in
his time; في عھد فلان during s.o.’s lifetime;
in s.o.’s epoch; عھده his familiar nature or
manner, his nature as it had always been
known; ظل كعھده (ẓalla) he remained as he
had always been, as everybody used to
know him; عھدھم the nature or manner that
they know (knew) of him (or of it), that
they are
(were) used to; كعھدھم به such as they
used to know him; ما زلت انت كعھدي بك yon
are still the same! ما زال على عھده to be
unchanged, be as always; طال به العھد
(‘ahdu) to last, or have lasted, a long time
عھدة ‘uhda contractual obligation (Isl.
Law); responsibility; charge, custody,
guardianship; guaranty │ في عھدته in his
care, custody, or charge, entrusted to him;
عھدته له (‘uhdatuhū) he is responsible for it
عھيد ‘ahīd ally, confederate
معھد ma‘had pl. معاھد ma‘āhid2 place,
locality (which one had known before or
which one revisits); public institute or
institution; (scientific) institute; seminar │
معاھد الذكريات m. ad-dikrayāt places fraught
with memories; معھد اصلاحي (iṣlāḥī)
reformatory
معاھدة mu‘āhada pl. -āt agreement,
arrangement, accord.; alliance, treaty, pact
│ معاھدة السلام (الصلح ) m. as-salām (aṣ-ṣulḥ)
peace treaty; معاھدة عدم الاعتداء m. ‘adam ali‘
tidā’ nonaggression pact
تعھد ta‘ahhud advocacy, support; care;
charge, custody, guardianship, tutelage
(with foll. genit.: over); care,
maintenance, servicing, upkeep;
assumption, undertaking ( ب of s.th.); (pl.
-āt) promise, pledge, commitment,
engagement, obligation, liability,
contractual duty
معھود ma‘hūd well-known; المعھود the
said ..., the … in question
متعھد muta‘ahhid pl. -ūn contractor,
entrepreneur; concessionaire │ متعھد فني
(fannī) impresario
متعاھد muta‘āhid: المتعاھدان the two
contracting parties
عھر ‘ahara a (‘ahr, ‘ihr) and ‘ahira a (‘ahar)
to commit adultery, whore ( اليھا with a
woman) III = I ( ھا with a woman)
عھر ‘ihr adultery, fornication,
whoredom; prostitution
عھر ‘ahr adulterer, whoremonger,
fornicator
عھارة ‘ahāra adultery, fornication,
whoredom; prostitution 652
عاھر ‘āhir committing adultery,
fornicating, whoring; (pl. عھار ‘uhhār)
adulterer, fornicator, whoremonger; -- (pl.
عواھر ‘awahir2) adulteress; whore, harlot,
prostitute
عاھرة ‘āhira pl. -āt, عواھر ‘awāhir2
adulteress; whore, harlot, prostitute
عاھل ‘āhil pl. عواھل ‘awāhil2 sovereign, prince,
ruler, monarch
عھن ‘ihn (colored) wool
عواھن ‘awāhin2 (pl. of عاھن ‘āhin)
limbs, extremities (of the body); palm
branches │ القى (رمى) الكلام على عواھنه (alqā,
kalāma) to talk without restraint, ramble
عوج ‘awija a (‘awaj) to be crooked,
curved, twisted, tortuous, bent, bowed,
stooping; to bend, twist, curve; -- عاج ‘āja
u to turn off the road (while traveling); to
stop (over). put up ( على at, in) II to bend,
crook, curve, twist ( ھ s.th.) V and IX = I
عوج ‘iwaj, ‘awaj crookedness,
twistedness, curvature, bend(ing),
tortuosity; unevenness; deviation (from
that which is right)
عاج ‘āj ivory
عاجي ‘ājī ivory (adj.)
اعوج a‘waj2, f. عوجاء ‘aujā’2, pl. ( عوج
‘ūj crooked, curved, bent, twisted,
tortuous, sinuous; stooping, bowed; wry;
odd, queer
اععجاج i‘wijāj crookedness, twistedness,
curvature, bend(ing), tortuosity;
unevenness; deviation (from that which is
right); crooked ways
معوجه mu‘awwaja pl. -āt retort (chem.)
معوج mu‘wajj crooked, curved, bent,
twisted, tortuous, sinuous; stooping,
bowed; wry; odd, queer
عاد (عود ) ‘āda u (‘aud, عود ‘auda, معاد ma‘ād)
to return, come back ( ل or الى to); to flow
back; to go back. be traceable, be
attributable ( الى to); to revert, redound,
accrue ( على to); to refer, relate ( على to); to
be due. go back ( الى to); to fall to s.o.’s (
الى ) lot or share, fall in s.o.’s (( الى
bailiwick; to belong, (ap)pertain, be
proper ( الى or ل to); to give up, abandon,
relinquish ( عن s.th.), withdraw, resign ( عن
from); عاد ب to return with = to lead back,
bring back, take back, return, reduce,
revert s.o. or s.th. ( الى to); عاد عليه ب to
bring about, entail s.th. for s.o s. result in
s.th. for s.o., yield, bring in, return s.th. to
s.o.; (with predicate adjective or noun in
acc.) to become, grow (into), turn into;
(with foil. imparf. or الى ) to resume, renew
(an activity); (with neg. and foil. imparf.)
to do s.th. no more or no longer; with foil.
finite verb) to do s.th. again or anew; -- u (
عيادة ‘iyāda) to visit ( ه a patient), have
under treatment ( ه s.o.; of a physician) │
عاد الى نفسه to regain consciousness, come
to; to take counsel with o.s., hold selfcommunion,
examine o.s. introspectively,
search one’s soul; عادت المياه الى مجاريھا
(majārīhā) the situation returned to
normal; عاد الى رأس أمره ra’s amrihī) to
start s.th. all over again; عاد ادراجه
(adrājahū) to retrace one’s steps; to turn
back, go back; عاد على عقبيه (‘aqbaihi), pl.
عادوا على اعقابھم (a‘qābihim) do.; لم اعد
استطيع صبرا lam a‘ud astatī‘u ṣabran I
could not stand it any longer; لم يعد لع طاقة
به (ya‘ud, ṭāqatun) he no longer had any
power over it; لم يعد اليه سبيل there is no
longer any possibility for it; عاد يقول he
continued (after a pause in his speech) II
to accustom, habituate, condition, inure,
season ( على or ھ ه s.o. to s.th.), make s.o. (
ه) get used ( على or ھ to s.th.) III to return (
ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.); to revert, come back,
turn again, apply o.s. anew ( ھ to s.th.),
take up again, resume ( ھ ٦٥٣ s.th.); to
befall again, seize again ( ه s.o.), come
again ( ه over s.o.) IV to cause to return,
bring back, take back ( ه ھ الى s.o., s.th. to);
to return, give back, send back ( ھ الى، ه
s.o., s.th. to s.o.); to put back, lay back ( ھ
s.th., الى محله ilā maḥallihī in its place); to
repeat ( على ھ s.th., i.e., words, to s.o.); to
reiterate, repeat, do again or anew, renew,
resume ( ھ s.th.); to re-establish, restore,
repair ( ھ s.th.); to restore ( ھ ھ s.th. to),
make s.th. ( ھ ) once more ( ھ s.th.); to
reinstate, reinstall ( ھ s.o.) │ اعاد بناء مسجد
(binā’a masjidin) to rebuild a mosque; اعاد
ذكريات (dikrayāt) to revive, or reawaken,
memories; اعاد طبع الكتاب (ṭab‘a l-k.) to
reprint a book; يعيد القول ويبدأه (yu‘īdu,
yabda’uhū) he keeps talking of it, he
continue, to bring up the subject; اعاد النظر
في (naẓara) to re-examine, reinvestigate,
reconsider, check, verify, revise s.th., go
over s.th. or into s.th. again; اعاد النظر في
الدعوى (da‘wā) to retry the case (jur.) V to
get used, be accustomed, habituate o.s. (
على or ھ to s.th.), make a habit ( على or ھ
of s.th.), be used to doing, be wont to do (
على or ھ s.th.) VIII = V; X to recall, call
back ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to reclaim, demand
back ( من ھ s.th. from); to regain, recover,
recuperate, reconquer, fetch back, get
back, retrieve ( ھ s.th.); to recall, recollect,
call back to one’s mind ( ھ s.th.); to ask
s.o. ( ه) to repeat ( ھ s.th.)
عود ‘ūd pl. اعواد a‘wād, عيدان ‘īdān
wood; stick, rod, pole; branch, twig,
switch; stem, stalk; cane, reed; aloes
(wood); lute (musical instrument); body,
build, physique; strength, force, intensity;
pl. اعواد full intensity (e.g., of a disease) │
عود الثقاب matchstick, match; عود الصليب
peony (Paeonia; bot.); عود الكبريت ‘ūd alkibrīt
matchstick, match; رخاوة العود
rakāwat al-‘ūd weakness of character;
صلب العود ṣulb al-‘ūd of robust physique;
strongly built, husky, sturdy; stubborn,
resistant, unbending, unyielding,
relentless; صلابة العود ṣalābat al-‘ūd
sternness, severity, hardness, obstinacy,
stubbornness, inflexibility, relentlessness;
لدن العود ladn al-‘ūd lissome, lithe, of
elastic physique; ثقف عوده (taqqafa) to
train, educate s.o.; عجم عوده (‘ūdahū) to
test s.o., put s.o. to the test; كسر عوده
(‘ūdahū) to break s.o.’s power of
resistance, crush s.o.’s spirit
عود ‘aud return; reversion; recurrence;
recidivism (jur.); repetition, reiteration │
فعله عودا وبدءا fa'alahū ‘audan wa bad’an or
فعله عوده على بدئه (‘audahū) or فعله عودا الى
بدء he did or started it all over again
عودة ‘auda return │ بعودة البريد by return
mail; الى غير عودة never to return again,
gone forever; good riddance! farewell
forever!
عادة ‘āda pl. -āt, عوائد ‘awā’id2 habit,
wont, custom, usage, practice; ‘ādatan
usually, customarily, ordinarily,
habitually; pl. عوائد taxes, duties; charges,
fees, rates │ فوق العادة extraordinary,
unusual, uncommon; special,
extraordinary, emergency (e.g., meeting);
على عادته according to his habit, as was his
wont, as he used to do; كسابق العادة kasābiqi
l-‘ā. as was formerly customary, as
usual; جرت العادة ب (jarat il-‘ādatu) to be
customary, usual, common or current,
prevail, be a common phenomenon, be the
vogue, have become common practice;
جرت به عادتھم that was their habit, that’s
what they used to do; العادة السرية (sirrīya)
onanism, masturbation; عوائد الجمرك ‘a. algumruk
customs duties; عوائد مبان ‘a.
mabānin house taxes; عوائد الأملاك taxes on
real state
عادي ‘ādī customary, usual, common,
ordinary, normal, regular;
undistinguished, run-of-the-mill; ordinary,
regular (e.g., 654 meeting, as opposed to
extraordinary, special, emergency);
simple, plain, ordinary (man); old,
ancient, antique; عاديات ‘ādīyāt antiques,
antiquities
عياد ‘iyād repetition, reiteration,
recurrence
عيادة ‘iyāda visit (with a patient),
doctor’s call (on a patient); -- (pl. -āt)
clinic; office (of a physician), consultation
room (of a physician) │ عيادة خارجية
(kārijīya) policlinic; outpatient clinic
عوادة ‘awāda pl. -āt woman lutist
معاد ma‘ād return; place to which one
returns; (place of) destination; المعاد the
hereafter, the life to come │ المبدأ والمعاد
(mabda’) the crux, (of a matter), the allimportant
factor (of s.th.)
تعويد ta‘wīd accustoming, habituation,
conditioning, inurement ( على to)
اعادة i‘āda giving back, handing back,
sending back, return(ing); reinstatement,
reinstallment; repetition, reiteration;
resumption; re-establishment, restoration,
repair │ اعاد البناء reconstruction; اعادة
الحقوق rehabilitation; اعادة التسلح i. attasalluḥ
rearmament; اعادة الشؤون على ما
كانت عليه restoration of the status quo ante;
اعادة التكوين re-formation; اعادة النظر في (i.
an-naẓar) re-examination, reinvestigation,
reconsideration, revision of s.th.; اعادة النظر
في دعوى (da‘wa) retrial of a case (jur.);
اعادة التنظيم reorganization
تعود ta‘awwud contraction of a habit,
habituation
اعتياد i‘tiyād oontraotion of a habit,
habituation
اعتيادي i‘tiyādī ordinary, common;
usual, customary, habitual; normal,
regular; plain, simple, ordinary (man)
استعادة isti‘āda reconquest, recovery,
recuperation, regaining, reclamation,
retrieval
عائد ‘ā’id returning, reverting,
recurrent; accruing (profit, merit);
belonging, (ap)pertaining, proper ( ل or الى
to s.o., to s.th.); (pl. -ūn) returning
emigrant, re-emigrant; (pl. عواد ‘uwwād)
visitor (to a sick person); pl. عائدات
revenues │ عائد الأرباح net profit, net gain
عائدة ‘ā’ida pl. عوائد ‘awā’d2 benefit,
profit, advantage, gain ( على for s.o.)
عائدية ‘ā’idīya a belonging (to), a being
part (of), membership
معود mu‘awwad used, accustomed,
habituated, conditioned, inured, seasoned
على) to); wont ( على to do s.th.), being in
the habit ( على of doing s.th.)
معيد mu‘īd pl. -ūn repetitor, tutor,
coach; assistant conducting drill sessions
(university)
معاد ma‘ād: معاد تصديره (taṣdīruhū)
forwarded (mail)
متعود muta‘awwid used, accustomed,
habituated, conditioned, inured, seasoned
على) to); wont ( على to do s.th.), being in
the habit ( على of doing s.th.)
معتاد mu‘tād used, accustomed,
habituated, conditioned, inured, seasoned,
على) to); wont ( على to do s.th.), being in
the habit ( على of doing s.th.); usual,
customary, normal │ كالمعتاد as usual; معتاد
الجرائم habitual criminal
عاذ (عوذ ) ‘āda u (‘aud, عياذ ‘iyād, معاذ ma‘ād) to
seek the protection ( من ب of s.o. from or
against), take refuge ( من ب with s.o. from)
│ 􀍿 اعوذ با a‘ūdu bi-llāh God forbid! God
save me from that! II to protect ( من ه s.o.
from or against, by placing him under the
wing ب of s.o. else); to pronounce a charm
or incantation ( ه over s.o.); to fortify ( ه
s.o.) with a charm, incantation or amulet
IV = II; to place s.o. ( ه) under God’s
protection, pray to God that he guard s.o. (
ه) against s.th. 655 V = I; X = I; to protect
o.s., make o.s. proof ( ب by means of)
عوذ ‘aud (act of) taking refuge
عوذ ‘awad refuge, place of refuge,
retreat, asylum, sanctuary
عوذة ‘ūda pl. عوذ ‘uwad amulet,
talisman; charm, spell, incantation
عياذ ‘iyād (act or instance of) taking
refuge │ عياذ لله ‘iyāda llāh or 􀍿 العياذ با
(‘iyāda) God forbid! God save (protect)
me (us) from that!
معاذ ma‘ād (act or instance of) taking
refuge; refuge, place of refuge, retreat,
asylum, sanctuary │ معاذ لله ma‘āda llāh(i)
God forbid! God save (protect) me (us)
from that!
تعويذ ta‘wīd pl. تعتويذ ta‘āwīd2 amulet,
talisman; charm, spell, incantation
عور ‘awira a (‘awar) to lose an eye, be or
become one-eyed II to deprive of one eye,
make blind in one, eye ( ه s.o.); to damage,
mar, spoil ( ھ s.th.); to gauge ( ھ measures,
weights), test the accuracy ( ھ of
measures, of weights) IV to lend, loan ( ھ ه
to s.o. s.th.) VI to alternate, take turns ( ھ
in s.th.), do by turns, take alternately ( ھ
s.th.): to seize, grip, befall, overcome,
(alternately, successively) ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.)
VIII اعتور i‘tawara to befall, affect
(alternately, successively) ( ه s.o.), come
(alternately, successively) ( ه over s.o.); to
shape, mold, form ( ھ s.th., said of
heterogeneous influences or factors); to
stand in the way of ( ھ ), hinder ( ھ s.th.) X
to borrow ( من ھ s.th. from)
عورة ‘aura defectiveness, faultiness,
deficiency, imperfection; -- (pl. -āt)
pudendum, genitals; weakness, weak spot
عوار ‘awār, ‘iwār fault, blemish, defect,
flaw, imperfection
عوار ‘uwwār a variety of swallow
عير ‘īra (eg.) false, artificial (teeth,
hair)
اعور a‘war2, f. عوراء ‘aurā’2, pl. عور ‘ūr
one-eyed │ المعي الأعور (ma‘y) caecum,
blind gut
اعارة i‘āra lending
اعاري i‘ārī: مكتبة اعارية (maktaba)
lending library, circulating library
تعاور ta‘āwur alternation, variation,
fluctuation
استعارة isti‘āra borrowing; metaphor
استعاري isti‘ārī metaphorical, figurative
عارية ‘āriya or ‘ārīya pl. عور ‘awārin
s.th. borrowed, borrowing; loan
معير mu‘īr lender
معار mu‘ār lent, loaned
مستعير musta‘īr borrower
مستعار musta‘ār borrowed; used
metaphorically or figuratively; false,
artificial (e.g., hair) │ اسم مستعار (ism)
pseudonym; وجوه مستعار masked faces;
hypocrites
عار 2 ‘ārin see عرى
عوز ‘awiza a (‘awaz) to be or become poor,
needy, destitute; -- عاز ‘āza u (‘auz) to
need, require ( ھ s.th.), be in want or need
ھ) of s.th.) IV اعوز a‘waza to be or
become poor, needy, destitute │ اعوزه
الشيء (šai’u) he lacked the thing, he
needed it, he was in want of it
عوز ‘awaz lack, need, want, necessity,
exigency; poverty, neediness, destitution,
indigence, penury
عوز ‘awiz poor, needy, destitute,
necessitous, indigent
عازة ‘āza lack, need, want, necessity,
exigency; poverty, poorness
اعوز a‘waz2 poor, needy, destitute,
indigent, necessitous 656
غ
غاباني gābānī cashmere, a soft twilled fabric
غار see غور
غاز gāz pl. -āt gas; petroleum, oil (magr.) │
الغازات السامة (sāmma) the poison gases
غازي gāzī gaseous, gaslike │ مياه غازية
carbonated water, mineral water
غازوزة (It. gasosa) gāzūza soda water
غال 1 gāl pl. -āt padlock
الغال 2 al-gāl Gaul (country)
غالي gālī Gallic; (pl. -ūn) a Gaul
غانة gāna غانا , 2 Ghana
غب 1 to attack every other day ( على، ه s.o., of
fever)
غب gibb end, outcome, upshot, issue,
effect, result, consequence; gibba (prep.)
after │ زاره غبا zarahū gibban to visit s.o.
at intervals; حمى الغب ḥummā l-g. tertian
fever
غبب gabab pl. اغباب agbāb dewlap (of
bovines), wattle
مغبة magabba pl. -āt end, outcome,
upshot, issue, effect, result, consequence
غب 2 gabba u (= عب ‘abba u) to gulp down,
pour down, toss down, drink avidly ( ھ
s.th.)
غبة gubba swallow, gulp, draught
غبر gabara u ( غبور gubūr) to go by,
elapse, pass; to be past, elapsed, bygone II
to soil, or cover, with dust ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.);
to raise dust │ غبر في وجھه (wajhihī) to
surpass, outstrip, outdo s.o., be superior to
s.o. IV = II; V to be dust-covered, be or
become dusty IX to be dust-colored
غبر gabir recrudescent, reopening
(wound)
غبرة guhra dust color
غبرة gabara dust
غبار gubār dust; (pl. اغبرة agbira) dust
cloud │ لا غبار عليه (gubāra) clear, plain,
distinct; unobjectionable, incontestable;
blameless, irreproachable, faultless,
impeccable (morally); ما شق غباره mā
šaqqa gubārahū he never quite attained
his (another’s) eminence, he did not
measure up to him; لا يشق غباره lā yušaqqu
gubāruhū or لا يشق له غبار (yušaqqu) he is
unsurpassable, he is unequaled;
unsurpassable, unequaled, unrivaled,
peerless, incomparable; جرى في غباره (jarā)
to follow s.o. loyally
اغبر agbar2, f. غبراء gabrā’2, pl. غبر
gubr dust-colored; dust-covered, dusty;
الأغبر the earth, the ground; الغبراء the Earth
اغبرار igbirār grudge, rancor,
resentment ( على toward)
غابر gābir pl. غابر gawābir2 bygone,
past, elapsed; the past │ الأزمان الغابرة or
القديم الغابر old times, ancient times
غبش gabaš pl. اغباش agbāš darkness, dark,
duskiness; the twilight before sunrise, last
shadows of the night
غبش gabiš dark (night); opaque, not
transparent
غبشة gabša twilight (of dawn)
اغبش agbaš 2, f. غبشاء gabšā’, pl. غبش
gubš dark (night); opaque, not transparent
غباشة gabāša weakness of the eyes,
asthenopia
غبط gabaṭa i (gabṭ) to envy ( على ه s.o. s.th. or
for s.th.); pass. gubiṭa to be happy II to
make ( ه s.o.) envious; to deem ( ه s.o.)
fortunate, call ( ه s.o.) happy VIII to be 664
glad, be delighted, rejoice, exult, be
jubilant ( ب at, about), be elated ( ب by); to
be happy ( ب about); to be pleased, be
satisfied ( ب with)
غبطة gabṭa state of happiness,
happiness, exultation, delight, rapture,
bliss, felicity; beatitude; title of the
Patriarch (Copt.-Chr.) صاحب الغبطة do.; كان
مكان غبطة (maḥalla g.) to be in an enviable
position
اغتباط igtibāṭ joy, delight, rejoicing,
exultation, triumph, jubilation; happiness,
contentedness, satisfaction, gratification,
pleasure
مغبوط magbūṭ in an enviable position,
happy, lucky, fortunate; blessed, beatified,
canonized (Chr.)
مغتبط mugtabiṭ glad, happy, delighted (
ب at), pleased, satisfied ( ب with), gratified
ب) by)
غبن 1 gabana i (gabn) to cheat, dupe,
gull, defraud, overreach ( في ه s.o. in),
impose ( في upon s.o. in)
غبن gabn, gubn pl. غبون gubūn fraud,
deceit, imposture, swindle; defraudation,
cheating, duping; damage, wrong,
prejudice │ غبن فاحش criminal fraud (Isl.
Law)
غبن gaban stupidity
تغابن tagābun mutual cheating │ يوم
التغابن yaum at-t. the Day of Resurrection
مغبون magbūn deceived, defrauded,
cheated, gulled, duped; prejudiced,
wronged, injured │ رجع بصفقة المغبون or. عاد
(bi-ṣafqati l-m.) to return empty-handed;
to lose the game
غباني 2 gabānī and غاباني gābānī cashmere, a
soft twilled fabric
غبو) and غبي ) gahiya a ( غباوة gabāwa) not to
comprehend ( عن or ھ s.th.), have no
knowledge, be ignorant ( عن or ھ of s.th.);
to be unknown, unfamiliar ( على to s.o.) VI
to be unaware ( عن of s.th.)
غبي gabīy pl. اغبياء agbiyā’2 unwise,
unjudicious, ignorant, foolish, stupid; dolt,
numbskull, ignoramus
غباء gabā’ ignorance, foolishness,
stupidity
غباوة gabāwa ignorance, foolishness,
stupidity
غبوة gabwa riddle, puzzle
اغبى agbā stupider, more foolish, more
simple-minded
غت gatta u (gatt) to press, choke, throttle ( ه
s.o.); to dip, plunge, immerse ( في ھ, ه s.o.,
s.th. in) │ غت الضحك (ḍaḥika) to suppress
one’s laughter, bite one’s lip
غث gatta i a ( غثاثة gatāta, غثوثة gutūta) to be or
become lean, meager; -- gatta i (gatt, غثيث
gatīt) to feater, suppurate, discharge pus
(wound)
غث gatt lean, thin, scrawny; meager,
scanty, poor, wretched
غثيث gatīt lean, thin, scrawny; pus,
matter
غثاثة gatāta leanness, thinness,
scrawniness
غثي gatā i to confuse, muddle, jumble, garble (
ھ s.th.); -- غثت نفسه gatat nafsuhū (gaty,
غثيان gatayān) and غثيت نفسه (gatiyat) to
feel like vomiting, feel sick, be indisposed
غثي gaty nausea, qualmishness,
sickness; indisposition
غثيان gatayān nausea, qualmishness,
sickness; indisposition
غثاء gutā’ scum
غجر (eg.) to scold, use abusive language,
curse, swear
غجري gajarī pl. غجر gajar gipsy
تغجير tagjīr scolding, cursing, abusive
language 665
غد see غدو
غدد gadad cattle epidemic
غدة gudda pl. غدد gudad gland │ الغدة
الدرقية (daraqīya) thyroid gland; غدة صماء
(ṣammā) endocrine (or ductless) gland;
الغدة الصنوبرية (ṣanaubarīya) pineal gland;
الغدة النكفية (nakfīya) parotid gland
غددي gudadī glandular
غدر gadara i u (gadr) to act
treacherously, perfidiously ( في or ب or ه
toward s.o.), doublecross, deceive, betray,
delude ( ب or ه s.o.) III to leave ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.; الى ھ place for), depart ( الى ھ from a
place to)
غدر gadr perfidy, breach of faith,
betrayal, treason, treachery
غدير gadīr pl. غدر gudur, غدران gudrān
pond, pool, puddle; stream, brook, creek,
river
غديرة gadīra pl. غدائر gadā’ir2 queue,
pigtail, braid, plait, tress (of hair)
غدار gaddār perfidious, disloyal,
treacherous, traitorous; false, faithless,
deceitful
غدارة gaddāra pl. -āt pistol │ غدارة سريعة
الطلق (s. aṭ-ṭalq) submachine gun, Tommy
gun
غادر gādir perfidious, disloyal,
treacherous; false, faithless, deceitful
غدفة gudfa pl. غدف gudaf headcloth, kerchief
غداف gudaf raven
غدق gadiqa a (gadaq) to be copious, be heavy,
pour down (rain) IV = I; to give
bountifully ( على to s.o.), shower, load ( ھ
على s.o. with s.th.), bestow liberally ( ھ على
upon s.o. s.th.)
غدق gadiq copious, abundant (water,
rain)
مغدق mugdiq copious, abundant (water,
rain)
غدن XII igdaudana to grow long and
luxuriantly (hair)
غدن gadan languor, lassitude,
flaccidity, limpness
غدنة gudna languor, lassitude,
flaccidity, limpness
غدان gidān clothes peg
مغدودن mugdaudin luxuriant, flowing,
long (hair)
غدا (غدو ) gadā u (gudūw, gadw, غدوة gadwa) to
go (away), leave, come, do, or be, early in
the morning; to run; to become ( ھ s.th.),
grow, turn ( ھ into), come to be ( ھ s.th.) │
غدا وراح (wa-rāḥa) to go back and forth,
walk to and fro; to come and go; -- غدي
gadiya a ( غدا gadan) to breakfast, have
breakfast II to give breakfast ( ه to s.o.); to
give lunch ( ه to s.o.) III to go early in the
morning ( ه to s.o.) │ يراوحھا ويغاديھا
yurāwiḥuhā wa-yugādīhā he calls on her
time and again or constantly V to
breakfast, have breakfast; to lunch, have
lunch
غد gad the morrow, the following day;
غدا gadan tomorrow; on a future day,
sometime in the future │ في غد, من غد on
the following day, tomorrow; في الغد do.;
on a future day, sometime in the future; بعد
غد day after tomorrow; في ذات غد see ذات
غداء gadā’ pl. اغدية agdiya breakfast;
lunch
غداة gadāh pl. غدوات gadawāt early
morning; الغداة al-gadāta this morning
غدوة gudwa pl. غدى gudan early
morning
غدوة gadwa pl. gadawat lunch; morning
errand; غدواته وروحاته (rauḥātuhū) all his
goings, his coming and going
مغدى magdan place to which one goes
in the morning │ مغدى ومراح (wa-marāḥ)
an ever frequented place, an aspired goal
666
غد gadda i (gadd) to fester, suppurate (wound)
IV do.; to hasten, speed, make forced
marches │ اغد (في) السير (sair) to ran fast,
hasten, hurry, speed
غذا (غذو ) gadā u (gadw) to feed ( ه ب s.o. s.th.),
nourish, nurture ( ه ب s.o. with) II to feed (
ب ه s.o. s.th.), nourish, nurture ( ب ه s.o.
with); to provide, supply, furnish, sustain (
ب ھ, ه s.o. s.th. with), feed, charge,
replenish ( ب ھ s.th. with) V to be fed ( ب
s.th.), be nourished, be nurtured ( ب with);
to feed, live ( ب on); to be supplied, be
provided, be furnished, be fed ( ب with,
e.g., with electric power) VIII to be fed,
be nourished, be nurtured
غذو gadw feeding, nourishment,
alimentation, nutrition, nurture
غذاء gidā’ pl. اغذية agdiya nourishment,
nutriment, nutrition, nurture, food; pl.
foodstuffs, victuals, food
غذائي gidā’ī alimental, alimentary,
nutritional, nutritious, nutritive │ مواد
غذائية (mawādd) foodstuffs, victuals, food,
nutritive substances
تغذية tagdiya feeding (also techn.),
nourishment, alimentation, nutrition,
provisioning, supply, input, charging (e.g.,
of an electric battery)
غر garra u ( غرور gurūr) to mislead, deceive,
beguile ( ب s.o.); to delude, gull, dazzle,
blind ( ه s.o.) II to deceive, beguile ( ب
s.o.); to delude, gull, dazzle, blind ( ب
s.o.); to entice, allure, tempt, seduce ( ب
s.o.); to expose to danger, endanger,
imperil ( ب s.o., s.th.), risk, jeopardize,
hazard ( ب s.th.) │ غرر بنفسه to expose o.s.
to danger, risk one’s life VIII to be
dazzled, blinded, fooled, deluded, misled,
let o.s. be deceived ( ب by), be mistaken ( ب
in, about); to be or become overweening
or conceited X to come unexpectedly ( ه to
s.o.), surprise ( ه s.o.)
غر garr (cutting) edge of a sword
غر girr pl. اغرار agrār inexperienced,
gullible, new, green; a greenhorn;
inattentive, inadvertent, heedless
غرة gurra pl. غرر gurar white spot on a
horse’s face, blaze; the best, the finest, the
prime (of s.th.); highlight │ غرة الشھر g.
aš-šahr the first day of the month; في غرة
العام at the beginning of the year
غرة garra inadvertency, heedlessness,
inattentiveness, inattention; unguarded
moment, moment of inadvertence │ على
غرة or على حين غرة (ḥīni g.) unexpectedly,
unawares, inadvertently, surprisingly; اخذ
على (حين) غرة (ukida) to be surprised, be
taken by surprise, be caught unawares
غرر garar risk, hazard, jeopardy,
danger, peril
غرور gurūr deception; delusion,
illusion;: conceit, overweeningness,
snobbery, vanities, trifles, banalities;
danger, peril │ الغرور بنفسه self-deception,
self-delusion
غرور garūr deceptive, delusive,
fallacious, illusory
غرير garīr deceived, misled, tempted;
(pl. also اغراء agirra, اغرة agirra)
inexperienced, naive, ingenuous, gullible
غرار girār (cutting) edge of a sword;
غرارا girāran in a hurry, hastily │ على غرار
in a hurry, hastily; على (من) غرار ... like …,
similar to …, in the manner of ..., after the
pattern of ...; على ھذا الغرار in this manner;
على غرار واحد after one pattern, in the same
manner, likewise, alike
غرار garrār deceptive, delusive,
fallacious
غرارة garāra inconsiderateness,
thoughtlessness, beedlessness │ على غرارة
in the manner of ..., after the pattern of ...
667
غرارة girāra pl. غرائر garā’ir2 sack (for
straw or grain)
اغر agar2, f. غراء garrā’2, pl. غر gurr
having a blaze (horse); beautiful,
handsome; magnanimous, generous;
noble; esteemed, honorable (esp. as a
complimentary epithet following the name
of a newspaper) │ اغر محجل (muḥajjal)
unique, singular
مغرور magrūr deceived, fooled, misled,
tempted; deluded, dazzled, blind; vain,
conceited, overweening, snobbish
غرام grām pl. -āt gram(me)
غرب garaba u (garb) to go away, depart,
absent o.s., withdraw ( عن from), leave ( عن
s.o., s.th.); -- garaba u ( غروب gurūb) to set
(sun, etc.); -- garuba u ( غرابة garāba) to
be a stranger; to be strange, odd, queer,
obscure, abstruse, difficult to comprehend
│ لا يغرب عنك ان you will not have failed to
notice that ..., you are, no doubt, aware (of
the fact) that ..., you know very well that
… II to go away, leave, depart, absent
o.s.; to go westward; to expel from the
homeland, banish, exile, expatriate ( ه s.o.)
│ غرب وشرق (wa-šarraqa) to get around in
the world, see the world IV to say or do a
strange or amazing thing; to exceed the
proper bounds ( في in), overdo, exaggerate
في) s.th.) │ اغرب في الضحك (ḍaḥik) to laugh
noisily or heartily, guffaw V to go to a
foreign country, emigrate; to be (far) away
from one’s homeland; to become an
occidental, become Westernized, be
Europeanized; to emigrate o.s., to the
Western way of life VIII to go to a foreign
country, emigrate; to be (far) away from
one’s homeland X to find ( ھ s.th.) strange,
odd, queer, unusual; to deem ( ھ s.th.)
absurd, preposterous, grotesque; to
disapprove ( ھ of s.th.); to become an
occidental, Westernized, be Europeanized;
to assimilate o.s. to the Western way of
life │ استغرب في الضحك (ḍaḥik) to laugh
noisily or heartily, guffaw
غرب garb west; occident; vehemence,
violence, impetuosity, tempestuousness;
الغرب the West, the Occident; غربا garban
Westward, toward the West │ فل غربه
falla garbahū to subdue s.o., put a damper
on s.o.; غربا بجنوب garban bi-janūbin
southwestward, toward the southwest
غربي garbī western, westerly;
occidental, Western; European; an
Occidental, a Westerner; الغربيون algarbīyūn
the Western Church (Chr.)
غربة gurba absence from the homeland;
separation from one’s native country,
banishment, exile; life, or place, away
from home
غراب gurāb pl. غربان (girbān, اغرب
agrub, اغربة agriba crow; raven; --
occiput; blade (esp. of a hatchet)
غريب garīb pl. غرباء gurabā’2 strange,
foreign, alien, extraneous ( على or عن to
s.o.); strange, odd, queer, quaint, unusual,
extraordinary, curious, remarkable,
peculiar; amazing, astonishing, baffling,
startling, wondrous, marvelous; grotesque;
difficult to understand, abstruse, obscure
(language); remote, outlandish, rare,
uncommon (word); (pl. also اغرب agrab)
stranger, foreigner, alien; pl. اغراب those
living abroad, those away from home,
emigrés │ غريب الأطوار whimsical,
capricious, eccentric, cranky; مادة غريبة
(mādda) foreign body, extraneous
substance
غريبة garība pl. غرائب garā’ib2
peculiarity; a strange, striking thing,
oddity, curiosity, marvel, prodigy, wonder
غروب gurūb setting (of the sun of a
star)
غرابة garāba strangeness, curiousness;
oddness, queerness, singularity,
peculiarity 668
اغرب agrab2 stranger, more alien;
odder, queerer, more unusual
مغرب magrib pl. مغارب magārib2 place
or time of sunset; west, occident; (f.)
prayer at sunset (Isl. Law); المغرب
Maghrib, northwest Africa │ مغرب الشمس
m. aš-šams time of sunset, sunset; بلاد
المغرب Maghrib, northwest Africa; وشارق
الأرض ومغربھا (m. al-arḍ) the entire world; ا
لمشرقان والمغربان al-mašriqān wa-l-m do.; في
المغربين والمشرقين all over the world,
throughout the world
مغربي magribī North African, Maghribi;
(pl. مغاربة magāriba) a North African, a
Maghribi
مغربة look up alphabetically
تغريب tagrīb banishment, expatriation
تغرب tagarrub separation from one’s
native country; emigration; Europeanism,
Occidentalism, Westernism
اغتراب igtirāb separation from one’s
native country; emigration; Europeanism,
Occidentalism, Westernism
استغراب istigrāb wonder, surprise,
astonishment, amazement, perplexity
غارب gārib pl. غوارب gawārib2 withers
(of the camel, of the horse); pl. wave
crests │ ترك (القى) حبله على غاربه (alqā
ḥablahū) to give free rein to s.o. or to s.th.
مغرب mugarrab expatriated, exiled,
banished; expatriate, exile
مغترب muglarib stranger, foreigner,
alien; living away from home
مستغرب mustagrib Europeanized,
Westernized
مستغرب mustagrab strange, odd, queer,
quaint, unusual, extraordinary, curious,
peculiar
غربل garbala ( غربل garbala) to sieve, sift,
riddle ( ھ s.th.)
غربال girbill pl. .kI pri لbll' sieve
غرابلي garābilī pl. -ūn, غرابلية garābilīya
sieve maker, sieve merchant
غرد garida a (garad) to sing, twitter (bird),
warble II and V = I
غرد garad singing, song, twitter(ing),
warbling (of a bird)
غرد gurd pl. غرود gurūd dune, shifting
dune
غريد girrīd singing, twittering, warbling
(bird)
اغرودة ugrūda pl. اغاريد agārid2
twittering, warbling, song (of birds)
تغريد tagrīd singing, song, twitter(ing),
warbling
مغرد mugarrid singing, twittering,
warbling (bird) │ طائر مغرد songbird
غرز garaza i (garz) to prick ( ب ھ s.th. with,
e.g., with a needle); to thrush, plunge,
insert, stick, stab, ram, push, bore ( في ھ
s.th. into); to plant, implant ( ل ھ s.th. in) II
to throat, plunge, insert, stick, stab, ram,
push, bore ( في ھ s.th. into) IV = II; V to
penetrate deeply ( في into), pierce ( في s.th.);
to be inserted, be stuck ( في into) VII to
bore, penetrate ( في into), pierce ( في s.th.);
to sink ( في into) VIII to penetrate deeply (
في into), pierce ( في s.th.); to be inserted, be
stuck ( في into) │ اغترز السير (saira) (he put
his foot in the stirrup, ready to depart=)
his departure was imminent
غرز garz leather stirrup
غرزة gurza pl. غرز guraz stitch
غريزة garīza pl. غرائز garā’iz2 nature,
natural disposition; natural impulse,
instinct
غريزي garīzī natural, native, innate,
inborn; instinctive
مغرز magraz pl. مغارز magāriz2 (eg.)
prank, practical joke 669
غرس garasa i (gars) to plant, implant ( في ھ
s.th. in); to place, put, set, infix, interpose,
interpolate, insert ( في ھ s.th. into) IV to
plant, implant ( ھ s.th.) VII to be planted,
be implanted; to sink in
غرس gars planted; (pl. اغراس agrās,
غراس girās) plant, layer, cion, nursery
plant, seedling
غرس girs pl. اغراس agrās plant, layer,
cion, nursery plant, seedling
غرسة girsa plant
غراس girās plant; planting time
غراسة girāsa cultivation, growing,
raising │ غراسة الزيتون (الزياتين ) g. az-zaitūn
olive growing; غراسة العنب g. al-‘inab wine
growing; viticulture
غريسة garīsa pl. غرائس garā’is غراس 2
girās nursery plant, layer, cion, seedling
مغرس magris pl. مغارس magāris2 place
where s.th. is infixed, interposed or
inserted; nursery, plantation, bed
مغارسة mugārasa pl. -āt a contract for
the lease of an orchard providing that the
lessee, who undertakes to cultivate the
orchard, will become owner of one half of
it after the orchard has yielded profit
(Tun.)
مغارسى mugārisī pl. -ūn one who
concludes a mugārasa (q.v.) (Tun.)
غرش girš, gurš pl. غروش gurūš piaster │ غرش
صاغ standard piaster
غرض IV اغرض الغرض (garaḍa) to attain the
goal V to take sides, be partial, have a
predilection, have a bias ( ل for)
غرض garaḍ pl. اغراض agrāḍ target,
aim, goal, objective, object; intention,
design, purpose; object of desire;
(personal, selfish) interest; inclination,
tendency, propensity; bias, prejudice; pl.
اغراض (syr.) articles of everyday use,
things, objects, stuff, odds and ends
غرضي garaḍī tendeney- (in
compounds), marked by directional, or
purposive, presentation
غريض garīḍ pl. اغاريض agārīḍ2 fresh,
tender
تغرض tagarruḍ prejudice, bias;
tendentious attitude
مغرض mugriḍ partial, biased,
tendentious; -- (pl. -ūn) partial person;
biased person; person guided by personal
interests
غرغر gargara ( غرغرة gargara) to gargle; to
gurgle; to simmer, bubble (pot) II
tagargara to gargle; to gurgle │ تغرغرت
عينه بالدمع (‘ainuhū bi-d-dam‘) his eyes
were bathed in tears
غرغر girgir (coll.; n. un. ة) guinea fowl
غرغرة gargara gargling, gargle, gurgle
غرف garafa i u (garf) to ladle, spoon, scoop ( ھ
s.th.); to ladle ( ھ food) from a cooking
pot, and the like, (into a howl) for serving;
to serve ( ھ a meal) VIII to ladle, scoop (
من ھ s.th. from or out of)
غرفة gurfa pl. غراف girāf the amount of
water scooped up with one hand; handful;
-- (pl. -āt, غرف guraf) upstairs room, room
on an upper floor; room; chamber (=
room; as a public body of administration,
etc.); cabinet; compartment, ward │ غرفة
g. al-akl dining room; غرفة التجارية or الغرفة
التجاري chamber of commerce; غرفة السفرة
g. as-sufra dining room; غرفة القيادة bridge
(naut.); غرفة النوم g. an-naum bedroom
غراف garraf pl. غراريف garārīf2 (syr.) a
water wheel turned by oxen or horses and
used for raising irrigation water from a
river onto the fields
مغرفة migrafa pl. مغارف magārif2 large
spoon, ladle, scoop 670
غرق gariqa a (garaq) to plunge, dive, become
immersed, immerge, become submersed,
submerge, sink, founder ( في in); to go
under, be drowned ( في in); to be
immersed, be engrossed, be absorbed ( في
in); to be wholly engaged, be loot ( في in),
be completely taken up ( في with) II to
plunge, dip, immerse, submerse ( ھ, ه s.o.,
s.th.); to sink, founder ( ھ s.th.), drown ( ,ھ
s.o., s.th.); to inundate, flood ( ھ s.th.;
السوق the market ب with) IV = II; to
exceed the proper bound! ( في in); to
exaggerate, overdo ( في s.th.); to be
excessive ( في in s.th.), carry ( في s.th.) to
excess │ اغرق في الضحك (ḍaḥik) to laugh
noisily or heartily, guffaw V to be sunk,
be foundered X to sink ( في into sleep, and
the like), be immersed ( في in); to absorb,
engross, engage wholly, claim completely,
fill, take up, occupy ( ھ , s.o., s.th.); to take,
last ( ھ a certain time) │ استغرق في الضحك
(ḍahik) to laugh noisily or heartily, guffaw
XII اغرورقت عيناه بالدموع (igrauraqat
‘aināhū) his eyes were bathed in tears
غريق gariq pl. غرقى garqā drowned; a
drowned person; immersed, engrossed,
absorbed ( في in)
غرقان garqan drowned
تغريق tagrīq drowning; sinking,
foundering, scuttling (of a ship);
inundation, flooding
اغراق igrāq drowning; sinking,
foundering, scuttling (of a ship);
inundation, flooding; exaggeration;
excessiveness, exorbitance, immoderation,
extravagance; hyperbole (rhet.)
غارق gāriq sunk, drowned; immersed,
engrossed, absorbed ( في in) │ غارق في
الدھشة (dahša) completely taken aback,
deeply shocked, utterly dismayed
مغرق mugraq immersed, engrossed,
absorbed ( في in)
مستغرق mustagriq immersed, engrossed,
absorbed ( في in)
غرلة gurla pl. غرل gural foreskin,
prepuce
غرم garima a (gurm, غرامة garāma, مغرم
magram) to pay ( ھ a fine, and the like); to
suffer loss II to fine ( ھ s.o.), impose a fine
ه) on s.o.) IV = II; pass, ugrima to be very
fond, be enamored ( ب of), be in love, be
infatuated ( ب with) V to be fined, be
mulcted
غرم gurm damage, loss
غرام garām infatuation ( ب with), love (
ب of), passion, ardent desire ( ب for);
penalty, mulct, fine; see also
alphabetically
غرامي garāmī passionate, impassioned,
erotic, amorous, amatory, love (used
attributively); غراميات garāmīyāt amours,
romances, love affairs, amorous
adventures │ رسالة غرامية love letter
غريم garīm pl. غرماء guramā’2 debtor;
creditor; opponent, adversary, antagonist,
rival; insulter
غريمة garīma woman opponent, female
antagonist, rival
غرامة garāma pl. -āt fine, mulct;
indemnity, compensation, damages;
reparation, amends, penalty
مغرم magram pl. مغارم magārim2
damage, loss; debt; liability, financial
obligation; fine
مغرم mugram enamored, ( ب of), in love,
infatuated ( ب with)
غرين garīn (alluvial) mud
غرناطة garnāṭa2 Granada (city in S Spain)
غرنوق gurnūq pl. غرانيق garānīq2 crane (zool.)
غرنيق girnīq pl. غرانيق garānīq2 crane
(zool.) 671
غرا (غرو ) garā u (gurw) to glue, fix with glue (
ھ s.th.) II = I; IV to make ( ه s.o.) covetous
ب) for), prod, spur on, goad, egg on,
incite, induce, instigate, abet, urge, impel (
ب ه s.o. to do s.th.); to entice, allure,
tempt, seduce ( ب ه s.o. to); to set ( ب ه s.o.
on), sick ( ب ھ a dog, etc., on game); to
bring about, cause, produce, provoke ( ھ
s.th.); pass. ugriya to desire ardently, love
ب) s.th.), be attached ( ب to s.th.) │ اغري
العداوة بين (‘adāwata) to cause or excite
enmity among …
لا غرو lā garwa no wonder! it is small
wonder
غرا garan glue
غراء girā’ glue
غرائي girā’ī gluey, glutinous
غروى girawī gluey, glutinous, sticky,
ropy, vicious; colloidal (chem.)
لا غروى garwā no wonder! it is small
wonder
غراية garrāya pl. -āt (eg.) glue pot
مغراة migrāh glue pot
اغراء igrā’ incitement, instigation,
inducement, spur, goad, impetus;
incentive, stimulus; enticement,
allurement, temptation, seduction
مغر mugrin enticing, alluring, tempting;
inciter, instigator, abettor; tempter,
seducer
مغريات mugriyāt lures, temptations
غز 1 IV to he thorny, prickly; to prick
غز 2 gazza2 Gaza (seaport in S Palestine)
غزي gazzī gauze
غزر 1 gazara u (gazr, غزارة gazāra) to be
plentiful, copious, abundant
غزر gazr abundance, copiousness,
profusion, plenty, large quantity, lavish
supply
غزير gazīr pl. غزار gizār much,
plentiful, copious, abundant, ample;
densely growing, luxuriantly growing;
rich ( بغز in) │ غزير المادة g. al-mādda wellinformed,
learned, well-read; غزير المواد g.
al-mawādd offering a wealth of
information (book)
غزارة gazāra abundance, copiousness,
profusion, plenty, large quantity, lavish
supply
غزارى 2 gazārī a variety of pigeon
غزل gazala i (gazl) to spin ( ھ s.th.); -- gazila a
(gazal) to display amorous behavior ( ب
toward a woman), make love ( ب to a
woman), court, woo ( ب a woman), flirt ( ب
with a woman); to eulogize in verses ( ب a
woman) III to speak words of love, make
love ( ھا to a woman), court, woo ( ھا a
woman), flirt, dally, philander ( ھا with a
woman) V to court, woo ( ب a woman),
make love ( ب to a woman), flirt, dally ( ب
with a woman), make eyes ( ب at a
woman); to celebrate in love poems ( ب a
woman, also في s.o.); to extol, laud,
eulogize ( ب s.th.) VI to flirt (with one
another) VIII to spin ( ھ s.th.)
غزل gazl spinning; (pl. غرول guzūl)
spun thread, yarn │ مصنع الغرل maṣna‘ alg.
spinning mill
غزل gazal flirt, flirtation, dalliance,
dallying; love; words of love, cooing of
lovers; love poetry, erotic poetry
غزلي gazalī amorous, amatory, erotic,
love (used attributively)
غزال gazāl pl. غرلة gizla, غرلان gizlān
gazelle
غزال gazzāl spinner (of yarn)
غزالة gazāla female gazelle, doe;
(rising) sun, disk of the sun; pommel of
the camel saddle
غزالة gazzāla spider 672
مغزل magzil pl. مغازل magāzil2 spinning
mill
مغزل migzal, mugzal pl. مغازل magāzil2
spindle │ ابو مغازل abū m. (eg.) stork
مغازلة mugāzala pl. -āt flirt, flirtation,
dalliance, dallying
تغزل tagazzul flirt, flirtation, dalliance,
dallying
غزا (غزو ) gazā u (gazw) to strive ( ھ
for), aspire ( ھ to); to mean, intend ( ھ
s.th.); -- gazā u (gazw, غزوان gazawān) to
carry out a military expedition, make a
raid, foray, or incursion, commit
aggression ( ھ، ه against s.o., against s.th.),
attack, assault ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), raid, invade
ھ) s.th.); to conquer ( ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to
overcome ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) │ غزا السوق
(sūq) to flood the market (com.)
غزو gazw assault, raid, incursion,
inroad, invasion, attack, aggression;
conquest
غزوة gazwa pl. gazawāt military
expedition, foray; raid, incursion, inroad,
invasion, attack, aggression; conquest;
campaign of conquest
غزاوة gazāh pl. غزوات gazawāt military
expedition, foray; raid, incursion, inroad,
invasion, attack, aggression; conquest;
campaign of conquest
مغزى magzan pl. مغاز magāzin sense,
meaning, signification, import; moral (of a
story); motto; importance, significance,
moment, consequence │ مغزى دقيق subtle
meaning; ذو مغزى dū m. significant
مغزاة magzāh pl. مغاز magāzin military
expedition, foray, raid; المغازى the military
campaigns of the Prophet
غاز gāzin pl. غزاة guzāh one who carries
out a military expedition or a foray; raider,
invader, aggressor, conqueror; الغازى algāzī
the war lord, warrior champion, ghazi
غازية gāziya pl. غواز gawāzin woman
dancer, danseuse
غس guss (sing. and pl.) worthless
غسق gasaq dusk, twilight before nightfall; dark
of night
غسل gasala i (gasl) to wash ( ب ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th. with), launder ( ب ه s.th. with); to
cleanse, clean ( ھ s.th., e.g., the teeth); to
purge, cleanse, clear, wash ( ھ s.th., من of);
to wash ( ھ against s.th.) II to wash
thoroughly ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) VIII to wash
(o.s.); to take a bath, bathe; to perform the
major ritual ablution (i.e., a washing of the
whole body; (Isl. Law)
غسل gusl pl. اغسال agsāl washing,
ablution; the major ritual ablution, i.e., a
washing of the whole body (Isl. Law);
wash water
غسل gasl wash water
غسلة gasla pl. gasalāt (n. vic.) a wash,
an ablution
غسيل gasīl washed; (dirty or washed)
clothes, washing
غسول gasūl wash water; washing agent,
detergent
غاسول gāsūl soap; lye
غسال gassāl washer, washerman,
laundryman
غسل gassāla pl. -āt washerwoman,
laundress; washing machine
غسالة gusāla dirty wash water, slops
مغسل magsil, magsala pl. مغاسل magāsil2
washing facility, washroom, lavatory;
washhouse
مغسل migsal washbasin; washbowl,
washdish, washtub
مغسلة magsala pl. مغاسل magāsil2
washstand
مغتسل mugtasal washroom, lavatory
غش gašša u (gašš) to act dishonestly ( ه toward
s.o.); to deceive, fool, mislead, cheat, gull,
dupe ( ه s.o.); to debase, vitiate, adulterate (
ه s.th., esp. food-stuffs) II to act
dishonestly ( ه toward s.o.); to deceive,
fool, mislead, cheat, gull, dupe ( ه s.o.) VII
and VIII to be deceived, be fooled, be
cheated, be duped; to let o.s. be deceived
X to regard ( ه s.o.) as dishonest or as a
fraud; to suspect ( ه s.o.) of fraud or
deception
غش gašš adulteration, corruption,
debasement; fraud, deceit
غش gišš faithlessness disloyalty,
perfidy; deception, deceit; fraud,
imposture, swindle
غشاش gašāš fraud, cheat, swindler,
impostor; deceptive, delusive, false
مغشوش magšūš deceived, fooled,
cheated, duped; adulterated, corrupted,
debased
غشم gašama i (gašm) to treat unjustly or
tyrannically, to wrong, oppress ( ه s.o.); to
act unjustly or tyrannically ( ه toward s.o.);
to act thoughtlessly, haphazardly ( ھ in
s.th.) VI to feign ignorance or
inexperience X to regard ( ه s.o.) as dumb,
stupid, ignorant, or inexperienced ه
غشم gašm oppression, repression, illtreatment
غشوم gašūm unjust, unfair, iniquitous,
tyrannical; oppressor, tyrant │ القوة الغشوم
brute force
غشيم gašīm pl. غشماء gušamā’
inexperienced, ignorant, foolish, dumb,
stupid; new (at an office), green, a
greenhorn; new, boorish, uneducated;
unskilled, untrained, clumsy, awkward,
gauche; raw, crude, unprocessed,
unworked
غشومة gušūma inexperience,
foolishness
غاشم gāšim unjust, unfair, iniquitous,
tyrannical; oppressor, tyrant; scum, dross
│ قوة غاشمة (qūwa) brute force
غشو) and غشي) غشا gašā u (gašw) to come ( ه to
s.o.; ھ to a place); -- غشي gašiya a ( غشاوة
gašāwa) to cover, wrap up, envelop,
conceal, veil ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to come,
descend ( ه upon s.o.), overcome,
overwhelm ( ه s.o.); to be dark (night); --
gašiya a ( غشيان gašayān, gišyān) to come
(to s.o.; ھ to place); to go to see, visit ( ه
s.o., ھ s.th.), call ( ه on s.o.); to sleep ( ھا
with a woman); to cover ( ھا the female
animal); to commit, perpetrate ( ھ e.g., an
outrage); to yield, give in ( ھ to a craving);
-- pass. غشي عليه (gušiya) ( غشي gašy, gušy)
to lose consciousness, faint, swoon II to
cover, wrap up, envelop, veil ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to spread a cover or wrap ( ھ، ه over
s.o., over s.th.); to overlay, coat, plate ( ھ
s.th.) IV to be dark (night); to spread a
cover or wrap ( ھ, ه over) V to cover o.s. (
ب with), wrap o.s. ( ب in) X استغشي ثيابه
(tiyābahū) to hide one’s head in one’s
clothes so as not to see or hear
غشي gašy, gušy unconsciousness,
fainting, swoon(ing)
غشية gašya fainting spell, swoon, faint
غشوة gašwa veil, wrap, cover, covering
غشاء gišā’ pl. اغشية agšiya cover,
covering, wrap, wrapper, wrapping,
envelope; coating, coat, plating;
integument; film, pellicle; membrane;
valve │ الغشاء الأنقى (anfī) nasal mucosa;
غشاء البكارة g. al-bakāra hymen, virginal
membrane; الغشاء المخاطئ (mukāṭi’) mucous
membrane, mucosa
غشائي gišā’ī: الخناق الغشائي (kunāq)
diphtheria (med.)
غشاوة gišāwa, gišāwa veil, wrap, cover,
covering
غشيان gašayān, gišyān unconsciousness,
faint(ing), swoon(ing)
مغشى magšan place at which one
arrives, object of a visit 674
غاشية gāšiya pl. غواش gawāšin
pericardium; misfortune, calamity,
disaster; faint, swoon; insensibility,
stupor; servants, attendants, retinue, suite
غص g􀀀aṣṣ (1st peril. perf. gaṣiṣtu) a (
غصص ) to be choked; to choke ( ب on, esp.
on some food); to be overcrowded,
congested, jammed, packed, crammed ( ب
with) │ غص بھم المكان (makānu) the place
was overcrowded IV to choke ( ه s.o.) VIII
to be overcrowded, congested, jammed,
packed, crammed
غصة guṣṣa pl. -āt, غص guṣaṣ that
which causal choking, a lump in the
throat; mortal distress, torment, agony,
ordeal, choking sound, suppressed moan
│ غصة الموت g. al-maut agony of death
غاص gāṣṣ replete, crowded, jammed,
packed, crammed ( ب with)
غصب gaṣaba i (gaṣb) to take away by
force or illegally, extort ( ھ s.th., ه، من، على
from s.o.), rob ( ھ s.th.; ھ ه or من or على
s.o. of s.th.), seize unlawfully, usurp ( ھ
s.th.), take illegal possession ( ھ of s.th.);
to force, compel, coerce ( ه s.o., على to); to
abduct, carry off ( ھا a woman); to rape,
ravish, violate ( ھا a woman); to conquer,
subdue ( على s.o.) VIII = I │ اغتصب ابواب
البلاد to force one’s entry into a country
غصب igtiṣāb forcible, illegal seizure,
extortion; usurpation, unlawful
arbitrariness (Isl. Law); force, compulsion,
coercion, constraint │ غصبا gaṣban and
بالغصب forcibly, by force; غصبا عنه against
his will, in defiance of him
اغتصاب igtiṣāb forcible, illegal seizure,
extortion, robbery, illegal appropriation,
usurpation; ravishment, violation, rape (of
a woman); force, compulsion, coercion,
constraint
غاصب gāṣib pl. -ūn, guṣṣāb usurper
مغصوب magṣūb acquired by unlawful
arbitrariness, extorted, usurped; forced,
compelled, coerced, constrained
مغتصب mugtaṣib violent, outrageous,
brutal; usurper
غصن II and IV to put forth branches, to branch
(tree)
غصن guṣn pl. غصون guṣūn, اغصان
agṣān twig, bough, limb, branch
غصنة guṣna twig, shoot, cion, sprout
غض gaḍḍa (1st peril. perf. qaḍaḍtu) i and (1st
peril. perf. qaḍiḍtu) a ( غضوضة guḍūda,
غضاضة gaḍāda) to be or become fresh,
succulent, tender (esp. a plant); -- gaḍḍa u
(gaḍḍ, غضاضة gaḍāḍa) to cast down,
lower ( من or ھ one’s eyes, one’s glance,
out of modesty, and the like), to lower,
lessen, diminish ( من the value, the prestige
of s.o. or s.th.), detract, derogate ( من from
s.o., from s.th.) │ غض طرفه (ṭarfahū) to
lower one’s eyes; غض الطرف (النظر) عنه
(naẓara) to overlook, let pass, disregard
s.th., pass over s.th., wink at s.th., pay no
attention to s.th., have no objection to s.th.
غض gaḍḍ aversion (of the glance) │
غض النظر (الطرف) عنه g. an-naẓar (aṭ-ṭart)
overlooking of s.th.; disregarding of s.th.;
بغض النظر عن aside from ..., not to speak of
..., let alone ..., regardless of …,
irrespective of ..., notwithstanding …
غض gaḍḍ fresh, succulent, juicy,
tender; lush, luxuriant (plant)
غضة guḍḍa shortcoming, deficiency,
fault, defect
غضيض gaḍīḍ fresh, succulent, juicy,
tender
غضاضة gaḍāḍa freshness, succulence,
juiciness, tenderness; shortcoming,
deficiency, fault, defect; blot, stain, 675
disgrace, shame │ ما وجد غضاضة في to take
no offence at …, have no objection to …
غضوضة gudūḍa freshness, succulence,
juiciness, tenderness
غضب gaḍiba a (gaḍab) to be or become angry,
cross, mad, vexed, irritated, exasperated,
furious, to fret ( من or على at s.th., with
s.o.); to stand up ( ل for), defend ( ل s.th.)
III to be cross, be on bad terms ( ه with
s.o.) IV to annoy, exasperate, anger, make
angry, enrage, infuriate ( ه s.o.); to vex,
irrigate, gall, provoke ( ه s.o.) V = I
غضب gaḍab wrath, rage, fury; anger,
exasperation, indignation; غضبا ل
(gaḍaban) for the protection of
غضب gaḍib wrathful, angry,
exasperated, irate, furious, infuriated,
enraged; vexed, annoyed, irritated, galled
غضبة gaḍba fit of rage, angry outburst,
tantrum
غضوب gaḍūb irascible, choleric,
irritable
غضباني gudābī irascible, choleric,
irritable; sullen, morose
غضبان gaḍbān2, f. غضبى gaḍbā, pl.
غضاب giḍāb, غضابى gaḍabā, guḍabā
wrathful, angry, exasperated, irate,
furious, infuriated, enraged
اغضاب igdāb exasperation, infuriation;
vexation, irritation, annoying; provocation
غاضب gāḍib wrathful, angry,
exasperated, irate, furious, infuriated,
enraged; vexed, annoyed, irritated, galled
مغضوب magḍūb: مغضوب عليه object of
anger
غضر gaḍara i (gadr) to turn away ( عن from);
to turn ( على against s.o. or to s.o.); --
gaḍira a (gaḍar) to be or become rich,
abundant, lavish, opulent, lush, luxuriant
غضر gaḍir abundant, lavish, opulent,
lush, luxuriant
غضير gaḍīr fresh, green (plant)
غضارة gaḍāra freshness; affluence,
prosperity, opulence
غضروف guḍrūf pl. غضاريف gaḍārīf
cartilage, gristle
غضن II to wrinkle, pucker, shrivel, fold, crease
ھ) s.th.) III to wink amorously ( ھا at a
woman) V to wrinkle, shrivel, form,
creases or corrugations; to be or become
wrinkled, creased, folded, corrugated
غضن gaḍn, gaḍan pl. غضون guḍūn
wrinkle, fold, crease, corrugation; (only
sg.) trouble, toil, labor, hardship, difficulty
│ في غضون ... in the course of, during,
within; في غضون meanwhile, in the
meantime
غضنفر gaḍanfar lion
غضو) ) IV to close one’s eyes (also with عينيه
‘ainahū); to overlook, disregard, avoid
seeing, condone ( عن، ھ s.th.), let ( عن، ھ
s.th.) pass, shut one’s eyes ( عن، ھ to s.th.),
take no notice ( عن، ھ of s.th.); to be
lenient ( عن with), have indulgence, show
forbearance ( عن for), wink, connive ( عن
at) VI to pretend not to notice; to
disregard ( عن s.th.); تغاضى عنه = اغضى عنه
غضى) غضا: على احر من جمر الغضى)
(aḥarra, jamri l-g􀀀.) lit: in a hotter spot
than the live embers of gaḍā (i.e. a variety
of euphorbia), i.e. on pins and needles, in
an unbearable situation
اغضاء igḍā’ overlooking, connivance,
condonation, disregard; indulgence,
forbearance
تغاض tagāḍin overlooking, connivance,
condonation, disregard; indulgence,
forbearance 676
غط gaṭṭa u (gaṭṭ) to immerse, dip, plunge ( في
ھ, ه s.o., s.th. in); -- gaṭṭa i ( غطيط gaṭīṭ) to
snore IV to immerse, dip, plunge ( في ھ, ه
s.o., s.th. in) VII to be immersed, be
dipped, be plunged ( في in)
غطيط gaṭīṭ snoring, snore
غطيطة guṭaiṭa fog, mist
غطرة guṭra designation of the kūfīya, or
headcloth worn under the ‘iqāl, in Nejd
and Bahrein
غطرس gaṭrasa to be haughty, arrogant,
supercilious, overbearing, snobbish,
conceited, overweening. self-important II
tagaṭrasa do. │ تغطرس في مشيته (mišyatihī)
to display a haughty bearing, swagger,
strut
غطرسة gaṭrasa haughtiness,
superciliousness, arrogance, insolence,
impudence, snobbishness, conceitedness,
self-importance
غطريس giṭrīs pl. غطاريس gaṭārīs2
haughty, supercilious, arrogant,
overbearing, snobbish, conceited,
overweening, self-important
متغطرس mutagaṭris haughty,
supercilious, arrogant, overbearing,
snobbish, conceited, overweening, selfimportant
غطريف giṭrīf pl. غطاريف gaṭārīf غطارف , 2
gaṭārif غطارفة , 2 gaṭārifa potentate; a noble,
great, famous man
غطس gaṭasa i (gaṭs) to dip, plunge, immerse,
submerse ( في ھ, ه s.o., s.th. into water); to
dive, plunge, become immersed, sink,
submerge ( في in water) II to dip, plunge,
immerse, submerse ( في ھ, ه s.o., s.th. into
water); (Chr.) to baptize ( ه s.o.) V to dive;
to bathe ( في in)
غطس gaṭs dipping, plunging,
immersion; diving; sinking (trans. and
intr.); submersion
غطاس giṭās baptism (Chr.); الغطاس
Epiphany (Chr.)
غطاس gaṭṭās diver (man or bird)
مغطس magṭis (migṭas) pl. مغاطس
magāṭis2 bathtub; plunge bath │ عيد المغطس
‘īd al-m. Epiphany (Chr.)
تغطيس tagṭīs dipping, plunging,
immersion; submersion; baptism (Chr.)
غاطس gāṭis draft (of a ship)
غطش gaṭaša i (gaṭš) to be or become
dark (night); -- gaṭiša a (gaṭaš) to become
dim (eye); to be dim-sighted V to be dim,
dim-sighted (eye)
غطش gaṭaš dim-sightedness
غطم giṭamm huge, vast (ocean)
غطا (غطو ) gaṭā u (gaṭw) to cover, cover up ( ھ
s.th.) II to cover, wrap, envelop, conceal (
ب ھ، ه s.o., s.th. with); to slip ( ب ھ over
s.th. s.th. else), cover ( ب ھ s.th. with); to
cover ( ھ s.th., e.g., expenses, the goal in
sports); to outshine, eclipse, obscure ( على
s.o., s.th.); to drown ( على s.th., of voices,
etc.); to be stronger, be more decisive ( على
than) V to be covered, wrapped,
enveloped, concealed ( ب with. by); to
cover o.s. ( ب with), wrap o.s., veil o.s.,
conceal o.s. ( ب in) VIII = V
غطاء giṭā’ pl. اغطية agṭiya cover,
covering, integument, wrap, wrapper,
wrapping, envelope; covering (=
clothing); lid │ غطاء الرأس headgear
تغطية tagṭiya cover(ing) (of expenses, of
currency, of the goal in sports); cover of
notes in circulation, backing of notes, note
coverage
غف gaffa i (eg.) to take unawares; to grab,
grasp, seize ( على s.o.)
غفر gafara i (gafr, غفر magfira, غفران
gufrān) to forgive ( ھ ل s.o. s.th.), grant
pardon ( ل ھ to s.o. for s.th.), remit ( ھ
s.th.) │ لا يغفر (yugfaru) unpardonable,
irremissible, inexcusable VIII to forgive
ھ ل) 677 s.o. s.th.), grant pardon ( ھ ل to
s.o. for), remit ( ھ s.th.) │ لا يغتفر
(yugtafaru) unpardonable, irremissible,
inexcusable X to ask s.o.’s ( ه) pardon ( ل or
من or ھ for an offense), ask ( ه s.o.) to
forgive ( ل or من or ھ an offense),
apologize ( ه to s.o., ل or من or ھ for) │
استغفر لله I ask God’s forgiveness! a
formular phrase used on various
occasions, esp. when modestly declining
compliments and amiabilities, approx.:
please don’t (say so)! not at all!
غفر gafr pardon, forgiveness; غفرا
gafran pardon me! I beg your pardon!
غفور gafūr readily inclined to pardon,
much-forgiving (esp. of God)
غفار gaffār readily inclined to pardon,
much-forgiving (esp. of God)
غفران gufrān pardon, forgiveness,
remission │ عيد صوم غفران ‘īd ṣaum al-g.
or عيد الغفران Day of Atonement, Yom
Kippur (Jud.)
مغفرة magfira pardon, forgiveness,
remission
مغفور magfūr: المغفور له (he who has
been forgiven), the deceased, the late ...
غفر 2 II to guard ( على s.o., s.th.), watch ( على
over s.o.) over s.th.)
غفرة gufra cover; lid
غفير gafīr numerous (crowd), abundant
(quantity), large (number); (pl. غفراء
gufarā’2) guard, sentinel; watchman │ جم
جمع) غفير ) (jamm, jam‘) large number or
quantity, large gathering of people
غفارة gifāra pl. غفائر gafā’ir2 kerchief
for covering the bead, headcloth
غفارة gaffāra cope (Chr.)
مغفر migfar pl. مغافر magāfir2 helmet
غفقة gafqa light slumber
غفل gafala u ( غفلة gafla, غفول gufūl) to neglect,
not to heed, disregard, ignore ( من s.th.), be
forgetful, be heedless, be unmindful ( عن
of), pay no attention ( عن to) II to make ( ه
s.o.) negligent, careless, heedless, or
inattentive III to use, or take advantage of,
s.o.’s ( ه) negligence, inadvertence,
inattention, heedlessness, or carelessness;
to surprise, take by surprise, take
unawares ( ه s.o.) IV to neglect, not to
heed, disregard, ignore ( ھ s.th.), be
forgetful, be heedless, be unmindful ( ھ of
s.th.), pay no attention ( ھ to s.th.); to pass
ھ) over s.th.), slight, leave out, omit, skip
ھ) s.th.); to leave unspecified ( ھ s.th.) V =
III; VI to feign inattention, inadvertence,
negligence, or carelessness; to pretend to
be, or make as if, inattentive, inadvertent,
negligent, or careless; to neglect,
disregard, ignore, slight ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.),
pay no attention ( عن to), be uninterested (
عن in), be indifferent ( عن to) X = III; to
regard ( ه s.o.) as stupid, as a fool; to make
a fool of s.o. ( ه), pull s.o.’s ( ه) leg
غفل gufl careless, heedless, unmindful,
inadvertent; undesignated, unmarked;
without name, anonymous; not provided (
من with), devoid ( من of) │ غفل من التاريخ
undated, without date, bearing no date; غفل
من الإمضاء (التوقيع ) (imḍā’) without
signature, unsigned, anonymous; حديد غفل
unprocessed iron, pig iron, crude iron
غفل gafal negligence, inadvertence,
inattention, heedlessness, carelessness
غفلة gafla negligence, inadvertence,
inattention, heedlessness, carelessness;
indifference; foolishness; stupidity │ موت
الغفلة maut al-g. sudden death; على غفلة and
على حين غفلة (ḥini g.) suddenly, all of a
sudden, unawares, inadvertently,
unexpectedly, surprisingly
غفلان gaflān(2) negligent, neglectful,
careless, heedless, inadvertent, inattentive;
drowsy, sleepy
تغفيل tagfīl stultification 678
اغفال igfāl neglect, disregard, ignoring,
nonobservance, slight(ing); omission,
skipping
تغافل tagāful neglect
غافل gāfil pl. -ūn, غفول gufūl, غفل guffal
negligent, neglectful, careless, heedless,
inadvertent, unaware, inattentive
مغفل mugaffal apathetic, indifferent,
inattentive; gullible, easily duped, a
sucker; simple-minded, artless; simpleton
مغفل mugfal anonymous │ =) شركة مغفلة
Fr. société anonyme) joint-stock
corporation
متغفل mutagaffil dunce, dolt, numskull
غفو) and غفى) غفا gafā u (gafw, gufūw) to
slumber, doze, take a nap; to doze off, nod
off, fall asleep; -- gafiya a ( غفية gafya) do.
IV do.
غفوة gafwa pl. -āt slumber, nap, doze,
cat nap
اغفاءة igfā’a slumber, nap, doz., cat nap
غل galla u (gall) to insert, put, stick, enter ( في
ھ s.th. in(to) or between); to penetrate,
enter ( ھ s.th. or into s.th.); to apply an
iron collar or manacles ( ه on s.o.),
handcuff, shackle, fetter ( ه s.o.); to
produce, yield, yield crops (land) │ غل يده
الى عنقه (yadahū, ‘unuqihī) (lit.: to fetter
one’s hand to one’s neck, i.e.) not to
spend or give away anything, be
niggardly; -- galla i (gill) to be filled with
hatred or rancor (breast); -- pass. gulla
(gull, غلة gulla) to suffer violent thirst,
burn with thirst II to apply an iron collar
or manacles ( ه on s.o.), handcuff, shackle,
fetter ( ه s.o.) IV to produce, yield, yield
crops (land); to yield ( ھ على to s.o. s.th.) V
to enter, penetrate ( في s.th. or into s.th.)
VII = V X to rake in, gain, win, obtain,
reap ( ھ s.th.); to realize, or make, a profit
ھ) on s.th.), receive the proceeds ( ھ of
s.th., esp. of land, and the like), turn to
(good) account, invest profitably, utilize (
ھ s.th.); to profit ( ه by s.o., ھ by s.th.),
derive advantage or profit ( ھ، ه from),
make capital ( ھ out of s.th.), capitalize ( ھ
on s.th.); to take advantage ( ھ، ه of),
exploit ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
غل gill rancor, hatred, spite, malice
غل gull burning thirst; (pl. اغلال aglāl)
iron collar; manacles, handcuffs; pl.
chains, shackles, fetters
غلة gulla burning thirst
غلة galla pl. -āt, غلال gilāl yield,
produce, crops; proceeds, revenue, returns
(esp. of farming); grain, cereals; corn;
fruits
غليل galīl burning thirst; thirst for
revenge; rancor, ill will; ardent desire; (pl.
غلال gilāl) exhausted with thirst, very
thirsty
غلالة galāla pl. غلائل galā’il2 a fine,
diaphanous cape, mantilla, veil; shirtlike
garment, gown │ غلالة النوم g. an-naum
nightshirt, nightgown
استغلال istiglāl utilization; development,
working (of a mine, and the like),
exploitation (of a mine; also = selfish
utilization, sweating); usufruct; abuse
استغلالي istiglālī serving exploitation,
exploitative
مغلول maglūl fettered, shackled;
exhausted with thirst, very thirsty │ مغلول
اليد m. al-yad inactive, idle
مغل mugill productive, fruitful, fertile
(land, soil)
مستغل mustagill exploiter, utilizer,
usufructuary, beneficiary
مستغل mustagall pl. -āt that which
yields crops, proceeds, or profit; yield,
produce, proceeds; profit 679
غلب galaba i (galb, غلبة galaba) to subdue,
conquer, vanquish, defeat, beat, lick ( على
or ھ، ه so., s.th.), get the better ( على or ھ، ه
of s.o., of s.th.), be victorious, triumph,
gain ascendancy, get the upperhand,
achieve supremacy ( على or ھ، ه over s.o.,
over s.th.); to master, surmount, overcome
على) or ھ s.th.); to seize ( على or ھ s.th.),
take possession ( على or ھ of s.th.), lay
hold ( على or ھ on s.th.); to overpower,
overcome, overwhelm ( على or ه s.o.); to
snatch, wrench, wrest ( على ه from s.o.
s.th.), rob, plunder ( على ه s.o. of s.th.); to
prevail, (pre)dominate, be preponderant (
على in s.th.); to be probable, be likely │
غلب على الظن (ẓann) to be probable, be
likely; تغلب عليه الصحة (الجدة ) (ṣiḥḥatu,
jiddatu) (to be) fairly, almost correct or
new; تغلب عليه الكآبة (ka‘ābatu) he is in low
spirits most of the time, melancholy
prevails in him; يغلب عليه الكرم (karamu) his
predominant, or foremost, quality is
generosity II to make ( ه s.o.) get the
upperhand ( على over), make ( ھ s.o.)
triumph ( على over); to put ( على ھ s.th.
above or before) III to try to defeat ( ه s.o.);
to fight, combat ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), struggle,
wrestle ( ه، ھ with; المصاعب with
difficulties); to befall, overcome ( ه s.o.;
e.g., sleep) V to triumph, gain the mastery
على) over), overcome, surmount, master (
على s.th.), cope ( على with), break ( على a
resistance); to outweigh ( على s.th.) │ تغلب
عليه النعاس (nu‘āsu) he was overcome by
drowsiness VI to wrestle with one
another, struggle
غلب galab (act of) conquering,
defeating, surmounting, overcoming
غلبة galaba victory; (eg.) idle talk,
chatter, prattle
غلباوي galabāwī (eg.) garrulous,
voluble, talkative; chatterbox, prattler,
windbag
غلاب gallāb victorious, triumphant,
conquering
اغلب aglab2 (elative, with def. article or
foll. genit.) the greater portion, the
majority, most (of) │ في الأغلب in most
cases; mostly, in general, generally; في
الأغلب والأعم (wa-l-a‘amm) do.; في اغلب الظن
(a. iẓ-ẓann) most likely, most probably, in
all probability; اغلب امره aglaba amrihī and
اغلب الأمر in most cases, mostly; most
likely, most probably, in all probability
اغلبية aglabīya majority, greater portion
│ اغلبية خاصة (kāṣṣa) qualified majority;
اغلبية مطلقة (muṭlaqa) absolute majority
(pol.)
غلاب gilāf combat(ing), fight; struggle,
strife, contest
مغالبة mugālaba combat(ing), fight;
struggle, strife, contest
تغلب tagallub surmounting,
overcoming, mastery ( على of s.th.)
غالب gālib (pre)dominant; (with foll.
genit. or suffix) most of, the greater
portion of, the majority of; (pl. غلبة
galaba) victor │ غالبا gāliban and في الغالب
mostly, in most cases, for the most part,
largely; in general, generally; most likely,
most probably; والغالب ان and the rule is
that …, as a rule ...
غالبية gālibīya majority, greater portion
مغلوب maglūb defeated, vanquished;
beaten; recessive (biol.) │ مغلوب على امره
(amrihī) helpless
مغلب mugallab defeated, overwhelmed,
overcome
غلس galas darkness of night (esp. that
preceding daybreak)
غلصمة galṣama pl. غلاصم galāṣim2 epiglottis
غلط galiṭa a (galaṭ) to make, or commit, a
mistake, commit an error, err, be mistaken
II to accuse ( ه s.o.) of a mistake or error,
put s.o. ( ه) in the wrong; to make ( ه s.o.)
commit a mistake or error 680 III to seek
to involve ( ه s.o.) in errors or mistakes; to
deceive, beguile, cheat, swindle (s.o.) IV
to make ( ه s.o.) commit a mistake or error
VI to mislead one another, cheat one
another
غلط galaṭ pl. اغلاط aglāṭ error, mistake,
blunder; incorrect, wrong │ غلط الحس g.
al-ḥiss deception of the senses, illusion; في
الامر غلط (amr) there is a but in the case,
there is a hitch somewhere
غلطة galṭa pl. galaṭāt, اغلالات aglāṭ
error, mistake, blunder │ غلطة مطبعية
(maṭba‘īya) misprint, erratum
غلطان galṭān2 one who commits a
mistake or error; mistaken, erring, wrong
اغلوطة uglūṭa pl. -āt, اغاليط agālīṭ
captious question
مغلطة maglaṭa pl. مغالط magaliṭ captious
question
مغالطة mugālaṭa pl. -āt cheating, deceit;
swindle, fraud; falsification, distortion;
fallacy, sophism
غلظ galuẓa u and galaẓa i (gilaẓ, غلظة
gilẓa, غلاظة gilāẓa) to be or become thick,
gross, coarse, crude, rude, rough, rugged;
to become viscous, viscid, tough, sirupy
(of a liquid, mush); to treat ( على s.o.)
harshly, ruthlessly II to make ( ھ s.th.)
thick, gross, big, coarse, crude, rude,
rough, or rugged; to thicken, coarsen ( ه
s.th.) │ غلظ اليمين to swear a sacred oath IV
في القول or اغلظ له القول (qaula, fī l-qauli) to
bark at s.o. rudely, use rude language
toward s.o., speak rudely, impolitely with
s.o. X to become thick, gross, big, coarse,
crude, rude, rough, rugged; to find ( ه s.th.)
thick, coarse, crude, rude, rough, rugged
غلاظ gilāẓ thickness, grossness;
coarseness, crudeness, roughness,
ruggedness; harshness, ruthlessness,
rudeness, impoliteness, boorishness
غلظة gilẓa thickness, grossness;
coarseness, crudeness, roughness,
ruggedness; harshness, ruthlessness,
rudeness, impoliteness, boorishness
غليظ galīẓ􀀀 pl. غلاظ thick (e.g., curtain,
fabric); fat and uncouth, hulking, burly,
gross (person, body); viscous, viscid,
sirupy (liquid); solid, stringy, tough
(food); coarse, crude (fabric, words,
person); rough, rugged (ground); harsh,
callous, rude, churlish, inconsiderate,
boorish; inviolable, sacred (alliance, oath)
│ غليظ الرقبة g. ar-raqaba stiff-necked,
obdurate, obstinate, stubborn; المعى الغليظ
(mi‘ā) the large intestine (anat.); يمين غليظة
binding, sacred oath
غلاظة gilāẓi thickness grossness;
coarser, ness, crudeness, roughness,
ruggedness
اغلظ aglāẓ thicker, grosser; coarser,
cruder, rougher; ruder, more impolite
مغلظ mugallaẓ: يمين مغلظة binding,
sacred oath
غلغل galgala to penetrate ( في s.th. or into s.th.);
to enter ( في s.th. or into s.th.); to plunge,
become immersed, submerge ( في in) II
tagalgala to set in, descend, fall (night); to
penetrate ( في s.th. or into s.th.); to enter (
في s.th. or into s.th.); to plunge, become
immersed, submerge ( في in); to be
crammed ( في into), be deeply embedded.
b. ensconced ( في in); to interfere, meddle
متغلغل mutagalgil deeply embedded ( في
in); extensive, widely extended, farreaching
(connections)
غلف II to put or wrap ( ھ s.th.) in a cover, wrap,
envelope, or case; to wrap, envelop ( ھ
s.th.); to cover ( ھ ب s.th. with)
غلفة gulfa foreskin, prepuce
غلاف gilāf pl. غلف guluf cover,
covering, wrapping, wrapper, wrapping,
jacket (of a book); case, box; envelope
681
اغلف aglaf2, f. غلفاء galfā’2, pl. غلف gulf
uncircumcised; rude, uncivilized
مغلف mugallaf uncircumcised; (pl. -āt)
cover, covering, wrap, wrapper, wrapping,
envelope (of a letter)
غلق galaqa i (galq) to close, shut ( ھ s.th., a
door); to look, bolt ( ھ s.th., a door);
galiqa a (galaq): غلق الرھن (rahnu) the
pledge was forfeited as the pledger was
unable to redeem it II to close shut ( ھ
s.th., a door); to lock, bolt ( ھ s.th., a door)
IV = II; to declare a pledge ( رھنا rahnan)
to be forfeited, foreclose ( رھنا a
mortgage); pass. ugliqa to be obscure,
dark, ambiguous, dubious,
incomprehensible ( على to s.o.) VII to be
closed, shut, looked, or bolted; to be
incomprehensible, X to be obscure, dark,
ambiguous, incomprehensible; to be
difficult, intricate, complicated │ استغلق
عليه الكلام (kalamu) he was unable to speak,
he was struck dumb, he was speechless
غلق galaq pl. اغلق aglāq lock, padlock
غلق galiq obscure, dark, ambiguous,
dubious, abstruse, recondite, difficult to
comprehend
غلاقة gilāqa unpaid balance
مغلاق miglāq pl. مغاليق magālīq2 look;
padlock; breech (of a firearm); any closing
or fastening mechanism, as, a latch, a
catch, a clasp, a cap, a cover, a lid, a
outoff, etc.
اغلاق iglāq closing, shutting, locking,
bolting, shutting-off, barring; foreclosure
(of a mortgage)
انغلاق ingilāq obscurity, abstruseness,
incomprehensibility
مغلق maglaq closed, shut; locked,
bolted; obscure, dark, ambiguous,
dubious, abstruse, recondite, difficult to
comprehend
مستغلق mustagliq obscure, dark, cryptic,
ambiguous, equivocal
غلم galima a (galam, غلم gulma) to be excited
by lust, be seized by sensuous desire VIII
= I
غلم galim excited by lu.t. seized by
sensuous desire, wanton, lewd, lascivious,
lustful; in heat, rutted
غلمة gulma lust, carnal appetite,
sensuous desire; heat, rut
غلام gulām pl. غلمان gilmān, غلمة gilma
boy, youth, lad; slave; servant, waiter
غلامية gulāmīya youth, youthfulness
غيلم gailam male tortoise
غلم gulūma youth, youthfulness
غلا (غلو ) galā u (gulūw) to exceed the proper
bounds, be excessive, go too far ( في in),
overdo, exaggerate ( في s.th.); -- galā u (
غلاء galā2) to be high, be stiff (price); to
become expensive, undergo a prise raise
(merchandise); to be expensive, be high
priced II to raise the price or s.th. ( ھ ) III
to exceed the proper bounds, be excessive,
go too far ( في in), overdo, exaggerate ( في
s.th.); to demand too high a price, charge
too much ( ب for); to put greet store ( ب by
s.th.), ascribe great value ( ب to s.th.), rate
highly ( ب s.th.) IV = II; to declare ( ھ s.th.)
to be dear or precious, appreciate, value,
prize, treasure, cherish ( ھ s.th.); to laud,
extol, praise highly ( ھ s.th.) VI to exceed
the proper bounds, be excessive, go too
far ( في in); to overdo, exaggerate ( ب، في
s.th.) X to find ( ھ s.th.) expensive or
costly
غلو gulūw exceeding of proper bounds,
excess, extravagance; exaggeration
غلاء galā’2 high cost, high level of
prices, rise in prices; high price
غلواء gulawā’2, gulwā’2 exceeding of
proper bounds, excess, extravagance │
خفف من غلوائه (kaffāfa) to dampen s.o.’s
ardor, curb s.o.’s enthusiasm 682
اغلى aglā more expensive; more
valuable, more costly
مغالاة mugālāh exceeding of proper
bounds, excess, extravagance,
exaggeration
اغلاء iglā’ laudation, extolment, high
praise; admiration
غال gālin expensive, high priced;
valuable, costly; dear, beloved; -- (pl. غلاة
gulāh) adherent of an extreme sect;
extremist, radical; fanatic adherent, fanatic
غلى galā i (galy, غليان galayān) to boil, bubble
up; to ferment (alcoholic beverage) II to
make ( ھ s.th.) boil; to boil ( ھ s.th.) IV = II
غلو galy boiling, ebullition
غلي galayān boiling, ebullition
غليون galyūn pl. غلايين galāyīn, water
pipe, narghile, hubble-bubble; smoking
pipe, tobacco pipe; see also below
غلاية gallāya pl. -āt boiler, kettle,
caldron │ آلة غلاية steam boiler
غالية gāliya a perfume made of muek
and ambergris (Galia moschata)
مغلي maglīy broth; decoction (pharm.)
غليون galyūn pl. غلايين galāyīn غلاوين , 2 galāwīn2
galleon; see also غلى
غم gamma u (gamm) to cover, veil, conceal ( ھ
s.th.); to fill ( ه s.o.) with sadness, pain, or
grief, to pain, grieve, distress ( ه s.o.); pass.
gumma to be obscure, incomprehensible (
على to s.o.) II to cover, veil, conceal ( ھs.
th.) IV to be overcast (sky); to fill ( ه s.o.)
with sadness, pain, or grief, to pain,
grieve, distress ( ه s.o.) VII to be
distressed, be worried, be sad, grieve,
pine, worry VIII = VII
غم gamm pl. غموم gumūm grief,
affliction, sorrow, distress, sadness,
worry, anxiety
غمة gumma grief, affliction, sorrow,
distress, sadness, anxiety
غمام gamām (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. غمائم
gamā’im2 clouds │ حب الغمام ḥabb al-g.
hail
غمامة gimāma pl. غمائم gamā’m2 blinder,
blinker (for horses, etc.); muzzle (for
animals)
اغم agamm2, f. غماء gammā’2 covered
with dense hair, hairy, hirsute, shaggy;
thick, dense (clouds)
غام gamm grievous, distressing,
sorrowful, sad, painful; sultry, muggy
(day, night)
مغموم magmūm grieved, distressed,
afflicted, worried, sad
مغتم mugtamm grieved, distressed,
afflicted, worried, sad
غمد gamada i u (gamd) to sheathe, put into the
scabbard ( ھ the sword); to plunge, threat (
ھ the sword into s.o.’s breast); to
encompass, shelter, protect, cover ( ه s.o.,
برحمته bi-raḥmatihī with His grace; of
God) II to conceal s.o.’s ( ه) offenses or
shortcomings IV to sheathe, put into the
scabbard ( ھ the sword) V to encompass,
shelter, protect, cover ( ه s.o., برحمته biraḥmatihī
with His grace; of God)
غمد gimd pl. اغماد agmād, غمود gumūd
sheath, scabbard
غمر gamara u ( غمارة gamāra, غمورة
gumūra) to be plentiful, copious,
abundant, abound (water); to overflow
(intr.); -- gamara u (gamr) to flood,
inundate ( ھ s.th., ب ھ s.th. with), overflow
ھ) s.th.); to douse, cover ( ھ s.th., ب with a
liquid), pour a liquid ( ب) over s.th. ( ھ ); to
lay, soak ( في ھ s.th. in a liquid); to
immerse, steep, submerge, place, embed (
في ھ، ه s.o. s.th. in(to); esp. fig.: in(to) an
environment, an atmosphere); to cover,
683 bury ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to bestow
liberally, lavish, heap, load ( ب ه upon s.o.
s.th.), shower ( ب ه s.o. with); to fill,
pervade ( ه s.o., ھ the heart; of feeling.) III
to plunge (blindly), throw o.s. (headlong)
في) or ھ into); to venture; to risk ( ب s.th.)
│ غامر بنفسه to engage in daring
adventures, risk one’s life VIII to cover,
bury, engulf, swallow ( ھ s.th.)
غمر gamr flooding, overflowing,
submersion, inundation; (pl. غمار gimār,
غمور gumūr) deluge, flood (also fig.); allengulfing,
flooding, overflowing (water);
of overflowing liberality, lavishly
openhanded, generous; -- gamr and gumr
(pl. اغمار agmār) inexperienced, green,
gullible, simple, ingenuous
غمرة gamra pl. gamarāt, غمار gimār
deluge, flood, inundation; (emotional)
exuberance; pl. غمار flood (fig., e.g., of
events); adversities, hardships, ups and
down, (of life, of battle, etc.); abundance,
profusion (e.g., of knowledge) │ غمرات
الموت g. a1-maut mortal throes
غمر gumr pl. اغمار agmār armfull
غمار gimār risk, hazard
مغامرة mugāmara pl. -āt a hazardous, or
foolhardy, undertaking; adventure; risk,
hazard
غامر gāmir overflowing, all-engulfing,
all-encompassing; plentiful, copious,
abundant; desolate, waste, empty (land)
مغمور magmūr obscure, unknown
مغامر mugāmir reckless, foolhardy;
adventurer
غمز gamaza i (gamz) to feel, touch,
palpate ( ب ھ ه s.o., s.th. with); to make a
sign, to signal ( ب ه to s.o. with); to beckon
with one’s eyes, wink ( ه at s.o.); to
twinkle, blink ( ب with one’s eyes); to
slander, calumniate ( على or ب s.o.) │ غمز
الجرس (jarasa) to press the bell button,
ring the bell; غمز قناته (qanātahū) to sound
s.o. out, probe into s.o., feel s.o.’s pulse
VI to signal to one another, wink at one
another VIII to detract ( ھ from s.th.),
belittle, decry, disparage ( ھ s.th.)
غمز gamza pl. -āt sign, signal, hint,
wink (with the eye), twinkle; taunt, gibe
غمازة gammāza dimple
غميزة gamīza failing, fault,
shortcoming, blemish (of character)
مغمز pl. مغامز magāmiz2 failing, fault,
shortcoming. blemish (of character);
weakness, weak spot, s.th. which arouses
doubt, invites comment, taunts, and the
like
غمس gamasa i (gams) to dip, plunge,
steep, immerse, submerse, link ( في ھ، ه
s.o., s.th. in) II = I; VII to be dipped, be
plunged, become immersed, be
submersed, be sunk; to plunge, throw o.s.
في) into) VIII = VII
غموس gamūs ominous, calamitous,
disastrous
مغموس magmūs immersed ( ب or في in)
غمص gamaṣ i (gamṣ) to esteem lightly,
belittle, undervalue, despise, hold in
contempt ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
غمص agmaṣ2 blear-eyed
غمض gamuḍa u and gamaḍa u ( غموض gumūḍ)
to be hidden, be concealed, hide; to close
(eye); to be obscure, dark, abstruse,
recondite, difficult to comprehend II to
make ( ھ s.th.) obscure, abetruse,
recondite, difficult to comprehend; to
close, shut ( عينيه عن (‘ainaihi one’s eyes
to, over, toward, or in the face of); to
sleep, be asleep │ غمض جفونه على القذى
(jufūnahū, qaḍā) see قذى IV to blur, dim (
عينيه عن ‘ainaihi s.o.’s eye for), make s.o.
blind to; to close, shut ( عينيه عن one’s eyes
to, 684 over, على على toward. in the face
of); to pretend not to see ( عن s.th.), feign
blindness ( عن to), overlook ( عن s.th.),
wink, connive ( عن at); to hear, stand,
tolerate ( عن، على s.th.) │ اغمض من عينيه
(‘ainaihi) to close, one’s eyes, refuse to
see VIII to close, be closed (eye) VIII do.;
to sleep, be asleep
غمض gumḍ sleep
غمضة gamḍa twinkle, blink, wink │ في
غمضة عين in a moment, in a jiffy
غماض gimāḍ twinkle, blink, wink
غموض gumūḍ obscureness, obscurity,
ambiguity, abstruseness, reconditeness,
mystery, inscrutability; inexplicability,
lack of clarity, vagueness, uncertainty,
incertitude
غموضة gumūḍa obscureness, obscurity,
abstruseness, reconditeness
اغمض agmaḍ2 obscurer, more cryptic
غامض gāmiḍ pl. غوامض gawāmiḍ2
hidden, concealed; obscure, dark,
ambiguous, abstruse, recondite, difficult
to comprehend; inscrutable, cryptic(al),
mysterious, enigmatic(al)
غامض gāmiḍ pl. غوامض gawāmiḍ2
unsolved problem, riddle, enigma,
mystery │ غوامض افكاره s.o.’s innermost
thoughts
غمط gamaṭa i and gamiṭ a (gamṭ) to despise,
hold in contempt, esteem lightly, belittle,
undervalue ( ه s.o.); to be ungrateful ( ھ for
s.th.) │ غمطه حقه (ḥaqqahū) to encroach
upon s.o.’s rights, refuse to recognize
s.o.’s rights
غمغم gamgama to mumble, mutter
غمغمة gamgama pl. غماغم gamāgim2 cry,
battle cry
غمق gamiqa a (gamaq), gamaqa u and
gamuqa u to be damp, moist, wet
غامق gāmiq2 dark (color)
غملج gamlaj fickle, inconstant, unstable
غملاج gimlāj fickle, inconstant, unstable
غمى gamā i (gamy) to provide with a roof, to
roof ( ھ a house); pas.: غمي عليه (gumiya)
to swoon, faint, lose consciousness II to
blindfold IV pass. اغمي عليه (ugmiya) to
swoon, faint, lose consciousness
غمي gamy swoon, faint,
unconsciousness
اغماء I igrmā’ swoon, faint,
unconsciousness
□ استغمائية (eg.; pronounced
istugummāya): لعبة الاسغماية la‘bat al-ist.
blindman’s buff
مغمى عليه magmīy, mugman ‘alaihi in a
swoon, unconscious
غن ganna (1st pers. perf. ganintu) a (gann, غنة
gunna) to speak through the nose, speak
with a nasal twang, nasalize
غن gann nasal pronunciation,
nasalization
غنة gunna nasal pronunciation,
nasalization; (pl. -āt) nasal sound, twang;
sound (also, e.g., of complaint, of regret)
اغن agann2, f. غناء gannā’2 nasal;
melodious, pleasant, sonorous (voice);
luxuriant, lush, gorgeous (of a garden)
غنج ganija a (gunj) to coquet, flirt, play the
coquette (woman) V do.
غنج gunj coquetry, flirtation, dalliance,
coquettish behavior
غنج ganija coquettish, flirtatious
(woman); a coquette
مغناج mignāj coquettish, flirtatious
غندر II tagandara to play the dandy, act like a
fop
غندر gundur fat, plump, chubby
غندور gundūr pl. غنادرة ganādira (eg.)
dandy, fop 685
غندقجي (eg.) gundaqgī armorer, gunsmith
غنغرينا gangarīnā gangrene (med.)
غنم ganima a (gunm, ganm, ganam,
غنيمة ganīma) to gain booty; to take as
(war) booty, capture, gain, obtain ( ھ
s.th.); to pillage, plunder, sack, loot II to
give (in a disinterested manner) ( ھ ه to s.o.
s.th.), bestow ( ھ ه on s.o. s.th.), grant ( ھ ه
s.o. s.th.) IV to give as booty ( ھ ه ه to s.o.
s.th.) VIII to take as (war) booty, capture (
ھ s.th.) │ اغتنم الفرصة (furṣa) to seize, or
take, the opportunity, avail o.s. of the
opportunity X استغنم الفرصة = اغتنم الفرصة
غنم gunm spoils, booty, loot, prey; gain,
profit, advantage, benefit
غنم ganam (coll.) pl. اغنام agnam sheep
(and goats), small cattle
غنام gannām shepherd
غنيمة ganīma pl. غنائم ganā’im2 spoils,
booty, loot, prey │ غنيمة easy prey; راض
من الغنيمة بالإياب (rāḍin, iyāb) (content with
returning without booty, i.e.) glad to have
saved one's skin; اقتنع من الغنيمة بالإياب
(iqtana‘a) to have to return empty-handed,
with nothing accomplished
مغنم magnam pl. مغانم magānim2 spoils,
booty, loot, prey; gain, profit, advantage,
benefit
غانم gānim successful │ عاد سالما غانما
(sāliman gāniman) approx.: he returned
safe and sound
غني ganiya a (ginan, غناء ganā’) to be free
from want, be rich, wealthy; not to need,
be able to spare ( عن s.o., s.th.), be able to
dispense ( عن with), manage, be able to do
عن) without), have no need ( عن for), be in
no need ( عن of) II to sing ( ب or ھ s.th., ھ ه
to s.o. s.th.), chant ( ب or. s.th.); to sing the
praises ( ب of s.o.), eulogize, extol ( ب s.o.)
IV to make free from want, make rich,
enrich ( ه s.o.); to suffice ( عن or , s.o. or for
s.o.), be sufficient, be enough, be
adequate, do ( عن or ه for s.o.), be of use,
be of help ( عن or ه to s.o.), avail, profit,
benefit, help ( عن or ه s.o.); to satisfy,
content ( عن s.o.); to be a substitute or set
off ( عن to s.o.), make dispensable or
superfluous ( عن for s.o. s.th.); to make up
عن) for s.th.), be a substitute ( عن for s.th.);
to dispense, free, relieve ( عن ه s.o. of
s.th.), spare, save ( عن ه s.o. s.th.); to
protect, guard, help ( ھ عن s.o. against) │
ما اغنى (عنه) شيئا to be of no use, be of no
avail (to s.o.); لا يغني فتيلا (yugnī) it is of no
use at all ( عن to s.o.), it doesn’t help ( عن
s.o.) a bit, it isn’t worth a farthing V to
sing, chant ( ب s.th.); to sing the praises ( ه
or ب of s.o., of s.th.); to eulogize, praise,
extol ( ب s.o.) VIII to become rich, gain
riches ( ب by) X to become rich; not to
need, be able to spare ( عن s.o., s.th.), he
able to dispense ( عن with), manage, be
able to do ( عن without), have no need ( عن
for), be in no need ( عن of); to get by, do,
manage, be satisfied ( ب with) │ لا يستغنى
(yustagnā) indispensable
غنى ginan wealth, affluence, riches │ لا
غنى عنه indispensable ( ل for); ما له عنه غني
he cannot dispense with it, he cannot do
without it; ھو في غني عنه he can dispense
with it, he does not need it; كان في غني عنه
to forgo, renounce s.th., dispense with
s.th., be in no need of s.th., not to need
s.th., need not do s.th.
غني gunya, ginya: ما له عنه غنية = ما له عنه
غني (ginan)
غني ganīy pl. اغنياء agniyā’ rich ( ب in),
wealthy, prosperous, well-to-do │ غني الحر
g. al-glarb war profiteer; غني عن الحرب
(bayān) self-evident, self-explanatory; it is
self-evident, it goes without saying ( ان
that) غناء 686 ganā’ wealth, affluence,
riches; sufficiency, adequacy; ability,
capability; use, avail, usefulness, utility (
عن for) │ لا غناء فيه (ganā’a) useless; it is
insufficient, inadequate, not enough, it is
no good, it is to little avail, it is of little
use; له غناء عنه (ganā’un), ھو في غناء عنه he
can dispense with it, he does not need it
غناء ginā’ singing, song
غنائي ginā’ī singing-, song- (in
compounds), vocal │ حفلة غنائية (ḥafla)
song recital, concert of vocal music
غناء gannā’2 see غن
اغنية ugnīya (ignīya), ugniya (igniya) pl.
-āt, اغان agānin song, melody, tune, lay
مغنى magnan pl. مغان magānin
habitation; (eg.) villa
غانية gāniya pl. -āt, غوان gawānin pretty
girl, beautiful woman, belle, beauty
مغن mugannin (male) singer, vocalist,
chanter
مغنية muganniya (female) singer,
vocalist, songstress, chanteuse
غيھب gaihab pl. غياھب gayāhib2 darkness, dark,
duskiness; gloom
غوث IV to help, succor ( ه s.o.), go to the aid ( ه
of s.o.) X to appeal for help ( ه or ب to
s.o., على against), seek the aid ( ه or ب of
s.o., على against); to call for help
غوث gaut call for help; help, aid, succor
غياث giyāt/ help. aid, succor
اغاثة igāta/help, aid, succor │ وكالة اغاثة
اللاجئين ( التابعة للأمم المتحدة )>(li-l-umami lmuttaḥda)
United Nations Relief and
Works Agency, UNRWA
استغاثة istigāta appeal for aid; call for
help
مغيث mugīt helper
غار (غور ) gāra u (gaur) to penetrate deeply ( في
into); -- gāra u a (gaur) to fall in, link in,
become hollow (eyes, and the like); to
seep away. ooze away (water); to dry up
(spring) II to fall in, link in, become
hollow (eyes, and the like); to seep away,
ooze away (water) IV to travel in the
lowlands; to make a predatory incursion,
make a foray ( على into s.o.’s territory); to
raid, invade ( على a country); to attack ( على
s.o., s.th.); to commit aggression ( على
against a nation)
غور gaur pl. اغوار agwār bottom;
declivity, depression; depth (also fig.);
الغور designation of that part of the Syrian
Graben which constitutes the Jordan
valley │ بعيد الغور deep; profound,
unfathomable
غار gar pl. اغوار agwār, غيران gīrān
cave, cavern; -- (coll.; n. un. ة) laurel tree,
bay
غارة gara pl. -āt predatory incursion,
raid, invasion, inroad, foray; attack ( على
on); a certain gait of camels │ غارة جوية
(jawwīya) air raid; متوالية or غارات متواصلة
(mutawāṣila, mutawāliya) rolling attacks,
attacks in waves; شن غارة على (šanna) to
attack s.o. or s.th., launch an attack on
مغار magār cave, cavern; grotto
مغارة magāra pl. -āt, مغاور magāwir2,
مغاير magāyir2 cave, cavern; grotto
مغوار migwār pl. مغاوير magawīr2 fleet,
swift-running (horse); making raids or
attacks, raiding, aggressive; bold, daring,
audacious; pl. مغاوير commandos, shock
troops (Syr., mil.)
اغارة igāra pl. -āt attack ( على on)
غائر gā’ir low-lying; sunk, hollow (of
the eyes)
مغير mugīr assailant, raider, aggressor
غوريلا gurillā gorilla
غاز، غازي look up alphabetically
غويشة (eg.) guwēša pl. -āt, غوايش gawāyiš2
glass bracelet, bangle
غاص (غوص ) gāṣa u (gauṣ, مغاص magāṣ, غياص
giyāṣ, غياصة giyāṣa) to plunge ( في into),
become immersed, submerge ( في in), dive
في) into; على for); to practice pearl-fishery
II to make ( ه s.o.) dive ( في into), plunge,
immerse, submerse ( في ه s.o. in)
غويص gawīṣ deep
غواص gawwaṣ pl. -ūn diver; pearl diver
غواصة gawwāṣa pl. -āt submarine
مغاص magāṣ diving place │ مغاص اللؤلؤ
m. al-lu’lu’ pearl diving, pearl-fishery
غوط 1 II to deepen, make deeper ( ھ a well) V to
evacuate the bowels, relieve nature
غوط gauṭ pl. غوط gūṭ, اغواط agwāṭ, غياط
giyāṭ, غيطان gīṭān cavity, hollow,
depression
الغوطة al-gūṭa name of the fertile oasis
on the south side of Damascus
غويط gawīṭ deep
غائط gā’iṭ human excrements, feces
غوطى 2 gūṭī Gothic
غاغة gāga mob, rabble, riffraff; noise, clamor,
din, tumult
غوغاء gaugā’2 mob, rabble, riffraff;
noise, clamor, din, tumult
غال (غول ) gāla u (gaul) to take (away)
unawares, snatch, seize, grab ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to destroy ( ه s.o.) VIII = I; to
assassinate, murder ( ه s.o.)
غال gāl pl. -āt (syr.) padlock
غول gūl usually fem., pl. اغوال agwāl,
غيلان gīlān ghoul, a desert demon
appearing in ever varying shapes; demon,
jinni, goblin, sprite; ogre, cannibal;
calamity, disaster
غيلة gīla assassination │ قتله غيلة
(gīlatan) to assassinate s.o.
اغتيال igtiyā1 pl. -āt murder(ing),
assassination
غائلة gā’ila pl. غوائل gawā’il2 calamity,
disaster; ruin, havoc, danger
غوى gawā i ( غي gayy, غواية gawāya) to stray
from the right way, go astray, err (in one’s
actions); to misguide, mislead, lead astray
ه) s.o.), seduce, tempt, entice, lure, induce
ب ه) s.o. to do s.th.); gawiya a to covet,
desire, like II to misguide, mislead, lead
astray, tempt, seduce, entice, lure, allure ( ه
s.o.) IV = II X to misguide, mislead, lead
astray ( ه s.o.); to tempt, seduce, entice,
lure, bait, ensnare, beguile, win ( ب ه s.o.
with)
غي gayy trespassing, transgression,
offense, error, sin; seduction, temptation,
enticement, allurement
غية gayya, gīya pl. -āt error, sin; taste,
inclination, liking
غواية gawāya error, sin; seduction,
temptation, enticement, allurement
اغوية ugwiya pl. اغاوى agāwīy pitfall,
trap
اغواء igwā’ seduction, temptation,
enticement, allurement
غاو gāwin tempter, seducer, enticer,
allurer; (pl. غواة guwāh) amateur, fan,
lover, dilettante, dabbler
مغواة mugawwāh pl. مغويات
mugawwayāt pitfall, trap
غى II to hoist ( ھ a flag)
غاية gāya pl. -āt extreme limit; utmost
degree, the outmost, extremity; aim, goal,
end, objective, intention, intent, design,
purpose, destination (of a journey) │ لغاية
(with foll. genit.) as far as, up to, to the
extent of, until, till; للغاية extremely, very
(much); كان غاية في الجمال ٦٨٨ (gāyatan,
jamāl) to be of extraordinary beauty; الغاية
تبرر الواسطة (tubarriru l-wāsitata) the end
justifies the means; انطلق لغايته to head or
set out for one’s destination
غى and غية see غوي
O غائية gā’īya finality (philos.)
غاب (غيب ) gāba i (gaib, غيبة gaiba, غياب
giyāb, غيبوبة gaibūba, مغيب magīb) to be
or remain absent, be or stay away; to
absent o.s. withdraw ( عن from), leave ( عن
s.o., s.th.); to vanish ( عن from s.o.’s sight,
from s.o., from s.th.); to disappear, be
swallowed up ( في in); to hide, be hidden,
be concealed ( عن from); -- ( مغيب magīb) to
set, go down (sun, and the like) │ غاب
الشيء عن باله the matter has slipped from
his memory, he has forgotten the matter;
غاب عن صوابه (ṣawābihī) to lose
consciousness, faint, swoon, become
unconscious; غاب عن الوجود do.; لا تغيب عنه
الشمس (šamsu) it is not veiled in darkness
II to lead away, take away, carry away,
remove ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to cause ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.) to disappear; to hide, conceal (، عن ھ
ه s.o., s.th. from); to make ( ه s.o.) forget
everything, make ( ه s.o.) oblivious of
everything │ غيبه عن الوجود it drove him
out of his mind; غيبه الثرى (tarā) the earth
covered, or buried, him V to be absent, be
away, stay away ( عن from s.o., from s.th.);
to be not present, be not there; to play
truant, play hooky ( عن from school) VIII
to slander, calumniate ( ه s.o.) X to use
s.o.’s ( ه) absence for maligning him,
backbite ( ه s.o.); to slander, calumniate ( ه
s.o.)
غيب gaib absence; hidden, concealed,
invisible; -- (pl. غيوب guyūb) that which is
hidden, the invisible; that which is
transcendental, the supernatural; divine
secret │ غيبا gaiban or عن ظھر الغيب (ẓahri
l-g.) by heart, from memory; علام الغيوب
‘allām al-g. he who thoroughly knows the
invisible, or transcendental, things = God;
عالم الغيب ‘ālam al-g. the invisible world;
بظھر الغيب bi-ẓahri l-g. behind s.o.’s back,
insidiously, treacherously; نظر بعين الغيب الى
(bi-‘aini l-g.) to foresee, foreknow, divine
s.th.
غيبي gaibī secret, hidden, invisible
غابة gāba pl. -āt, غاب gāb (coll.) low
ground, depression, hollow; forest, wood,
copse, thicket; jungle; reed │ الغاب الھندي
(hindī) bamboo
غيبة gaiba absence; concealment,
invisibility
غيبة gāba slander, calumniation,
calumny
غياب giyāb absence, being away; setting
(of the sun)
غيابي giyābī: حكم غيابي (ḥukm) judgment
by default (jur.); غيابيا giyābīyan in
absence, in absentia (jur.)
غيابة gayāba pl. -āt bottom, depth (of a
well, of a dungeon, of a ditch, and the
like)
غيبوبة gaibūba swoon, faint,
unconsciousness; trance, daze, stupor
مغيب magīb absence; setting (of the
sun)
تغيب tagayyub absence, nonattendance,
being away, staying away, truancy
اغتياب igtiyāb slander, calumniation,
defamation; gossip about (genit.)
غائب gā’ib pl. -ūn, غيب guyyab, غياب
guyyāb absent, not present, not there;
hidden, concealed, unseen, invisible; third
person (gram.)
مغيبات mugayyibāt narcotics,
stupefacients, anesthetics
مغيب mugayyab hidden, concealed,
invisible; pl. المغيبات al-mugayyabāt the
hidden, transcendental things, the divine
secrets 689
مغيب mugib and مغيبة woman whose
husband is absent, grass widow
متغيب mutagayyib absent ( عن from)
مغتاب mugtāb slanderer, calumniator
غيتو ghetto
غاث (غيث ) gaja i (gait) to water with rain ( ھ
s.th.), send rain ( ھ, ه upon s.o. upon s.th.,
of God)
غيث gait pl. غيوث guyūt, اغياث agyāt
(abundant) rain
غيد VI to walk with a graceful, swinging gait
غيد gayad delicacy, slender shapeliness,
tenderness, softness (of a woman)
غادة gāda pl. -āt young girl, young lady
اغياد agyād غيداء , 2 gaidā’ غيد , 2 gīd
young and delicate; الغيد the young ladies
غار (غير ) gāra a ( غيرة gaira) to be jealous ( من
of); to display zeal, vie ( على for); to be
solicitous ( على about. for); to guard or
protect jealously ( على من s.o., s.th. from) II
to alter, modify, make different ( من or ھ
s.th.), change ( ھ s.th.) III to be dissimilar,
be different, differ; to be in contrast ( ھ, ه
to), be unlike s.o. or s.th. ( ھ, ه ); to change
ھ) e.g., a garment); to interchange,
exchange ( بين between); to haggle,
bargain, chaffer ( ه with s.o.); to vie,
compete ( ه with s.o.) IV to make jealous ( ه
s.o.) V to be altered, be modified, be
changed, change, alter, vary, undergo an
alteration or change VI to differ, be
different, be heterogeneous
غير gair other than (with dependent
genit.), different from, unlike, no, not,
non-, un-, in-, dis-; (prep.) gaira except,
save, but │ الغير the others, fellow men,
neighbors; وغيره، وغير ذلك and the like, and
so forth, and so on, et cetera; and others,
and other things, et alii, et alia; لا غير and
ليس غير (gairu) (and) that’s all, nothing
else, no more, nothing but, only, merely,
solely; غير ان gaira anna except that ...,
however, but, yet, ...though; غير واحد gaira
wāḥidin more than one, several; غير مرة
gaira marratin, more than once, quite
often, frequently; بغير bi-gairi or من غير
gairi without; ( ما) في غير fī gairi (mā)
without (generally followed
by abstract noun), في غير ترو (tarawwin)
without thinking, unhesitatingly; في غير ما
تھيب (tahayyubin) without fear; على غير
معرفة منه (ma‘rifatin) or من غير علم منه
(‘ilmin) without his knowing or having
known it, without his knowledge,
unwittingly
غيري gairī altruist
غيرية gairīya altruism
غير giyar, غير الدھر g. ad-dahr
vicissitudes of fate
غيرة gaira jealously; zeal, fervor,
earnest concern, vigilant care, solicitude (
على for); sense of honor, self-respect
غيور gayūr pl. غير guyur (very) jealous;
zealous, fervid, eager ( على in, in the
pursuit of), keen, eagerly intent ( على on),
earnestly concerned ( على with),
enthusiastic ( على for)
غيران gairān2, f. غيرى gairā, pl. غياري
gayāra = غيور
تغيير tagyīr pl. -āt changing, alteration,
modification, variation; change,
replacement, relief
تغيير tagyīra pl. تغايير tagāyīr2 exchange,
interchange, change, replacement; lending
of books and manuscripts sheet by sheet
(one malzama after the other; eg.)
غيار giyār exchange, interchange,
change, replacement; (pl. -āt) dressing,
bandage (of a wound) │ قطع الغيار qiṭa‘ alg.
spare parts
تغير tagayyur pl. -āt alteration,
variation, change
مغاير mugāyir: مغاير للآداب indecent,
immoral
متغير mutagayyir changeable, variable,
liable to change or alteration │ تيار مغير
(tayyār) alternating current (el.)
غيض) غاض) gāḍa i (gaiḍ, مغاض magāḍ)
to decrease, diminish, recede, become
less, dwindle away │ غاض لونه (launuhū)
his face lost all color, he turned pale
غيض gaiḍ prematurely born fetus
غيضة gaiḍa pl. -āt, غياض giyāḍ, اغياض
agyāḍ thicket, jungle
غيط gaiṭ pl. غيطان gīṭān field
غاظ (غيط ) gāẓa i (gaiẓ) to anger, enrage,
infuriate, irritate, exasperate, vex, gall ( ه
s.o.) II and IV = I; V to become
furious, become angry ( من with s.o., at
s.th.) VII and VIII = V
غيظ gaiẓ wrath, anger, ire, exasperation,
fury, rage
اغتياظ igtiyāẓ wrath, anger, ire,
exasperation, fury, rage
منغاظ mungāẓ angry, irate, furious,
enraged
مغتاظ mugtāẓ angry, irate, furious,
enraged
غيل 1 gīl pl. اغيال agyāl thicket
غال gāl pl. -āt (syr.) padlock
غيلة 2 gīla and غيلان gīlān see غول
غام (غيم ) gāma i (gaim) to become cloudy,
become overcast (sky); to become fogged,
become blurred II do.; to form clouds; to
billow, float, waft (smoke) IV agāma and
agyama = I
غيم gaim (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. غيوم guyūm
غيام giyām clouds; mist, fog
غائم gā’im clouded, overcast; cloudy
متغيم mutagayyim clouded, overcast
غين 1 gain pl. -āt, غيون guyūn, اغيان agyān name
of the letter غ
غينة gaina dimple on the cheek
غيني 2 gīnī: خنزير غيني (kinzīr) guinea pig
غينيا gīniya Guinea │ غينيا الجديدة Gīniyā
l-jadīda New Guinea
غيھب see غھب
ف
ف 1 abbreviation of فدان faddān (a square
measure)
ف 2 fa (conj.) then, and then; and so, thus,
hence, therefore; but then, then however;
for, because; (with subjective:) so that │
يوما فيوما (yauman) day after day, day by
day; شيئا فشيئا (šai’an) gradually, step by
step; امر فقتلوه (fa-qatalūhu) he ordered him
to be killed
فان fa-inna (with foll. suffix or noun in
acc.) for, because
فاء name of the letter ف
فابريقة fābrīqa and فابريكة pl. -āt, فبارك fabārik2
factory, plant
فأت VIII to tell lies ( على about); to take violent
measures ( على against); to violate ( على a
duty, etc.); pass. افتئت uftu’ita to 691 die
suddenly │ افتأت برئيه (bi-ra’yihī) to act on
one’s own judgment
افتآت ifti’āt oppression, violence
فاتورة (It. fattura) fātūra pl. فواتير fawātīr2
invoice, bill
الفاتيكان al-fātīkān, al-vatikān the Vatican
فؤاد fu’ād pl. افئدة af’ida heart
فؤادية fu’ādīya “Fuad cap”, summer
field-cup of the Egyptian Air Force (1939)
فأر fa’r (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. فئران fi’rān mouse;
rat
فار fār (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. فيران fīrān mouse; rat
فارة fāra (= فأرة fa’ra) mouse; (pl. -āt)
plane (tool)
فارس fāris2 Persia, also بلاد فارس
فارسي fārisī Persian; a Persian
فاروز fārūz turquoise
فازلين fazlīn, vazlīn vazeline
فأس fa’s f., pl. فؤوس fu’ūs, افؤس af’us ax,
hatchet; hoe
فاس 1 fās = فأس fa’s
فاس 2 fās2 Fez or Fès (city in Morocco)
فاشستي fāšistī fascist(ic); a fascist
فاشستية fāšistīya fascism
فاشي fāšī fascist(ic); a fascist
فاشية fāšīya fascism
فاصوليا fāṣūliyā (eg.-syr.) common European
bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.; bot.)
فأفأ fa’fa’a to stammer, stutter
فاكون (Fr. wagon) fākōn pl. فواكين fawākīn2
(railroad) car, coach
فأل VI to regard as a good omen, as an
auspicious beginning ( ب s.th.); to be
optimistic
فأل fa’l pl. فؤول fu’ūl, افؤل af’ul good
omen, favorable auspice; optimistic
outlook, hope; omen, auspice, sign │ قرأ
الفأل to tell fortunes, predict the future
تفاؤل tafā’ul optimism
متفائل mutafā’il optimistic; optimist
فالس (Fr. valse) vals waltz
فالوذج fālūdaj a sweet made of flour and honey
فالوذجى fālūdajī soft and flabby, like
fālūdaj
فئام fi’ām group (of people)
فإن fa-inna see ف 2 fa
فانلة fanella and فانلا pl. -āt flannel; undershirt;
pl. فانلات fanellāt underwear,
underclothing
فانوس fānūs pl. فوانيس fawānīs2 lantern │ فانوس
سحري (siḥrī) laterna magica, magic
lantern; (slide) projector
فئة fi’a pl. -āt group, class; troop, band, party;
platoon (of light arms; Syr., mil.); rate (of
taxation), (tax) bracket; tax, rate, fee;
price
فاوريقة fāwarīqa pl. فوارق fawārīq2 factory plant
□ فايظ fāyiẓ (= فائض ) see فيظ
فبراير fabrāyir February
فبارك fabārik2 (pl.) factories, plants
فت fatta u (fatt) to weaken, undermine, sap ( في
s.th.) │ في ساعده or فت في عضده (‘aḍudihī)
to weaken s.o., sap s.o.’s strength,
discourage, enervate s.o. II to crumble,
fritter ( ھ s.th.); to divide into small
fragments ( ھ s.th.) │ (يفتت القلب (الأكباد
(qalba) heartbreaking, heart-rending V to
crumble, disintegrate, break up into
fragments VII = V 692
فتة fatta a kind of bread soup
فتات futāt crumbs, morsels
فتيت fatīt crumbs, crumbled bread
فتيتة fatīta a kind of bread soup
فتأ fata’a a and فتئ fati’a a (with negation) not
to cease, to be ( ھ s.th.); فتئ fati’a a ( فتء
fat’) to desist, refrain ( عن from), cease ( عن
doing s.th.), stop ( عن s.th., doing s.th.) │ ما
فتئ يفعل not to cease doing, do incessantly
فتح fataḥa a (fatḥ) to open ( ھ s.th.); to
turn on ( ھ a faucet); to switch on, turn on
ھ) an apparatus); to dig ( ھ a canal); to
build ( ھ a road) ; to open, preface,
introduce, begin ( ھ s.th.); to conquer,
capture ( ھ s.th.); to reveal, disclose ( ھ على
to s.o. s.th.); to grant victory or success ( ھ
على to s.o. over or in s.th.; of God), give
into s.o.’s ( على ) power ( ھ s.th.; of God); to
open the gates (of profit) ( على to s.o.; of
God); to infuse, imbue, inspire, endow ( ب
or ھ على s.o. with; of God); (gram.) to
pronounce with the vowel a ( ھ a
consonant) │ فتح البخت (bakta) to tell
fortunes; فتح عينيه على آخرھما (‘ainaihi) to
open one’s eyes wide, stare wide-eyed; فتح
الشھية (šahīyata) to stimulate the appetite II
to open ( ھ s.th.); (of a dower) to open III
to address first ( ه s.o.), speak first ( ه to
s.o.); to open the conversation or talk ( في ه
with s.o. about); to disclose ( ھ or ب ه to
s.o. s.th.), let s.o. ( ه) in on s.th. ( ھ or ب) V
to open, open up, unfold (intr.); to be
opened ( عن so that s.th. becomes
perceptible); to be open, be responsive
(heart) VII to open, open up, unfold
(intr.); to be opened VIII to open,
inaugurate ( ھ s.th.); to introduce, preface,
begin ( ب ه s.th. with); to conquer, capture
ھ) s.th.) X to begin, start, commence ( ھ
s.th.); to seek the assistance of God ( على
against), implore God for victory ( على
over)
فتح opening; introduction,
commencement, beginning │ فتح الاعتماد
opening of a credit, presentation of a letter
of credit; -- (pl. فتوح futūḥ, فتوحات futūḥāt)
conquest; victory, triumph; pl. فتوحات
alms; donations, contributions (for a
zāwiya; Tun.)
فتحة the vowel point a (gram.)
فتحة futḥa pl. فتح futaḥ, -āt opening,
aperture, breach, gap, hole; sluice
فتاح fattāḥ opener (of the gates of profit,
of sustenance; one of the attributes of
God)
فتاحة fattāḥa pl. -āt can opener
مفتاح miftāḥ pl. مفاتيح mafātīḥ2 key (to a
door, of a keyboard, esp. that of a piano);
switch (el., railroad); lever, pedal (of a
vehicle); knob (on a radio); stop (of a
wind instrument); valve (of a trumpet);
peg, pin (of a stringed instrument)
مفتاحجي miftāḥjī (railroad) switchman
مفاتحة mufātaḥa opening of a
conversation
افتتاح iftitāḥ opening, inauguration;
introduction, beginning │ ليلة الافتتاح lailat
al-ift. première, opening night
افتتاحي iftitāḥī opening, introductory,
preliminary, prefatory, proemial;
inaugurational │ مبلغ افتتاحي (mablag)
opening bid, lowest bid (at auctions); فصل
مقال) افتتاحي ) (faṣl, maqāl) and مقالة افتتاحية
(maqāla) editorial, leading article, leader; ل
يلة افتتاحية (laila) première, opening night
استفتاحية iftiftāḥīya editorial, leading
article, leader; overture (mus.)
استفتاح istiftāḥ start, beginning,
commencement, inception, incipience;
earnest money, handsel
فاتح fātiḥ opener; beginner; conqueror,
victor; light (color) │ فاتح البخت f. al-bakt
fortuneteller; ارزق فاتح light-blue 693
فاتحة fātiḥa pl. فواتح fawātiḥ2 start,
opening, beginning, commencement,
inception, incipience; introduction,
preface, preamble, proem │ الفاتحة or فاتحة
الكتاب name of the first sura
مفتوح maftūḥ opened, open │ الباب مفتوح
على مصراعيه (miṣrā‘aihi) the door is wide
open
مفتح mufattaḥ appetizing; (pl. -āt)
aperitif
مفتتح muftataḥ start, beginning,
commencement, inception, opening,
inauguration
فتر 2 fatara u ( فتور futūr) to abate, subside; to
become listless, become languid, languish,
flag, slacken; to cool off, become tepid,
become lukewarm (water); to slacken,
flag, become lax, become remiss, let up (
عن in) II to cause ( ھ s.th.) to subside,
abate, allay, mitigate, ease, soothe ( ھ
s.th.); to make languid, make listless,
exhaust, slacken. weaken, sap, enfeeble (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to make tepid ( ھ water) IV
to make languid, make listless, exhaust,
Blacken, weaken, sap, enfeeble ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.) V to become listless, become
languid, languish, flag, slacken; to become
tepid, become lukewarm (water)
فتر fitr pl. افتار aftār small span (the
space between the end of the thumb and
the end of the index finger when
extended); corner
فترة fatra lassitude, languor,
listlessness, slackness, weakness,
feebleness, debility; tepidity, indifference,
coolness (of a feeling); -- (pl. fatarāt)
interval of time, intermission, pause;
period, spell, while │ فترة الانتقال transition
period; بين فترة واخرى (wa-ukrā) now and
then, from time to time; في الفترة بعد الفترة at
certain intervals, now and then, off and
on, once in a while
فتور futūr lassitude, languor,
listlessness, slackness, laxity, slackening,
flagging; tepidity
فاتر fātir languid, weak, feeble, listless,
slack, loose, flabby; dull, listsless,
stagnant (stock exchange); tepid,
lukewarm
متفتر mutafattir intermittent
فاتورة 2 pl. فواتر look up alphabetically
فتش II to examine (thoroughly), scrutinize,
search, investigate, explore ( ھ s.th.); to
look, search ( ھ into s.th.); to inquire ( عن
about, after), look, search ( عن for); to
supervise, superintend, control, inspect (
على or ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to be in charge,
exercise supervision, control, or
inspection ( على of)
فتاش fattāš thorough examiner,
investigator, explorer, researcher
تفتيش taftīš pl. تفاتيش tafātīš2
examination, scrutiny, searching, search;
investigation; inquiry, research,
exploration; supervision, superintendence,
control, charge; inspection; survey,
review; controlling body, board of control;
inquisition; circle of irrigation, irrigation
district, also تفتيش الري t. ar-rīy (Eg.) │
تفتيش جوي (jawwī) aerial inspection
تفتيشي taftīšī išnvestigational,
investigatory, examining, examinatory
مفتش mufattiš inspector, supervisor │
مفتش بيطري (baiṭarī) veterinary inspector
(Eg.); مفتش الري m. ar-rīy irrigation
inspector (Eg.)
مفتشية mufattišīya inspectorate
فتفت fatfata to speak secretly ( الى to); to fritter,
crumble ( ھ s.th., esp. bread)
فتفوتة fatfūta pl. فتافيت fatāfīt2 crumb,
morsel (esp. of bread)
فتق fataqa u (fatq) to undo the sewing (
ھ of s.th., e.g., of a garment), unsew,
unstitch, rip, rip open, tear apart, rend,
slash, slit 694 open ( ھ s.th.), │ فتق الذھن
(dihna) to make s.o. see his way clear,
cause s.o. to see things in their true light;
الضرورة تفتق الحيلة (ḥīlata) necessity is the
mother of invention; فتقت له حيلة futiqat
lahū ḥīlatun a ruse came to his mind II to
unsew, unstitch, rip, tear, etc. (= I; ھ s.th.)
V to be unsewn, be unstitched (e.g., a
garment), be ripped open, be torn apart, be
rent, be slashed, be slit open; to bring
forth, produce ( عن s.th.); to hatch,
contrive, devise ( عن s.th., fig., of the
mind) VII to be unsewn, be unstitched
(e.g., a garment), be ripped open, be torn
apart, be rent, be slashed, be slit open; to
bring forth, produce ( عن s.th.)
فتق fatq pl. فتوق futūq rip, rent, tear,
cleft, crack, fissure, slit, slash; hole (e.g.,
in a stocking); hernia, rupture (med.) │
مصاب بالفتق (muṣāb) afflicted with hernia;
person suffering from hernia
فتاق fitāq hernia, rupture (med.)
فتيق fatīq unstitched, ripped, ripped
open, slit, rent, torn; sharp
مفتوق maftūq unstitched, ripped, ripped
open, slit, rent, torn; afflicted with hernia
فتك fataka u i (fatk) to assassinate, murder,
slay, kill ( ب s.o.), destroy, annihilate ( ب
s.th.); to attack suddenly, assault ( ب s.o.)
│ فتك به فتكا ذريعا (fatkan darī‘an) to cut off,
destroy, wipe out, eradicate, extirpate,
exterminate s.o.; to decimate, thin the
ranka of ... (esp., said of a disease)
فتك fatk assassination, murder;
destruction, annihilation
فتكة fatka pl. -āt devastation, ravage,
havoc
فتاك fattāk deadly, lethal, murderous; of
disastrous effect, wreaking havoc ( ب on)
افتك aftak2 deadlier, more destructive
فاتك fātik pl. فتاك futtāk assassin,
murderer, killer
فتل fatala i (fatl) to twist together, twine,
entwine, plait, throw ( ھ s.th.); to spin ( ھ
s.th.) II to twist, twine, wreathe, wind,
weave, plait ( ھ s.th.); to splice ( ھ a rope)
V to be twisted, be twined, be plaited, be
woven, be wound VII = V; to turn on
one’s heel and leave, turn away ( من from)
│ انفتل من الباب to slip out the door
فتلة fatla (n. vic.) twist(ing), twining,
plaiting; (eg.; pl. فتل fital) thread │ شمع
الفتلة (šlammā‘a) to make off, make a
getaway, beat it
فتيل fatīl twisted, twined, entwined,
plaited, wreathed, wound, woven, coiled;
-- (pl. -āt, فتائل fatā’il) wick; gauze
tampon; fuse, slow match, match cord │ لا
يغني فتيلا (yugnī) it is of no use at all ( من to
s.o.), it won’t help him ( عنه ) a bit, it isn’t
worth a farthing; لا يجدي فتيلا (yujdī) = لا
يغني فتيلا
فتيلة fatīla pl. -āt, فتائل fatā’il2 wick; O
filament of a light bulb
فتال fattāl ropemaker, cordmaker
مفتول maftūl strapping, sturdy, husky;
(watch) tower (Nejd) │ مفتول الساعد
muscular, brawny, strong, husky, burly
فتن falana i (fatn, فتون futūn) to turn away ( من ه
s.o. from); to subject to temptations or
trials, seduce, tempt, entice, allure, beguile
ه) s.o.); to enamor, charm, enchant,
captivate, enthrall, enrapture, fascinate,
infatuate (. s.o.); -- fatana i (fatn) to
torture, torment ( ه s.o.); to denounce ( على
s.o.), inform ( على على against s.o.); pass.
futina to be charmed, be enraptured, be
infatuated ( ب by), be enamored ( ب of), be
in love ( ب with); to be crazy ( ب over), be
like mad ( ب ٦٩٥ after) IV to enamor,
charm, enchant, captivate, enthrall,
enrapture, fascinate, infatuate ( ه s.o.) VIII
to subject to temptations ( ه s.o.); to be
charmed, be tempted, be infatuated; act.
iftatana and pass. uftutina: to be subjected
to temptations, be lead from the right
course; pass. uftutina = futina
فتنة fitna pl. فتن fitan temptation, trial;
charm, charmingness, attractiveness;
enchantment, captivation, fascination,
enticement, temptation; infatuation;
intrigue; sedition, riot, discord, dissension,
civil strife
فتان fattān fascinating, captivating,
enchanting, charming; tempter, seducer;
denunciator, informer, slanderer
;jil alu.,,· more charming, more
attractive, more delightful
مفاتن mafātin2 charming qualities;
charms; magic powers
فاتن fātin pl. فواتن fawātin2 tempting,
alluring, seductive, fascinating,
captivating, enchanting, charming;
tempter, seducer
مفتون maftūn fascinated, captivated,
infatuated, enraptured, charmed ( ب by);
enamored ( ب of), in love ( ب with);
madman, maniac
فتو) and فتي) فتى fatiya a ( فتاء fatā’) to be
youthful, young, adolescent IV to give a
formal legal opinion ( في ه to s.o. in or
regarding; Isl. Law); to furnish ( ه s.o.)
with information ( في about), expound, set
forth ( في ه to s.o. s.th.); to deliver an
opinion ( في about), decide by a legal
opinion ( ب for or in favor of s.th.), state as
a (legal) opinion ( بان that) X to ask ( ه s.o.)
for a formal legal opinion ( في in or
regarding; Isl. Law); to ask ( ه s.o.) for a
formal opinion ( في about), request
information ( في ه of s.o. about), seek s.o.’s
ه) ) counsel ( في in, about), consult ( في ه s.o.
in, about), ask s.o.’s ( ه) opinion ( في about)
فتى fatan pl. فتيان futyān, فتية fitya youth,
adolescent, juvenile, young man; slave;
hero; pl. young people, adolescents,
juveniles
فتاة fatāh pl. فتيات fatayāt young woman,
(young) girl
فتاء fatā’ youth, adolescence
فتي fatīy youthful, juvenile, adolescent,
young
فتية fatīya youthfulness, juvenility
فتوى fatwā pl. فتاو fatāwin, فتاوى fatāwā
futwa, formal legal opinion (Isl. Law)
فتيا futyā formal legal opinion (Isl. Law)
فتوة futūwa youth, adolescence; the
totality of the noble, chivalrous qualities
of a man, noble manliness, magnanimity,
generosity, nobleheartedness, chivalry;
designation of Islamic brotherhoods of the
Middle Ages, governed by chivalrous
precepts; name of several youth
organizations in Arabic countries; (eg.; pl.
-āt) bully, brawler. rowdy, tough;
racketeer (eg.)
افتاء iftā’ deliverance of formal legal
opinions (Isl. Law); office of mufti (Isl.
Law); deliverance of formal opinions,
advising, advice, counseling
استفتاء istiftā’ request for a formal legal
opinion (Isl. Law); consulting,
consultation; referendum, plebiscite, also
استفتاء الشعب ist. aš-ša‘b and استفتاء شعبي
(ša‘bī)
مفت muftin pl. ·fl" deliverer of formal
legal oplnions (Isl. Law); official
expounder of Islamic law, mufti │ مفتي
الديار المصرية (miṣrīya) Grand Mufti of
Egypt; سماحة المفتي samāḥat al-m. (title of a
mufti) His Eminence the Mufti
فثأ fata’a a ( فثء fat’) to quench, still ( ھ s.th.,
hunger, thirst, also fig.) 696
فج fajja u (fajj): فج رجليه (rijlaihi) to straddle IV
to stride, hurry
فج fajj pl. فجاج fijāj way, road between
two mountains │ من كل فج عميق or من كل فج
وصوب (wa-ṣaubin) from all sides, from all
directions, from everywhere
فج fijj unripe, green (fruit); blunt, rude
(speech)
فجأ faja’a and فجئ faji’a a ( فجء faj’, فجأة faj’a,
فجاءة fujā’a) and III to come suddenly,
descend unexpectedly ( ه upon s.o.),
confront ( ه s.o.) suddenly or unexpectedly,
take ( ه s.o.) by surprise, surprise ( ب ه s.o.
with), attack, assail ( ه s.o.)
فجأة faj’atan suddenly, unexpectedly,
inadvertently, unawares
فجاءة fujā’atan suddenly, unexpectedly,
inadvertently, unawares
فجائي fujā’ī sudden, unexpected,
surprising
مفاجأة mufāja’a pl. مفاجآت mufāja’āt
surprise
فاجئ fāji’ sudden, unexpected,
surprising
مفاجئ mufāji’ sudden, unexpected,
surprising; pl. مفاجئات surprising events,
surprises
فجر fajara u (fajr) to cleave, break up, dig up (
ھ e.g., the ground); -- ( فجور fujūr) to act
immorally, sin, live licentiously, lead a
dissolute life, indulge in debauchery; to
commit adultery II to create an outlet or
passage ( ھ for water, and the like), let ( ھ
water, and the like) flow or pour forth; to
split, cleave ( ھ s.th.); to explode ( ھ s.th.)
IV to commit adultery V to gush out, spurt
forth, break forth, break out, erupt, burst
out VII = V; to go off, discharge, burst; to
burst forth; to explode, detonate; to
overflow ( ب with); to descend suddenly,
break in, rush in, swoop down ( على upon)
فجر fajr dawn, daybreak, morning
twilight; dawn (fig.), beginning, outset,
start; (f.) morning prayer (Isl. Law)
فجور fujūr immorality, iniquity,
depravation, dissolution, debauchery,
licentiousness, profligacy, dissolute life,
fornication, whoredom
تفجر tafajjur outbreak, outburst,
eruption
انفجار infijār pl. -āt outbreak, outburst,
eruption; explosion, detonation │ مواد
الانفجار mawādd al-inf. explosives
انفجاري infijārī explosive, blasting (adj.)
فاجر fājir pl. فجار fujjār, فجرة fajara
libertine, profligate, debauchee, roué,
rake; adulterer; liar; insolent, impudent,
shameless, brazen
فاجرة fājira pl. فواجر fawājir2 adulteress;
whore, harlot
متفجر mutafajjir explosive, blasting
(adj.)
منفجر munfajir explosive, blasting (adj.)
فجع faja‘a a (faj‘) to inflict suffering
and grief ( ه upon s.o.), afflict, distress ( ه
s.o.); to make miserable ( ه s.o., ب by
bereaving him of s.o.) │ فجع بولده fuji‘a biwaladihī
he was stricken by the death of
his eon II to torment, torture, distress,
grieve ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) V to be or become
painfully affected, be mentally distressed
فجعة faj‘a gluttony
فجاعة fajā‘a gluttony
فجوع fajū‘ painful, grievous, trying,
distressing
فجيعة fajī‘a pl. فجائع fajā’i‘2 misfortune,
calamity, disaster 697
فجعان faj‘ān voracious, insatiable;
glutton, ravenous eater
تفجع tafajju‘ agony, mental distress,
affliction, suffering, grief
فاجع fāji‘ painful, grievous, trying,
distressing
فاجعة fāji‘a pl. فواجع fawāji‘ misfortune,
diluter, calamity; catastrophe; drama,
tragedy
مفجعات mufajji‘āt horrors, terrors
تفجعن tafaj‘ana to eat greedily, ravenously, be
gluttonous
فجعنة faj‘ana gluttony
فجفج fajfaja garrulous, loquacious; thoughtless
chatterer, windbag; braggart, boaster,
swaggerer
فجل fujl (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. فجول fujūl radish
(Raphanus sativus L.; bot.)
فجا (فجو ) fajā u (fajw) to open ( ھ ه door)
فجوة fajwa pl. fajawāt, فجاء fijā’
opening, aperture, breach, gap, interstice;
(horisontal) tombstone
فح faḥḥa u i (faḥḥ, فحيح faḥīḥ) to hiss (snake),
whistle (storm)
فحش faḥuša u (fuḥš) to be monstrous; to be
excessive, exorbitant; to be detestable,
abominable, atrocious, obscene, indecent,
foul, shameless, impudent IV to use
obscene language; to commit atrocities VI
= I and IV
فحش fuḥš monstrosity; abominableness,
atrocity; obscenity, indecency; obscene
language
فحشاء faḥšā’2 monstrosity, abomination,
atrocity, vile deed, crime; adultery,
fornication, whoredom
فحاش faḥḥāš obscene, lewd, shameless
in speech or action │ تأليف فحاش
pornography
تفاحش tafāḥuš monstrosity,
abominableness
فاحش fāḥiš monstrous; immoderate,
excessive, exorbitant, absurd,
preposterous, nonsensical; detestable,
loathsome, abominable, atrocious,
repugnant, disgusting; dirty, foul, vile,
indecent, obscene; shameless, impudent
فاحشة fāḥiša harlot, whore, prostitute; --
(pl. فواحش fawāḥiš2) monstrosity,
abomination, atrocity, vile deed, crime;
adultery, fornication, whoredom
مفحشة mufḥiša harlot, whore
فحص faḥaṣa a (faḥṣ) to scratch up ( ھ
the ground); to examine ( ه s.o., also
medically, ھ s.th.), test ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.),
investigate ( ھ s.th.), scrutinize ( ھ , s.o.,
s.th.); to search ( عن for), inquire ( عن
about, into s.th.), seek information ( عن
about) V to search ( عن for), inquire ( عن
about, into s.th.), seek information ( عن
about); to examine ( ھ s.th., ه s.o.,
medically)
فحص faḥš pl. فحوص fuḥūš test;
examination (in general, school, medical);
(medical) checkup; investigation, scrutiny;
search, inquiry
افحوص ufḥūṣ pl. افاحيص afāḥīṣ2 dugout
hollow in the ground in which a bird lays
ito eggs, nesting place, breeding place
فحل X to become dreadful, terrible,
momentous, serious, difficult ( على for s.o.;
affair), to get out of control, become
excessive, become irreparable (damage)
فحل faḥl pl. فحول fuḥūl, فحولة fuḥūla
male (of large animals), stallion;
outstanding personality, luminary, star,
698 master; a paragon (of) │ الشعراء الفحول
(šu‘arā’) the master poets
فحولة fuḥūla excellence, perfection
استفحال istifḥāl dreadfulness,
terribleness, gravity, seriousness;
difficulty
مستفحل mustafḥil dreadful, terrible;
grave, serious; difficult; overwhelming,
overpowerful, rampant, spreading
dangerously
فحم faḥuma u ( فحوم fuḥūm, فحومة
fuḥūma) to be or become black; -- faḥama
a (faḥm) to be dumfounded, nonplused,
unable to answer II to blacken (with
charcoal), make black ( ھ، ه s.o. s.th.); to
char, carbonize, reduce to charcoal ( ھ
s.th.) IV to dumfound, nonplus, strike
dumb ( ه s.o.); to silence ( ه s.o.) with
arguments; to put ( ه s.o.) off brusquely,
give s.o. ( ه) the brush-off
فحم faḥm (coll.; n. un. ة) charcoal(s);
coal(s); pl. فحومات fuḥūmāt coals, brands
of coal │ فحم حجري (ḥajarī) soft coal,
bituminous coal; فحم حطب ḥaṭab charcoal;
فحم قوالب briquettes; فحم كوك (kōk) coke
فحمة faḥma pl. faḥamāt lump of coal │
فحمة الليل f. al-lail deep-black night; -- (pl.
فحام fiḥām, فحوم fuḥūm) blackness
فحمي faḥmī black, coal-black
فحيم faḥīm black
فحام faḥḥām coal merchant, coal dealer;
collier, miner
فاحم fāḥim black │ اسود فاحم aswad or
فاحم السواد f. as-sawād coal, black, pitch,
black, jet-black
فحوى faḥwā or فحواه faḥwā2 sense, meaning,
signification, import; purport, tenor (of a
letter, of a speech, etc.)
فخ fakk pl. فخاخ fakkāk, فخوخ fukūk: trap, snare
فخت fakata a (fakt) to perforate, pierce ( ھ s.th.)
فخذ fakid, fakd, fikd f., pl. افخاذ afkād thigh; leg
(of mutton, etc.); (m.) subdivision of a
tribe
فخذة fakda leg (of mutton, etc.)
فخذي fakidī, fakdī femoral
فخر fakara a (fakr, fakar, فخار fakār) to glory (
ب in), boast ( ب of s.th.), brag ( ب of). vaunt
ب) s.th.); to pride o.s. ( ب upon), be proud (
ب of); -- fakira a (falfa,) to despise,
disdain III to vie in glory ( ه with s.o.); to
be proud ( ب of), pride o.s. ( ب upon), boast
ب ه) before s.o. of) V to be proud, haughty
VI and VIII = I fakara X to find ( ھ s.th.)
excellent
فخر fakr glory, pride; honor;
vainglorious poetry (as a literary genre) │
غير فخر gaira fakrin or ولا فخر wa-lā fakra
I say this without boasting
فخري fakrī honorary, honoris causa
فخرة fukra glory, pride
فخار fakār glory, pride
فخور fakūr vainglorious, boastful,
bragging; proud ( ب of)
فخير fakīr boasting, bragging,
swaggering, boastful
فخار fakkār (fired) clay; earthenware,
crockery, pottery
فخاري fakkārī potter’s earthen; potter
فاخورة fākūra pottery, earthenware
manufactory
فاخوري fākūrī potter
افخر afkar2 more splendid, more
magnificent
مفخرة mafkara pl. مفاخر mafākir2 object
of pride, s.th. to bout of; glorious deed,
exploit, feat; glorious trait or quality 699
مفاخرة mufākara boasting, bragging,
vainglory, pride
تفاخر tafākur boasting, bragging,
vainglory
افتخار iftikār pride, vainglory, boasting,
bragging
فاخر fākir proud, vainglorious, boastful,
bragging; outstanding, excellent, first-rate,
perfect, splendid, superb, glorious,
magnificent; sumptuous, de luxe
مفاخر mufākir boastful, vainglorious,
proud
مفتخر muftakir proud, vainglorious,
boastful, bragging; outstanding, excellent,
first-rate, perfect, splendid, superb,
glorious, magnificent; sumptuous, de luxe
فخفخ fakfaka to be boastful, vainglorious; to
boast, brag
فخفخة fakfaka ostentation, showiness,
pageantry, pomp
فخم fakuma u ( فخامة fakāma) to be stately,
imposing, splendid, magnificent, grand II
to intensify ( ھ s.th.); to honor, treat with
respect ( ه s.o.), show deference ( ه to); to
pronounce emphatically, make emphatic (
ھ a consonant)
فخم fakm stately, imposing, splendid,
superb, magnificent, grand, grandiose
فخامة fakāma stateliness, imposingness,
imposing appearance; splendor,
magnificence, eminence, high rank; title
of the head of a nonmonarchic state; title
of honor given to high-ranking foreign
dignitaries, approx.: Highness,
Excellency, = فخامة الدولة │ صاحب الفخامة f.
ad-daula title of the President of the
Republic (Syr., Leb.); فخامة رئيس الدولة do.
(Syr., Leb.); فخامة الرئيس f. ar-ra’īs title of a
foreign head of state, approx.: His
Excellency, the President; فخامة المعتمد
السامي f. al-mu‘tamad as-sāmī His
Excellency, the High Commissioner
تفخيم tafkīm emphatic or velarized
pronunciation of a consonant (phon.) │ آلة
التفخيم amplifier (radio)
مفخم mufakkam honored │ الحروف المفخمة
the emphatics (phon.)
فدح fadaḥa a (fadḥ) to oppress, burden (
ه s.o.), weigh ( ه upon s.o.) X to regard ( ھ
s.th.) as a heavy burden, as painful
فداحة fadāḥa oppressiveness,
burdensomeness
افدح afdaḥa2 more oppressive, more
burdensome, more serious, heavier
فادح fādiḥ burdensome, oppressive;
grave, serious (mistake), heavy (loss), bad
(physical defect)
فادحة fādiḥa pl. فوادح fawādiḥ
misfortune, calamity
فدخ fadaka a (fadk) to break, smash ( ھ s.th.)
فدر fadar pl. فدور fudūr chamois
فدفد fadfad pl. فدافد fadāfid2 wasteland, tract of
desert land, desert
فدم fadama i to seal ( ھ the mouth, an aperture)
فدم fadm pl. فدام fidām clumsy in speech;
heavy-witted, sluggish, dull, stupid
فدن II to fatten, stall-feed ( ھ s.th.)
فدان faddān pl. فدادين fadādīn2 yoke of
oxen; (pl. افدنة afdina) feddan, a square
measure (Eg. = 4200.833 m2)
فادن fādin pl. فوادن fawādin2 plummet,
plumb bob
فدى fadā i (fidan, فداء fidā’) to redeem, ransom
ب ھ، ه) s.o., s.th. with or by); to sacrifice (
ب ه for s.o. s.th.) III to sacrifice, offer up (
ب s.th.) VI to 700 beware ( من of), guard (
من against), get away, keep away ( من or ھ
from); to get rid ( من or ھ of); to prevent,
obviate, avert, avoid ( من or ھ s.th.) VIII =
I; to obtain ( ھ s.th.) by sacrificing s.th.
else ( ب); to redeem o.s., ransom o.s. ( ب
with or by); to free o.s. ( من from) │ افتداه
بالنفس to sacrifice o.s. for s.o. or s.th., risk
life and property for s.o. or s.th.
فدى fidan, fadan redemption,
ransoming; ransom; sacrifice (with foll.
genit.: for s.th., to save or liberate s.o. or
s.th.) │ جعلت فداك (ju‘iltu) (lit.: may I be
made your ransom, i.e.) oh, could I but
sacrifice myself for you! مات فدى للوطن
(waṭan) he died for his country
فدية fidya pl. فديات fidayāt, فدى fidan
ransom; redemption (from the omission of
certain religious duties, by a material
donation or a ritual act; Isl. Law)
فداء fidā’ redemption, ransoming;
ransom; price (one has to pay for s.th.),
sacrifice (one makes for s.th.) │ جعل كل
شيء فداءه (fidā’ahū) he sacrificed or gave
up everything for it
فدائي fidā’ī one who sacrifices himself
(esp., for his country); esp. pl. فدائيون
fighters who risk their lives recklessly,
soldiers prepared to sacrifice their lives;
fedayeen, commandos, shock troops (Eg.)
فدائية fidā’īya spirit of self-sacrifice
مفاداة mufādāh sacrifice
فاد fādin redeemer
مفدي mafdīy (prop., object of selfsacrifice)
following the name of a king,
also after وطن waṭan, عرش ‘arš, and the
like, approx.: dearly beloved, dear
فذ fadd pl. افذاذ afdād, فذوذ fudūd alone, only,
sole, single; singular, unique; uncommon,
unusual, infrequent; pl. افذاذ extraordinary
people
فذلكة fadlaka brief summary, résumé, survey,
outline, abstract, epitome
فر farra i (farr, فرار firār, مفر mafarr) to
flee, run away, run off, escape ( من from) │
فر ھاربا (hāriban) to flee, take to one’s
heels IV to put ( ه s.o.) to flight VIII to
open up or part ( عن so that s.th. becomes
visible); to bare, show ( عن the teeth when
smiling), reveal ( عن s.th.); to shimmer,
gleam
فرار firār flight
فرار furār: عينه فراره ‘ainuhū furāruhū
(firāruhū) his outward appearance
bespeaks his inner worth; you need only
look at him to know what to think of him
فرار farrār fugitive, runaway, escaped;
a fugitive, a runaway; deserter, defector;
quicksilver, mercury
فريرة furrēra teetotum (eg.)
مفر mafarr flight, escape │ لا مفر منه
(mafarra) unavoidable, inevitable
فار fārr pl. -ūn, فارة fārra fugitive,
fleeing; a fugitive
فرأ fara’ pl. افراء afrā’ wild ass, onager
فراء farā’ wild ass, onager │ كل الصيد في
جوف الفراء kullu ṣaidin fī jaufi l-f. there are
all kind, of game in the belly of the wild
ass (proverbially of s.o. or s.th. that
combine. all good qualities and
advantages and makes everything else
dispensable)
فراك (Fr. frac) firāk, frāk pl. -āt swallow-tailed
coat, full dress, tails
فراولة faraula (from It. fragola) strawberry
(eg.)
الفرات al-furāt the Euphrates; فرات sweet
(water) 701
فرتيكة furtīka clasp, buckle (eg.)
فرج faraja i (farj) and II to open, part,
separate, cleave, split, gap, breach ( ھ
s.th.), make an opening, gap or breach ( ھ
in); to dispel, drive away ( ھ s.th., e.g.,
grief, worried; to comfort, solace, relieve (
عن s.o.) II to show ( على ه to s.o. s.th.) IV to
leave ( عن a place); to free, liberate, let free
عن) s.o.), release ( عن s.o., s.th.) V to be
opened عن , be separated, be cleft, be split;
to part, divide, move apart (e.g., a crowd
so as to let s.o. pass; to be dispelled (grief,
sorrow); to derive comfort ( في or على from
the light of), take pleasure, delight ( في or
على in looking at); to regard, view,
observe, watch, inspect ( على s.o., s.th.),
look ( على at s.o., at s.th.) VII to be opened,
be separated, be cleft, be split; to open or
part widely, widen, diverge, split open,
gape, yawn; to open ( عن so that s.th.
becomes visible); to show, reveal ( عن
s.th.); to relax, become relaxed (features;
crisis); to be dispelled, be driven away
(grief, sorrow); to become gay
فرج farj pl. فروج furūj opening,
aperture, gap, breach; pudendum of the
female, vulva
فرج faraj freedom from grief or sorrow,
release from suffering; joy; relaxation;
relief, ease, repose, pleasure, comfort;
happy ending
فرجة furja state of happiness (esp. after
suffering); pleasure, delight; -- (pl. (فرج
opening, aperture, gap, breach, hole;
onlooking, watching, inspection, viewing;
sight, spectacle
فروج farrūj (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. فراريج
frārīj2 chick, young chicken, pullet
فرارجي (eg.) farargī seller of chicken,
poulterer
مفرج mafraj pl. مفارج mafārij2 relief,
relaxation; denouement, happy ending
افراج ifrāj freeing, liberation; release (
عن of s.o., of s.th.), unblocking ( عن e.g., of
assets), decontrol ( عن e.g., of rationed
foodstuffs, etc.)
تفرج tafarruj inspection, viewing,
regarding; watching, observation
انفراج infirāj relaxedness, relaxation
متفرج mutafarrij pl. -ūn viewer,
watcher, observer, spectator, onlooker
منفرج munfarij opened wide, wideopen;
relaxed; gay, merry │ زاوية منفرجة
(zāwiya) obtuse angle (geom.)
فرجار firjār compass, dividers
فرجون firjaun currycomb, brush
فرح fariḥa a (faraḥ) to be glad, happy,
delighted, rejoice ( ل، ب at), be gay, merry,
cheerful ( ل، ب about, over) II to gladden,
delight, cheer, exhilarate, make merry,
happy, gay ( ه s.o.)
فرح faraḥ joy, gladness, glee, gaiety,
hilarity, mirth, exhilaration, merriment,
happiness; wedding; pl. افراح afrāḥ feast of
rejoicing, celebration, festival, festivity;
wedding (feast) │ ردھة الأفراح radhat al-a.
banquet hall, ball-room
فرحة farḥa joy
فرح fariḥ merry, gay, cheerful, joyful,
glad, delighted, happy
فرحان farḥān2 merry, gay, cheerful,
joyful, glad, delighted, happy
مفارح mafāriḥ2 feasts of rejoicing,
joyous events
تفريح tafrīḥ exhilaration, amusement
فارح fāriḥ merry, gay, cheerful, joyful,
glad, delighted, happy
مفرح mufriḥ gladdening, cheering,
exhilarating, joyous, delightful 702
فرخ II to have young ones (bird); to hatch (said
of eggs); to hatch, incubate ( ھ s.th.); to
germinate, sprout, put out new shoots (of
a tree); to spread, gain ground IV to have
young ones (bird); to hatch (said of eggs);
to hatch. incubate ( ھ s.th.); to germinate,
sprout, put out new shoots (of a tree) │
افرخ روعه (rau‘uhū) fear left him
فرخ fark pl. افراخ afrāk فروخ furūk, فرخ
firāk, فرخان firkān young bird; shoot, spout
(of a plant, of a tree) │ فرخ ورق f. waraq
(eg.) sheet of paper
فرخة farka pl. فراخ firāk young female
bird; hen │ فرخ رومي (rūmī) (eg.) turkey
hen
فراخ firāk (pl. of فرخ ) poultry, domestic
fowls
فرخ tafrīk hatching, incubation │ آلة
التفريخ incubator
فرد farada and faruda u ( فرود furūd) to be
single, be alone; to be singular, be unique;
-- farada u ( فرود furūd) to withdraw, retire,
segregate ( عن from); -- farada i (eg.) to
spread, spread out, extend, stretch ( ھ
s.th.); to unfold ( ھ s.th.) IV to set aside,
separate, segregate, isolate ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to single out. assign especially ( ب or
ل ھ s.th. for), devote ( ب or ل ھ s.th. to
s.th. else) V to be alone; to do alone,
perform single-handedly ( ب s.th.); to
possess alone ( ب s.th.); to be matchless, be
unique VII = V; to stand alone, b. without
parallel ( في or ب with or in s.th.); to
withdraw, segregate, walk away ( عن
from); to be isolated ( عن from) X to find (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) singular, unique or isolated;
to isolate ( ھ s.th., chem.)
فرد fard pl. افراد afrād, فرادى furādā
alone, single; sole, only; solitary, lone,
lonely; singular, unique, matchless,
unrivaled, peerless, incomparable; one, a
single one, a single thing, a single person,
individual; odd, uneven (number); الفرد
epithet of the month of Rajab; (pl. فراد
firād) one, one of a couple, one of a pair;
(pl. فرود furūd, فرودة furūda) pistol; --
singular (gram.) │ فردا فردا fardan) singly,
separately, one by one, one at a time, one
after the other
فردة farda one part, one half, one of a
pair
فردى fardī single, solitary; single- (in
compounds); pertaining to a single person;
one-man (in compounds); solo (adj.);
singles (tennis); individual, personal;
individualist; odd, uneven (numbr)
فردية fardīya individuality,
individualism
فريد farīd alone, lone, lonely, solitary;
singular, unique, matchless, peerless,
unrivaled, incomparable; (with foll. genit.)
especially endowed with │ فريد في بابه
unique of its kind
فريدة farīda pl. فرائد farā’d2 precious
pearl, precious gem, solitaire; (eg.) quire
(of paper)
فرادا furādan singly, separately, one by
one, one at a time, one after the other
فرادى furādā singly, separately, one by
one, one at a time, one after the other
تفريدي tafrīdī detailed, itemized
انفراد infirād solitude, loneness,
loneliness; isolation, seclusion │ على
الانفراد alone, apart, isolatedly, in solitude,
in seclusion; singly, by o.s.;
confidentially; الانفراد بالسلطة (sulṭa)
autocracy
انفرادي infirādī individual;
individualistic; autocratic; isolationistic,
tending to isolation 703
مفرد mufrad single, solitary, lone,
detached, isolated; (gram.) simple,
consisting of only one word (expression);
being in the singular; singular (gram.); (pl.
-āt) vocable, word; pl. words, terms,
names, expressions (of a scientific field);
details │ مفردات خاصة (kāṣṣa) technical
terms, terminology; بمفرده by o.s., alone,
apart, singly, isolatedly, in solitude, in
seclusion, solitarily; بالمفردات in detail; by
retail
منفرد munfarid isolated, detached,
separated; lone, solitary, alone; solo (adj.;
also mus.)
2 □ فردة firda (< فرضة furḍa) pl. فرد firad tax,
head tax, poll tax
الفردوس al-firdaus f., pl. فراديس farādīs2
Paradise
فردوسي firdausī paradisiacal, heavenly
فرز 1 faraza i (farz) and IV to set apart,
separate, detach, isolate ( ھ s.th.); to
secrete, excrete, discharge ( ھ s.th.;
physiol.); to sort, sift, classify ( ھ s.th.); to
examine ( ھ s.th.), screen ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.),
muster ( ه s.o.); to select, pick out ( ھ s.th.);
to distinguish, discriminate, differentiate (
من ھ s.th. from)
فرز farz separation, detachment,
isolation; secretion, excretion, discharge;
sorting, sifting; mustering, muster,
screening, examination; selection,
selecting │ فرز عسكري (‘askarī) preinduction
examination (mil.)
فرازة farrāza: O فرازة آلية (‘ā1īya) seed
separator, seed-screening apparatus
مفرزة mafraza pl. مفارز mafāriz2 group,
detachment, party, troop, band
افراز ifrāz pl. -āt secretion, excretion,
exudation, discharge, expectoration
(physiol.) │ قسمة افراز qismat i. partition in
kind (Isl. Law)
O فارزة fāriza comma
مفرزات mufrazāt secretions, excretions,
exudations (physiol.) │ المفرزات الداخلية
(dākilīya) internal secretions, endocrines
فريز 2 pl. افرزة = افريز
فيروز، فاروز 3 and فيروزج look up alphabetically
افريز 4 pl. افاريز look up alphabetically
فرزان II tafarzana to queen, become a
queen (of a pawn; in chess)
فرزان firzān pl. فرازين farāzīn 2 queen (in
chess)
فرس 1 farasa i (fars) to kill, tear ( ھ its prey, of
a predatory animal) V to regard
searchingly, eye, scrutinize ( ھ، ه or في s.o.,
s.th.), look firmly ( ھ، ه or في at s.o., at
s.th.); to recognize, detect ( ھ a quality, في
in s.o.) VIII = I; to ravish, rape ( ھا a
woman)
فرس faras m. and f., pl. افراس afrās
horse, mare; knight (chess) │ فرس البحر f.
al-baḥr hippopotamus; فرس الرھان race
horse; الفرس الأعظم PegaSus (astron.)
فراسة farāsa horsemanship, equitation
فراسة firāsa perspicacity, acumen,
discernment, discrimination, minute
observation; keen eye (esp. for traits of
character); intuitive knowledge of human
nature │ علم الفراسة ‘ilm al-f. physiognomy;
فراسة اليد f. al-yad chiromancy, palmistry
فريسة farīsa pl. فرائس farā’is2 prey (of a
wild animal)
فريسي farīsī, فرسي Pharisee
فروسة furūsa horsemanship, equitation;
chivalry, knighthood,
فروسية furūsīya horsemanship,
equitation; chivalry, knighthood; heroism,
valor
فارس fāris pl. فرسان fursān, فوارس
fawāris2 horseman, rider; knight, cavalier;
704 hero; pl. cavalry │ لست من فرسان ذلك
الميدان (lastu, maidān) I am unfamiliar with
this field, I am not competent in this field
فارسة fārisa pl. -āt horsewoman;
mounted female warrior, Amazon
مفترس muftaris rapacious, ravenous
(animal) │ حيوان مفترس (ḥayawān)
predatory animal, beast of prey
الفرس 2 al-fursān the Persians; Persia, also بلاد
الفرس
فارس fāris, also بلاد فارس Persia
فارسي fārisī Persian (adj. and n.)
فرسي visāy Versailles
فرسخ farsak pl. فراسخ farāsik2 a measure of
length, parasang
فرسوفيا varōviyā Warsaw (capital of Poland)
فرش faraša u (farš, فراش firāš) to spread,
spread out ( ھ s.th.); -- faraša u i (farš) to
pave, cover ( ھ the ground, floor, path,
room, etc., ب with) II to cover ( ھ the
floor, etc., ب with); to furnish, provide
with furniture ( ھ ..th.); to tile, pave ( ھ
s.th.) VIII to spread, spread out ( ھ s.th.);
to lie down, stretch out, sprawl ( ھ on
s.th.); to sleep ( ھا with a woman) │ افترش
لسانه (lisānahū) to give one’s tongue free
rein
فرش farš pl. فروش furūš furnishing;
furniture, household effects; mat, rug,
carpet; anything spread on the ground as
bedding; foundation (arch.)
فرشة farša bed; mattress
فراش farāš wheel (of a mill); (coll.; n.
un. ة) moths; butterflies
فراشة farāša (n. un.) moth; butterfly;
flighty, fickle person
فراش firāš pl. فرش furuš, افرشة afriša
cushion, pillow; blanket, cover, spread;
mattress; bed
فراش farrāš one who spreads the
carpets; servant, attendant; house servant,
valet; office boy, errand boy
مفرش mifraš pl. مفارش mafāriš2
tablecloth, table cover, cover (in general);
bedspread, counterpane
مفرشة mifraša pl. مفارش mafāriš2 saddle
blanket
مفروش mafrūš covered ( ب with);
furnished; مفروشات mafrūšāt furniture,
household effects
فرش 2 II to brush ( ھ s.th.)
فرشة furša pl. فرش furaš brush;
paintbrush │ فرشة البودرة powder puff; فرشة
اسنان f. asnān toothbrush
فرشاة furšāh brush; paintbrush
فرشاية furšāya (syr.) brush
فرشح faršaḥ ( فرشحة faršaḥa) to straddle, stand
with one’s legs apart
فرشخ faršaka = فرشح faršaḥa
فرشينة (It. forcina) furšīna pl. -āt hairpin
فرص II to make holidays
فرصة furṣa pl. فرص furaṣ opportunity,
chance, auspicious moment; holidays,
vacation │ فرصة من الزمن (furṣatan,
zaman) for a short time, briefly; انتھز
الفرصة (intahaza) to seize the opportunity,
avail o.s. or take advantage of the
opportunity
فريصة farīṣa pl. فرائص farā’iṣ2 flesh or
muscle beneath the shoulder-blades │
فريصته or ارتعدت فرائصه (irta‘adat) violent
fear or excitement seized him
مفرص mufarriṣ holiday-maker,
vacationist, tourist
فرصاد firṣād mulberry; mulberry tree
فرض faraḍa i (farḍ) to decide,
determine; to decree, order, ordain ( ھ
s.th.); to appoint, assign, apportion,
allocate ( ھ ل to s.o. s.th., money, and the
like); to impose, 705 enjoin, make
incumbent ( ھ على upon s.o. s.th.),
prescribe ( ھ على to s.o. s.th.); to impose (
الحصار blockade, على on); to assume,
presume, suppose, presuppose, postulate (
ھ s.th., ان that) │ فرض ارادته عليه
(irādatahū) to force one’s will on s.o. II to
notch ( ھ s.th.), make incisions ( ھ in s.th.)
VIII to impose, enjoin, make incumbent (
ھ على upon s.o. s.th.), prescribe ( ھ على to
s.o. s.th.); to decree, order ( ھ s.th.); to
assume, suppose ( ھ s.th., ان that)
فرض farḍ pl. فروض furūḍ notch,
incision; duty, precept, injunction, order,
decree, ordinance, command; religious
duty (Isl. Law); statutory portion, lawful
shore (Isl. Law); assumption, supposition,
presupposition, premise, postulate,
hypothesis │ فروض التحية f. at-taḥīya
prescribed forms of salutations; فرض عين
f. ‘ain individual duty (Isl. Law); فرض كفاية
collective duty (Isl. Law); على فرض on the
premise of …; على فرض ان on the
assumption that, with the understanding
that ..., supposing that ...
فرضي farḍī hypothetic(al),
suppositional, conjectural, assumed
without proof
فرضية farḍīya hypothesis
فرضة furḍa pl. فرض furaḍ notch,
incision; opening, gap, crevice, crack;
seaport, river harbor, small port town
فريضة farīḍa pl. فرائض farā’ḍ2 religious
duty (Isl. Law); divine precept, ordinance
of God (Isl. Law); obligatory prayer (Isl.
Law); pl. distributive shares in estate (Isl.
Law) │ فريضة الجمعة f. al-jum‘a the
obligatory divine service on Friday (Isl.
Law); ذو الفرائض dawū l-f. the “Koranic
heirs”, i.e., those entitled to a statutory
portion in estate according to sura lV,
12ff. (Isl. Law); علم الفرائض ‘ilm al-f. law
of descent and distribution
افتراض iftirāḍ assumption, supposition,
presupposition, premise, postulate,
hypothesis
افتراضي iftirāḍī hypothetic(al)
فارض fāriḍ old, advanced in years
مفروض mafrūḍ supposed, assumed,
premised; pl. مفروضات duties, obligations
فرط farata u to precede ( ه s.o.); to escape
inadvertently, slip ( من s.o.’s tongue; of
words); to escape ( من s.o.), get lost ( من on
s.o.); to happen (inadvertently) ( من to s.o.,
faux pas, etc.); to neglect ( في s.th.), be lax,
be remiss ( في with regard to); to strip off (
ھ fruits) │ فرط منه الشيء (šai’u) he missed
the thing, lost it II to leave, abandon,
forsake, give up ( ه s.o., في or ,. s.th.),
renounce, waive ( في or ھ s.th.); to separate
ه) or عن from), part ( ه or عن with); to
neglect ( في s.th.), be lax, be remiss ( في
with regard to); to exceed the proper
bounds, go too far, be excessive ( في in),
exaggerate, overdo ( في s.th.); to waste,
squander ( في s.th.) IV to exceed the proper
bounds, go too far, be excessive ( في in),
exaggerate, overdo, abuse ( في s.th.) VII to
be stripped off, be loosened, become
detached ( من from); to be dissolved,
dissolve, break up │ انفرط عقدھم
(‘aqduhum) they broke up, they parted
company, they dissolved
فرط farṭ excess, immoderation,
exaggeration; (with foll. abstract noun)
hyper- (in compounds)
فرط faraṭ (eg.) interest (on money,
capital, etc.)
فراطة furāṭa small change, coins
تفريط tafrīṭ negligence, neglect
افراط afrāṭ excess, immoderation,
exaggeration
فارط fāriṭ elapsed, bygone, put, last,
e.g., يوم الأحد الفارط (yaum al-aḥad) last
Sunday
مفرط mufarril prodigal, wasteful,
squandering; wastrel, spendthrift,
prodigal, squanderer
مفرط mufriṭ exaggerated, excessive 706
فرطح farṭaḥa to make broad, broaden, flatten (
ھ s.th.)
مفرطح mufarṭaḥ broad; flattened, flat,
oblate; fat and flabby, bloated
فرع fara‘a a (far‘, فرع furū‘) to surpass,
outstrip ( ه s.o.); to excel ( ه s.o.) II to put
forth branches, to branch; to derive,
deduce ( من ھ s.h. from) V to branch out,
ramify, become ramified, spread in all
directions; to divide, fork, bifurcate (road,
pipeline); to branch off VIII to de1lower
فرع far‘ pl. فروع furū‘, افرع afru‘ twig,
branch. bough, limb, (also coll.) branches,
twigs; derivative; section, subdivision;
branch office, subsidiary establishment,
branch; branch line, feeder line; branch
wire, feed wire (el.) │ الفروع or علم الفروع
‘ilm al-f. the doctrine of the branches, i.e.,
applied fiqh, applied ethics (consisting in
the systematic elaboration of canonical
law in Islam); شرعا وفرعا šar‘an wa-far‘an
with full right, with good cause, justly
فرعي fa‘ī branch, subsidiary, tributary,
sub-, side (in compounds); subdivisional;
secondary
افرع afra‘2, f. فرعاء far‘ā’ tall, slender
تفرع tafarru‘ many-sidedness,
versatility; (pl. -āt) ramification; pl.
secondary things, concomitant
circumstances, minor factors
فارع fāri‘ tall, lofty, towering; highgrown,
slender, slim; beautiful, handsome,
pretty │ فارع الطول f. aṭ-ṯūl tall, highgrown;
فارع القامة tall and slender
مفرع mufarra‘ ramified, branching
متفرعات mutafarri‘āt secondary things,
concomitant circumstances, minor factors
فرعون fir‘aun pl. فراعنة farā‘ina Pharaoh
فرغ faraga u and fariga a ( فروغ furūg, فراغ
farāg) to be empty, be void; to be vacant;
to be exhausted, be used up; to be rid ( من
of s.o.), be done, be finished ( من with); to
finish, terminate, conclude, close, wind
up, finish off, settle, complete, bring to an
end ( من s.th.); to devote o.s. apply o.s.
attend, tend ( الى or ل to s.o. to s.th.),
occupy o.s. ( الى or ل with) │ فرغ الى نفسه to
collect one’s thoughts II to empty, void,
vacate, evacuate, discharge ( ھ s.th.); to
unload ( ھ a cargo); to pour out ( ھ s.th.)
IV to empty, void, vacate, evacuate ( ھ
s.th.); to pour out ( على ھ s.th. over. في
into); to unload ( ھ s.th., e.g., from a ship)
│ افرغه في قالب (qālab) to mold s.th. (fig.);
مجھوده) or) افرغ جھده (jahdahū) to exert o.s.
to the utmost, make every effort ( في in),
do one’s best V to be free from work. be
unoccupied, be idle, have leisure; to be
free, disengage o.s. ( الى or ل for some
work), occupy o.s. exclusively ( الى or ل
with), devote o.s., apply o.s., attend ( الى or
ل to) X to empty ( ھ a bowl, and the like);
to vomit │ استفرغ مجھوده to exert o.s. to the
utmost. make every effort ( في in), apply
every ounce of strength ( في to), do one’s
best
فرغ farg empty, void; vacant
فراغ farāg void, vacuity, vacancy,
vacuum, empty space; gap; space ( ل for
s.o., for s.th.); cession (of things which are
not transferable as a property, but
transferable as a possession; (Isl. Law);
leisure, sparetime
فراغي farāgī vacuum (adj.)
فروغ furūg emptiness, voidness,
vacuity; vacancy, unocoupiedness;
termination, expiration, exhaustion │ فروغ
الصبر f. aṣ-ṣabr impatience
افرغ afrag2 emptier
تفريغ tafrīg emptying, vacating,
evacuation; discharge; unloading (of a
cargo) 707
افراغ ifrāg emptying, vacating,
evacuation; pouring out
استفراغ istifrāg emptying, voiding,
vacating, evacuation; vomiting
فارغ fārig pl. فراغ furrāg empty, void;
vacant; unoccupied, not busy, idle,
leisurely; inane, vacuous, idle, useless; --
tare (com.) │ بالفارغ in the void (of the
target) = in the bull’s-eye; بفارغ الصبر bi-f.
iṣ-ṣabr impatiently
مفروغ منه mafrūg minh finished, settled
(question, problem, and the like);
exhausted (topic, and the like)
مفرغ mufarrig emptying; creating a
vacuum │ O آلة مفرغة vacuum pump
مفرغ mufarrag emptied, vacated,
exhausted of air, vacuum (adj.); hollow
مفرغ mufrag cast (in a mold) │ حلقة
مفرغة (ḥalqa) seamless ring; vicious circle,
circulus vitiosus
فرفر 1 farfara to shake itself (of animals, esp. of
a bird)
فرفر farfar small bird
فرفور furfūr small bird
فرفوري 2 farfūrī = فغفوري fine porcelain
فرفير 3 firfīr purple, purpure
فرفش farfaša: فرفش نفسه (eg.) to recover, pick
up, revive
فرفشة farfaša (eg.) ease, comfort,
convenience, leisure
فرفير firfīr purple, purpure
فرق faraqa u (farq, فرقان furqān to separate,
part, divide, sever, sunder ( ھ s.th.); to
make a distinction ( بين between),
distinguish, differentiate, discriminate ( بين
between); فرق (farq) to part ( ھ the hair);
fariqa a (faraq) to be terrified, be
dismayed; to be afraid ( من of) II to
separate, part, divide, sever, sunder ( ھ
s.th.); to strew about, scatter, disperse ( ھ
s.th.); to make a distinction ( بين between),
distinguish, differentiate ( بين between; عن ه
s.o. from); to distribute ( في or على ھ s.th.
to, among); to frighten, scare, daunt,
terrify, horrify ( ه s.o.) │ فرق تسد farriq
tasud divide and rule! divide et impera! III
to separate o.s. disengage o.s., withdraw,
depart ( ھ، ه from s.o., from s.th.), part (, ھ
ه with s.o., with s.th.), leave, quit ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.) V to be or become separated, split,
disunited, divided, scattered, dispersed,
separate, part, divide, scatter, disperse,
dissolve, break up VII to be or become
separated, disunited, divided, separate o.s.,
disengage o.s. ( عن from), part ( عن with)
VIII = V │ افترق طرائق قددا (ṭarā’iqa
qidadan) to split into many parts or
groups, become divided
فرق farq separation, severance,
sunderance, division, partition;
differentiation, distinction, discrimination;
parting (of the hair); -- (pl. فروق furūq)
difference, dissimilarity, distinction; small
change, coins; pl. cases similar with
regard to facts, yet different as to their
legal implications (Isl. Law)
فرق firq part, portion, division, section,
unit; band, company, party, detachment,
troop, group; herd, flock
فرق faraq fear, fright, terror
فرق fariq fearful, timid, timorous,
cowardly, craven
فرقة firqa pl. فرق firaq part, portion,
division, section, unit; band, company,
party, detachment, troop, group; class;
grade, class (in school); pupils or students
of a course; troupe, ensemble; team, crew;
division (mil.); sect │ الفرقة اللأجنبية
(ajnabīya) the Foreign Legion; الفرقة
الخامسة the fifth column; فرقة مصفحة
(muṣaffaḥa) armored division; فرقة المطافئ
٧٠٨ (or الأطفاء ) f. al-maṭāfi2 (or al-iṭfā’)
fire department, fire brigade; فرقة الإعدام f.
al-i‘dām firing squad; فرقة استعراضية
(isti‘rāḍīya) show troupe, revue troupe;
فرقة موسيقية (mūsīqīya) orchestra; فرقة
موسيقى f. mūsīqā (military) band
فرقة furqa separatedness, separation,
disunion
فريق farīq pl. فروق furūq, افرقة afriqa,
افرقاء afriqā2 band, company, troop,
detachment, unit; party; faction; team
(sports); - a military and naval rank,
approx.: lieutenant general (Eg.), vice
admiral (Eg.) │ فريق اول (awwal)
lieutenant general (Ir.); فريق ثان (tānin)
major general (Ir.)
فروق farūq very fearful, timid,
timorous, cowardly, craven;
--Constantinople
فاروق fārūq very timorous; الفاروق he
who distinguishes truth from falsehood
(epithet of the 2nd Caliph, Omar)
فاروقية fārūqīya “Faruk cap”, winter
field cap of the Egyptian Air Force (1939)
فرقان furqān proof, evidence; الفرقان the
Koran
مفرق mafraq, mafriq pl. مفارق mafāriq2
crossing, intersection, bifurcation, forking,
fork, junction, interjunction; road fork,
highway intersection, crossroads, also
مفرق الطرق m. aṭ-ṭuruq; المفرق al-mafraq or
قلعة المفرق qal‘at al-m. Mafrak (city in N
Jordan) │ مفرق الشعر mafriq aš-ša‘r parting
(of the hair)
تفريق tatrīq separation, severance,
sunderance, partition, division; dispersion,
dispersal, scattering; differentiation,
distinction, discrimination; distribution;
pl. تفاريق tafārīq2 single, separate parts,
detached sections │ بالتفريق in detail; in
portions; by retail (com.)
تفرقة tafriqa separation, severance,
sunderance, partition, division; dispersion,
dispersal, scattering; differentiation,
distinction, discrimination; distribution │
بالتفرقة in detail; in portions; by retail
(com.)
مفارقة mufāraqa separation, parting,
farewell, leave-taking, departure;
difference, dissimilarity, distinction
فراق firāq separation, parting, farewell,
leave-taking, departure; difference,
dissimilarity, distinction
تفرق tafarruq separation, disunion,
division; dispersing, dispersal, scattering;
deployment (in the field; mil.)
افتراق iftirāq separation, disunion,
division
فارق fāriq distinguishing, differential,
distinctive, discriminative, separative; (pl.
فوارق fawāriq2) a separating or distinctive
factor; distinctive characteristic, criterion;
difference, distinction, dissimilarity,
disparity │ مع بعد الفارق (bu‘d l-f.) in spite
of the great difference
مفرق mufarriq distributor, retailer;
mailman, postman
مفرق mufarraq retail (adj.) │ تاجر المفرق
retail merchant, retailer; بالمفرق by retail
متفرق mutafarriq dispersed, scattered;
sporadic; متفرقات miscellany, sundries
(com.), miscellaneous items
مفترق muftaraq crossing, intersection,
bifurcation, forking, fork, junction,
interjunction; road fork, highway
intersection, crossroads, also مفترق الطرق
m. aṭ-ṭuruq
فاوريقة 2 pl. فواريق look up alphabetically
افريقيا 3 look up alphabetically
افريقي 4 pl. افارقة look up alphabetically
فرقد farqad calf; الفرقدان two bright stars of Ursa
Minor (β and γ) 709
فرقع farqa‘a ( فرقعة farqa‘a) to pop, crack,
burst, explode II tafarqa‘a = I
فرقعة farqa‘a crack, pop, report (of a
firearm); explosion, blast
مفرقع mufarqi‘ explosive, blasting
(adj.); pl. مفرقعات explosives; firecrackers,
fireworks
فرقلة farqilla (eg.) pl. -āt whip with a
leather thong, used in driving animals
فرك faraka u (fark) to rob ( ھ s.th.) II = I
V to be robbed VII = V
فريك farīk rubbed; cooked green wheat
O مفراك mifrāk twirling stick
فراك 2 look up alphabetically
فركش farkaša (eg.) to disarrange, dishevel,
tangle ( ھ s.th.), tousle, muss, tear (hair)
فرم 1 farama i (farm) to out into small pieces ( ھ
meat, tobacco), mince, chop, hash ( ھ
meat) II = I
مفرمة miframa meat grinder; mincer,
mincing machine
مفرمم mafrūm: دخان مفروم (dukān) finely
cut tobacco; لحم مفروم (laḥm) chopped
meat, hashed meat
فرم 2 (It. forma) furma pl. فرم furam mold
فرمان faramān pl. -āt, فرامين farāmīn2 firman;
decree, edict; (letter of) safe-conduct,
laisser-passer (formerly, in the Ottoman
Empire)
فرمبواز (Fr. framboise) frambuwāz raspberry
فرمسون (eg.) firmasōn (from Fr. franc-maçon)
Freemason
فرملة farmala pl. فرامت farāmil2 brake (of a
wheel, etc.)
فرملجي (eg.) farmalgī pl. -īya brakeman
فرموزا farmōza, formōza Formosa
فرن furn pl. افران afran oven, baking oven
فران farrān baker
فرنج II tafarnaja to become Europeanized,
adopt European manners, imitate the
Europeans
الإفرنج al-ifranj the Europeans │ بلاد
الإفرنج Europe
افرنجي ifranjī European; الإفرنجي syphilis
فرنجة firanja2 Land of the Franks,
Europe
تفرنج tafarnuj Europeanization,
imitation of the Europeans
متفرنج mutafarnij Europeanized
فرند 1 firind a sword of exquisite workmanship
فرندة 2 faranda, varanda pl. -āt veranda, porch
فرنس farnasa ( فرنسة farnasa) to make French,
Frenchify, imbue with French culture ( ھ
s.th.) II tafarnasa to become a Frenchman;
to imitate the French
فرنسا faransā (also فرنسة ) France
فرنسي faransī French; (pl. -ūn)
Frenchman
فرنساوي faransāwī (also فرنسوي ) French
الفرنسيس al-faransīs the French
الفرنسيسكان al-faransiskān the Franciscans
فرنك (Fr. franc) firank and فرنكة pl. -āt franc
فره farih lively, agile, nimble
فراھة farāha liveliness, agility,
nimbleness, swiftness (of an animal);
sturdiness
فاره fārih lively, agile, nimble, swift
(animal); comely, pretty; sturdy; big
فرو farw (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. فراء firā’ furriery,
fur(s), skin(s), pelt(s), peltry
فروة farwa (n. un.) fur, pelt; akin, hide │ فروة
الرأس scalp; ابو فروة abū f. (eg.) chestnut
فرى 710 farā i (fary) to split lengthwise,
cut lengthwise ( ھ s.th.); (eg.) to mince,
chop ( ھ s.th.); to invent lyingly, fabricate,
trump up ( على ھ s.th. against) │ فرى كذبا
(kidban) to fabricate, or invent, a lie ( على
against) II to split lengthwise, cut
lengthwise ( ھ s.th.) IV = II; VIII to invent
lyingly, fabricate, trump up ( على ه s.th.
against); to slander, libel, calumniate ( على
s.o.)
فرية firya pl. فرى firan lie, falsehood,
falsity; slander, calumny
فرى farīy: جاء) شيئا فريا or) اتى to do s.th.
unheard-of, do an unprecedented thing
مفراة mifrāh (eg.) (= مفرمة ) meat grinder;
mincer, mincing machine
افتراء iftirā’ lie, falsehood, falsity;
slander, calumny
مفتر muftarin slanderer, calumniator
مفتريات muftarayāt lies, falsities;
calumnies
فريز farīz pl. افرزة afriza = افريز ifrīz (look up
alphabetically)
فز fazza i (fazz) to jump up, start, bolt;
to be or become frightened, terrified,
dismayed, startled; to frighten, alarm,
startle ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), scare away ( عن ھ، ه
s.o., s.th. from) IV to frighten, alarm,
startle ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), scare away ( عن ھ، ه
s.o., s.th. from) V to become restless,
restive, uneasy X to fill with unrest or
excitement, rouse, agitate, excite, stir up,
instigate, incite, egg on, inflame, whip up
ه) s.o.), provoke ( ھ an incident); to startle
عن ه) s.o. out of); to stir up, arouse ( من ه
s.o. from)
فزة fazza start, jump, bolt, dart
استفزاز istifzāz pl. -āt instigation,
agitation, incitement, provocation
استفزازي istifzāzī agitative, instigative,
inflammatory, rabble-rousing,
provocative, incendiary
فزر lazara u (fazr) to tear, rent, burst ( ھ s.th.)
V to be torn, be rent, split open, burst VII
= V
فزارة fazāra female leopard
فزورة fazūra pl. فوازر fawāzir2 (eg.)
riddle, puzzle
فزع fazi‘a a (faza‘) and faza‘a a (faz‘, fiz‘) to
be afraid, be scared ( من of), be alarmed,
frightened, terrified ( ل or من by); -- fazi‘a
a to take refuge, flee ( الى to), seek asylum
الى) with) II to strike ( ه s.o.) with fear; to
frighten, scare, alarm, terrify, dismay,
startle ( ه s.o.) IV to frighten, startle,
terrify, scare ( ه s.o.) V to be terrified,
startled, dismayed; to be frightened │ تفزع
من نومه (naumihī) to be roused from one’s
sleep
فزع faza‘ pl. افزاع afzā‘ fear, fright,
terror, alarm, dismay, anxiety,
consternation, panic
فزع fazi‘ frightened, terrified, scared,
alarmed, startled, dismayed, fearful,
timorous
فزعان faz‘ān frightened. terrified,
scared, alarmed, startled, dismayed,
fearful, timorous
فزاعة fazzā‘a one who inspires fear;
scarecrow
مفزع mafza‘ place of refuge, retreat,
sanctuary
مفزعة mafza‘a place of refuge, retreat,
sanctuary; scarecrow
مفزع mufzi‘ terrible, dreadful, alarming
مفزع mufzi‘ frightened, terrified,
alarmed, startled
فستان fustān pl. فساتين fasātīn2 (woman’s) dress,
gown, frock
فستق fustuq, fustaq pistachio (bot.)
فسح fasuḥa u ( فسحة fusḥa, فساحة fasāḥa) to be or
become wide, spacious, roomy; 711 –
fasaḥa a (fasḥ) to make room, clear a
space ( ھ، في in, ل for) II to make wide,
make spacious, widen, broaden, extend,
expand ( ھ s.th.); to make room, clea a
space ( ل for) │ فسح مجالا له (majālan) to
make room for s.o., or s.th., give s.o. or
s.th. free play or free scope; to open up an
opportunity for s.o.; فسح له الطريق to open
or pave the way for s.o. or s.th. IV to
make room, clear a space ( ل for); to clear.
open up ( ھ s.th., ل for) V to be or become
wide, spacious, roomy; to walk, take a
walk VII to be or become wide, spacious,
roomy; to extend, expand, dilate; to be
free, be ample (time) │ انفسحت لي الأوقات I
had plenty of time
فسحة fusḥa wideness, ampleness,
spaciousness, roominess; extensive
possibilities, ample opportunities, wide
scope for action; (time) margin, enough
time ( ل for); -- (pl. فسح fusaḥ, -āt) free,
open, or empty, space; holidays, vaoation;
walk, promenade, stroll, ride, drive,
outing, excursion │ ما زال في الوقت فسحة
(waqt) there is still time
فسحة fusḥa pl. -āt (eg.) anteroom,
vestibule, hallway, entrance hall; (eg., also
syr.) open space between houses;
courtyard
فسيح fasīḥ) pl. فساح fisāḥ wide, ample,
spacious, roomy, broad
انفساح infisāḥ wideness, ampleness;
extension, expansion, dilation
منفسح munfasaḥ) wideness, ampleness;
plane, surface
فسخ fasaka a (fask) to dislocate, disjoint,
luxate, put out of joint ( ھ a limb); to
sever, sunder, tear ( ھ s.th.); (jur.) to
cancel, abolish, rescind, revoke, abrogate,
annul, nullify, invalidate, dissolve, void,
vacate ( ھ s.th.); -- fasika a (fasak) to lose
color; to fade (color) II to tear to pieces,
tear apart, lacerate, mangle ( ھ s.th.); (eg.)
to salt ( ھ fish) V to break up into
fragments, fall apart, disintegrate VII
(jur.) to be canceled, abolished, rescinded,
revoked, abrogated, annulled, nullified,
invalidated, dissolved, voided, vacated
فسخ fask (jur.) cancellation,
abolishment, abolition, rescission,
revocation, abrogation, annulment,
nullification, invalidation, dissolving,
voiding, vacating
فسخي faskī abolitionary, revocatory,
abrogative, nullifying
فسخة faska (wood) splinter, chip, sliver
فسيخ fasīk (eg.) small salted fish
متفسخ mutafassik degenerate(d)
فسد fasada u i ( فساد fasād, فسود fusūd) to be or
become bad, rotten, decayed, putrid, be
spoiled; to be or become vicious, wicked,
vile, corrupt, depraved, be marred,
impaired, corrupted, perverted, vitiated; to
be empty, vain, idle, unsound, false,
wrong II to spoil, deprave, ruin, corrupt,
demoralize ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to degrade,
abase, sully, tarnish, defile ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.)
IV to spoil ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.; ھ s.th. على of
s.o., e.g., s.o.’s plans, etc.), deprave,
corrupt, pervert, demoralize ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to mar, distort, devaluate,
depreciate, denigrate, degrade ( ھ s.th., على
for s.o.); to weaken, sap. undermine,
upset, ruin, destroy, foil, thwart, frustrate (
ھ s.th.); to alienate, estrange ( على ه s.o.
from another; ھ على s.o. from s.th.), entice
away ( على s.o., ھ from s.th.); to sow, or
stir up, dissension ( بين among); to act
evilly, wickedly; to cause mischief │ افسد
عليه امره (amrahū) to play s.o. a dirty trick
VII = I
فساد fasād rottenness, spoiledness,
corruption, decay, decomposition,
putrefaction, putridity; depravity,
wickedness, viciousness, iniquity.
immorality; weakness; 712 pervertedness,
wrongness ; incorrectness, imperfection
(of a legal transaction; Isl. Law)
مفسدة mafsada pl. مفاسد mafāsid2 cause
of corruption or evil; scandalous deed,
heinous act; pl. مفاسد dirty tricks, malicious
acts, chicaneries │ في المصلحة والمفسدة
(maṣlaḥa) in good and bad times, for
better or for worse
افساد ifsād thwarting, undermining,
sabotaging
فاسد fāsid pl. فسدي fasadī bad, foul,
rotten, spoiled, decayed, decomposed,
putrid; depraved, corrupt, vicious, wicked,
immoral; empty, vain, idle, unsound,
false, wrong; imperfect (legal transaction;
Isl. Law) │ دور فاسد (daur) vicious circle,
circulus vitiosus
فسر II to explain, expound, explicate,
elucidate, interpret ( ھ s.th.), comment ( ھ
on) V to be explained, interpreted, etc.
(see II); to have an explanation ( ب in), be
explainable ( ب with, by) X to ask ( ه s.o.)
for an explanation ( عن of), inquire ( عن ه of
s.o. about), ask ( عن ه s.o. about); to seek
an explanation ( عن for)
تفسير tafsīr pl. تفاسير tafāsīr2
explanation, exposition, elucidation,
explication, interpretation; commentary
(esp. one on the Koran)
تفسيري tafsīrī explanatory, explicatory,
illustrative
تفسرة tafsira urine specimen (of a
patient, for diagnosis)
استفسار istifsār pl. -āt inquiry, question (
عن about)
مفسر mufassir commentator
فسطاط fusṭāṭ pl. فساطيط fasāṭīṭ2 (large)
tent made of haircloth; tent, pavilion,
canopy; الفسطاط al-fusṭāṭ ancient Islamic
city south of present-day Cairo
فسطان fusṭān pl. فساطين fasāṭīn2 see فستان
فسفات fusfāt phosphate
فسفر fasfara and II tafasfara to phosphoresce
فسفر fusfur phosphorus
فسفس fasfara (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. فسافس fasāfis2
bedbug
فسفوسة fasfūsa pl. فسافيس fasāfīs2 pustule,
pimple
فسيفساء fusaifisā’ mosaic, mosaic work
فسق fasaqa u i (fisq, فسوق fusūq) and
fasuqa u to stray from the right course; to
stray, deviate ( عن from); to act unlawfully,
sinfully, immorally, lead a dissolute life;
to fornicate ( ب with) II (Isl. Law) to
declare ( ه s.o.) to b. a fāsiq (q.v.)
فسق fisq sinfulness, viciousness, moral
depravity, dissolute life │ دور الفسق dūr alf.
brothels
فسوق fusūq outrage, iniquity
مفسقة malaaqa pl. مفاسق mafāsiq2 brothel
فاسق fāsiq pl. فساق fussāq, فسقة fasaqa
godless, sinful, dissolute, wanton,
licentious, profligate, vicious, iniquitous,
nefarious; trespasser, offender, sinner;
fornicator, adulterer; a person not meeting
the legal requirements of righteousness
(Isl. Law)
فسقية 2 fasqīya, fisqīya pl. -āt, فساقي fasāqīy
fountain; well
فسل 1 fasl pl. فسول fusūil low, lowly,
ignoble; despicable; false, deceitful
فسل lusUIa lowliness; w.akness
فسيلة fasīla pl. فسيل fasīl, فسائل fasā’il2
palm seedling, palm shoot
فسولية 2 fasūlīya = فصوليا
فسلجة faslaja physiology
فسلجي faslajī physiologic(al) 713
فسو) فسا) fasā u (fasw, فساء fusā’) to break wind
noiselessly
فاسياء fāsiyā’2 dung beetle
فسولية fasūliya = فصوليا
فسيولوجيا fisiyōlōjiyā physiology
فسيولوجي fisiyōlōjī physiologic(al);
physiologist
فش fašša u (fašš) to cause ( ھ a swelling, and
the like) to subside; to go down, subside
(swelling) │ فش خلقه (غله) في (kulqahū,
gillahū) (eg.) to vent one’s anger on …
VII to go down, subside (swelling, and the
like)
فشة fišša pl. فشش fišaš (eg., syr.) lung,
lights (of animals)
فاشي and فاشية look up alphabetically
فشخ fašaka a (fašk) to straddle; to stride, take
large steps
فشخ fašk pl. -āt stride, large step
فشر fašara u to brag, boast, swagger
فشر fašr bragging, swagger, vain
فشار fušār bragging, swagger, vain
boasting
فشار fišār (eg.) popcorn
فشار faššār braggart, swaggerer, vain
boaster
فشفاش fašfāš (eg.) lung, lights (of animals)
فشك fašak (coll.; n. un. ة) cartridges │ فشك خلبي
(kullabī) blank cartridges (Syr.); فشك دخاني
(dukānī) smoke cartridges (Syr.)
فشل fašila a (fašal) to lose courage, be or
become cowardly or faint-hearted, lose
heart, despair; to be disappointed; to fail,
he unsuccessful ( في in); to miscarry, go
wrong, fail n and IV to thwart, foil,
frustrate ( ھ s.th.) V to fail, be
unsuccessful
فشل fašal disappointment, failure, flop,
fiasco
فشل fašl, fašil weak, faint-hearted,
cowardly, craven
فاشل fāšil failing, unsuccessful, futile,
doomed to failure; no good, worthless
فشو) فشا) fašā u ( فشو fašw, fušuw, فشي fušīy) to
spread, spread about, diffuse, gain ground,
make the rounds, circulate; to be revealed,
he disclosed, he divulged IV to spread,
disseminate, put in circulation ( ھ s.th.); to
reveal, disclose, divulge ( ھ or ب s.th.) V
to spread, spread about, gain ground, rage
(e.g., a disease)
تفش tafaššin spreading, spread, outbreak
فص II (eg.) to remove the outer shell ( ھ of
s.th.)
فص faṣṣ pl. فصوص fuṣūṣ stone of a ring;
clove (of garlic); segment (of an orange);
lobe (anat., bot.); joint; essence │ فص ملح
f. milḥ (eg.) lump of salt; بنصه وفصه
(naṣṣihī) in the very words, ipsissimis
verbis, literally, precisely
فصح 1 faṣuḥa u ( فصاحة faṣāḥa) to be eloquent II
to bring ( ھ the language) into literary
form, make ( ھ the language) correct
Arabic, purify ( ھ the language) IV to
express o.s. in flawless literary Arabic; to
speak clearly, distinctly, intelligibly; to
give expression ( عن to), express, state
clearly, declare outright, make plain ( عن
s.th.), speak openly, frankly ( عن about); to
orient, inform ( عن ل s.o. about); to become
clear, plain, distinct V to affect eloquence,
affect mastery of the language VI = V
فصيح faṣīḥ pl. فصحاء fuṣaḥā’ فصاح , 2
fiṣāḥ, فصح fuṣuḥ pure, good Arabic
(language), literary; skillful in using the
correct literary language; clear, plain,
distinct, 716 intelligible (language,
speech); fluent, eloquent
فصاحة faṣāḥa purity of the language;
fluency, eloquence
افصح afṣaḥ2, f. فصحى fuṣḥā of purer
language; more eloquent │ ( العربية (اللغة
الفصحى (‘arabīya, luga) classical Arabic;
الفصحى do.
افصاح ifṣāḥ flawless literary Arabic
style; frank statement, open word ( عن
about), open declaration ( عن of)
مفصح mufṣiḥ clear, plain, distinct,
intelligible; cloudless, sunny, bright (day)
فصح 2 IV to celebrate Easter (Chr.); to celebrate
Passover (Jud.)
فصح fiṣḥ, faṣḥ pl. فصوح fuṣūḥ Easter
(Chr.); Pesach, Passover (Jud.)
فصد faṣada i (faṣd, فصاد faṣād) to open
a vein; to bleed ( ه s.o.), perform a
venesection ( ه on) V to drip (e.g., the face,
عرقا ‘araqan with perspiration) VII to be
bled, undergo a venesection; to bleed
(nose)
فصد faṣd opening of a vein,
bloodletting, venesection, phlebotomy
فصاد fiṣād opening of a vein,
bloodletting, venesection, phlebotomy
فصادة fiṣāda pl. فصائد faṣā’id2
bloodletting, venesection, phlebotomy │
ابو فصادة abū f. (eg.) wagtail (zool.)
مفصد mifṣad, pl. مفاصد mafāṣid2 lancet
فصفات fuṣfāt phosphate
فصفور fuṣfūr phosphorus
فصفوري fuṣfūrī phosphoric,
phosphorous │ ضياء فصفوري
phosphorescence
فصل faṣala i (faṣl) to separate, part,
divide, disjoin, divorce, cut off, detach, set
apart, segregate ( عن ھ، ه s.o. s.th. from); to
separate ( بين two things or persons); to
isolate ( ھ s.th.); to cut, sever, sunder,
interrupt ( ھ s.th.); to discharge, dismiss,
fire, sack, expel ( من or عن ه s.o. from an
office), relieve, divest ( من or عن ه s.o. of an
office), cashier ( ه s.o.); to decide ( ھ a
controversy, and the like), make a
decision. render judgment ( في in, about,
with respect to); to fix the price ( ھ for
s.th.); -- ( فصال fiṣāl) to wean ( ه عن الرضاع
the infant from sucking); -- faṣala u ( فصول
fuṣūl) to go away, depart, move away ( عن
or من from), leave ( عن or من a place), pull
out ( عن or من of a place) II to divide into
particular sections, arrange in sections,
group, classify, categorize ( ھ s.th.); to
present in logical order, set forth in detail,
detail, particularize ( ھ s.th.); to make ( ھ
s.th.) clear, plain, distinct; to make to
measure, cut out ( ھ a garment) III to
separate o.s., dissociate o.s., be separated (
ه from s.o.), part company ( ه with); to
haggle, bargain ( على ه with s.o. for) VII to
separate o.s., disengage o.s., dissociate
o.s. segregate, secede ( عن from); to be
separated, disjoined, detached, removed,
set aside, cut off ( عن from), be interrupted;
to be discharged, dismissed, fired, sacked,
cashiered; to retire, resign ( من or عن from
an office), be relieved, be divested ( من or
عن of an office); to quit, leave ( من or عن a
political party, and the like)
فصل faṣl parting, disjunction,
detachment, severance, sunderance,
cutting off; separation; division, partition;
discharge, dismissal ( من or عن from an
office); decision, (rendering of) judgment;
-- (pl. فصول fuṣūl) section, part; chapter;
act (of a play); movement (of a symphony,
etc.); article (in a newspaper); class, grade
(school); season │ فصل الخطاب (in letters:)
conclusion of the formal greetings by the
words اما بعد ٧١٥ ammā ba‘du; conclusion,
termination; decision; unmistakable
judgment; بيني وبينك فصل الخطاب we’re
through with one another once and for all;
فصل التمثيل (theater) season; القول الفصل
(qaul) the last word, the final decision; يوم
الفصل yaum al-f. Day of Judgment,
Doomsday
O فصلة faṣla comma │ O فصلة منقوطة
semicolon
فصلة fiṣla offprint, reprint
فصيل faṣīl pl. فصال fiṣāl, فصلان fuṣlān
young (weaned) camel
فصيلة faṣīla pl. فصائل faṣā’il genus,
species, family (bot., and the like);
detachment, squad; group, cell (pol.);
platoon, squadron (of heavy arms; mil.) │
فصيلة دم f. dam blood group; فصيلة الإعدام f.
al-i‘dām firing squad, execution squad;
فصيلة الاستكشاف reconnaissance squad,
patrol
فيصل faiṣal decisive criterion;
arbitrator, arbiter
فيصل faiṣalīya “Faisal cap”, Iraqi field
cap (formerly, Ir.)
مفصل mafṣil pl. مفاصل mafāṣil2 joint,
articulation
مفصلي mafṣilī articular
تفصيل tafṣīl detailed statement,
elaborate or minute exposition,
particularization, detailing; elaborateness,
minuteness, completeness of detail;
cutting out, cut (of a garment); (pl. -āt,
تفاصيل tafāṣīl2) detail, particular │ تفصيلا
tafṣīlan and بالتفصيل in detail, elaborately,
minutely, circumstantially; ... من تفصيل
(with foll. genit.) made to measure by ...;
tailored by ...; ثياب التفصيل tailor-made
clothes; محبوك التفصيل well-fitting
(garment)
تفصيلي tafṣīlī detailed, minute,
particular, elaborate; analytic(al); تفصيليا
tafṣīlīyan separately, singly, one at a time
│ المساحة التفصيلية land survey
انفصال infiṣāl separation;
disengagement, dissociation, withdrawal;
secession; interruption │ O حرب الانفصال
ḥarb al-inf. the American Civil War; انصار
الانفصال separatists
انفصالي infiṣālī separatistic; (pl. -ūn)
separatist
انفصالية infiṣālīya aeparatism فاصل faṣil
separatory, separating, parting, dividing;
isolating, insulating; decisive, crucial;
conclusive; separation, partition, division,
interruption │ بلا فاصل without
interruption, uninterrupted, unbroken;
فاصل الحرارة f. al-ḥarāra heat-insulating
(phys.); مباراة فاصلة (mubārāh) finals, final
match (sports); خط فاصل (kaṭṭ) demarcation
line
فاصلة fāṣila pl. فواصل fawāṣil2 partition,
division; interstice, interspace, interval; O
comma; O dash (punctuation mark); end,
rhyme of a Koranic verse
مفصل mufaṣṣal set forth or described
minutely, elaborately or in great detail,
detailed, minute, elaborate, circumstantial;
tailor-made, custom-made; مفصلا
mufaṣṣalan in detail, minutely,
elaborately, circumstantially
مفصلة mufaṣṣala pl. -āt hinge
منفصل munfaṣl separate, detached
فصم fṣama i (faṣm) to cause ( ھ s.th.) to
crack, crack ( ھ s.th.); to split, cleave ( ھ
s.th.); pass. fuṣima to be destroyed (house)
VII to have a crack, be cracked; to be
split, be cleft
فصم faṣm pl. فصومات fuṣūmāt recess,
niche, chamfer (in walls; arch.)
انفصام infiṣām split; O schizophrenia
فصوليا faṣūliyā (or فصولية ) the common
European bean (Phascolus vulgaris L.;
bot.) 716
فصى V to free o.s., rid o.s. ( من of),
shake off ( من s.th.)
فض faḍḍa (1st pers. perf. faḍaḍtu) u
(faḍḍ) to break (open), pry open, force
open, undo ( ھ s.th., e.g., a seal); to break,
snap ( ھ s.th.); to scatter, disperse, break
up, rout ( ھ s.th.); to perforate, pierce ( ھ a
pearl); to conclude, close ( ھ a session, and
the like); to dissolve ( ھ parliament); to
settle ( ھ a conflict, and the like); to shed (
ھ tears) │ فض بكارتھا (bakāratahā) to
deflower a girl; لا فض فوك lā fuḍḍ fūka
how well you have spoken! II to plate or
coat with silver, to silver ( ھ s.th.) VII to
he opened, be broken, be undone (e.g., a
seal); to be scattered, be dispersed, be
routed; to scatter, disperse, disband, break
up, dissolve; to be concluded, be closed
(session, and the like) VIII to deflwer ( ھا a
girl)
فض faḍḍ opening, breaking, undoing
(e.g., of a real); dispersion, scattering,
breaking up, routing; settlement, settling
(of a dispute); conclusion, closure (e.g., of
a session) │ فض البكارة f. al-bakāra
defloration
فضة fiḍḍa silver
فضي fiḍḍī silver, silvery, argentic,
argentous, made of silver, like silver;
فضيات fiḍḍīyāt silverware │ الجمھورية الفضية
(jumhūrīya) Argentina; الستار الفضي the
motion-picture screen, the silver screen
مفض mifaḍḍ implement for opening or
breaking open │ مفض الخطابات letter opener
انفضاض infiḍāḍ dissolution, breaking
up, dispersal; end, close, conclusion,
closure (e.g., of a session)
افتضاض iftiḍāḍ defloration
فضح faḍaḥa a (faḍḥ) to disclose or uncover
s.o. ( ه) faults or offenses, expose, show up,
compromise, shame, disgrace, dishonor ( ه
s.o.); to outshine, eclipse ( ھ s.th., e.g., the
moon the stars); to ravish, violate, rape ( ھا
a woman); to disclose, reveal, show, bring
to light, divulge, betray ( ھ s.th.) VII to be
exposed, be compromised, be disgraced,
be dishonored VIII to become public,
become known, come to light │ افتضح امره
(amruhū) he was exposed
فضح faḍḥ exposure, humiliation,
mortification, debasement, degradation,
disgracing, dishonoring
فضيح faḍīḥ covered with shame,
exposed, compromised, humiliated,
shamed, disgraced, dishonored;
disgraceful, shameful, infamous,
ignominious
فضيحة faḍīḥa exposure, humiliation,
mortification, debasement, degradation,
disgracing, dishonoring; -- (pl. فضائح
faḍā’iḥ2) disgraceful, or scandalous, act or
thing; infamy, ignominy; shame, disgrace,
scandal
فضاح faḍḍāḥ divulging secrets,
unearthing shameful things
افتضاح iftiḍāḥ disgracefulness,
ignominy, infamy
فاضح fāḍiḥ disgraceful, shameful,
infamous, ignominious, dishonorable,
discrediting, scandalous
مفضوح mafḍūḥ covered with shame,
exposed, compromised, humiliated,
shamed, disgraced, dishonored;
disgraceful, shameful, infamous,
ignominious
فضفاض faḍfāḍ wide, loose, flowing (garment);
ample, abundant; plump, corpulent (girl);
pompous, high-sounding, bombastic
(speech)
فضل faḍala u and faḍila a (faḍl) to be surplus,
be in excess, be left (over), remain; --
faḍala u (faḍl) to excel, surpass ( على or ، ھ
ه s.o., s.th.); to be excellent, superior,
exquisite, good, be better, be more 717
adequate II to prefer ( على ھ، ه s.o., s.th. to
s.o., to s.th.), like better ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.,
على than); to give preference ( على ھ، ه to
s.o., to s.th. over), set s.o. or s.th. ( (ھ، ه
before or above ( على ) III to contend for
precedence or superiority ( ه with s.o.) │
فاضل بين شيئين to compare two things in
order to determine which deserves
preference IV to confer a benefit ( على
upon s.o.), do ( على s.o.) a favor, oblige (
على s.o.); to present, honor ( ب على s.o.
with), bestow, confer ( ب على upon s.o.
s.th.), grant, award ( ب على to s.o. s.th.) V =
IV; to have the kindness ( ب of doing or to
do s.th.; or ف fa with finite verb), be so
kind ( ب as to do s.th.; or ف with finite
verb), deign, condescend, be graciously
disposed ( ب to do s.th.; or ف with finite
verb); (imperative) tafaḍḍal please! if you
please; to put on house clothes, be dressed
for around the house
فضل faḍl pl. فضول fuḍūl surplus,
overplus, excess, superfluity, overflow;
leftover, remainder, remnant, rest; matter
of secondary importance, subordinate
matter; -- pl. فضول that which is
superfluous, redundant or in excess, a
surplus, overplus, superfluity; waste,
refuse; droppings, excrements; --
superiority ( على over); precedence, priority
على) over), preference ( على to); grace,
favor ( على to, toward); kindness,
graciousness, amiability; erudition,
culture, refinement; -- (pl. افضال afḍāl)
merit, desert ( في on behalf of, with respect
to), credit (for, in), service(s) ( على to);
benefit, favor, gift, present │ فضلا عن
(faḍlan) beside, aside from ..., not to speak
of …, let alone ..., to say nothing of ...;
فضلا عن ذلك besides, moreover,
furthermore; بفضل thanks to, owing to, due
to; من فضلك please! if you please; يرجع
الفضل في ذلك (yarji‘u) or الفضل في ذلك عائد
عليه the merit thereby is his due, he
deserves all the credit for it; ليس بالفضول ان
it is not superfluous that ...; فضول الأحاديث
futile
talk, idle words; من فضول الكلام ان (f. ilkalām)
it would be needless talk to ..., it
would be a waste of words if ...
فضلة faḍla pl. faḍalāt remnant,
remainder, residue, leftover, rest, surplus,
overplus; waste, scrap, discard, offal,
waste product; pl. excretions (physiol.),
excrements
فضول fuḍūl curiosity, inquisitiveness,
officiousness, meddling
فضولي fuḍūlī inquisitive, curious; busybody,
officious, meddlesome; prattler,
chatterer; manager without commission,
uncommissioned agent (Isl. Law)
فضولية fuḍūlīya inquisitiveness
curiosity; obtrusiveness, importunity,
officiousness, indiscreetness
فضيل faḍīl pl. فضلاء fuḍalā’ outstanding,
eminent, very good, first-rate, excellent;
distinguished, deserving; learned, erudite
فضالة fuḍāla pl. -āt remnant, remainder,
residue, leftover, rest, surplus, overplus;
offal, refuse, scum
فضيلة faḍīla pl. فضائل faḍā’il2 moral
excellence, excellent quality, virtue; merit,
advantage, excellence, exquisiteness │
صاحب الفضيلة title of Islamic scholars (as,
for instance, Rector and sheiks of Al
Azhar University), also preceding the title
of sheik: فضيلة الشيخ
افضل afḍal2, f. فضلى fuḍlā, pl. m. -ūn,
افاضل afāḍil2, f. فضليات fuḍlayāt better,
best; more excellent, preferable, etc.; افاضل
(very) excellent, learned men; فضليات
السيدات f. as-sayyidāt the worthy (or
esteemed) ladies
افضلية afḍalīya precedence, priority ( على
over), preference ( على to. over);
predilection 718
مفضل mifḍal pre-eminent, most
outstanding, most excellent, very
generous, very liberal
مفضلة mifḍala pl. مفاضل mafāḍil2 house
dress, everyday dress
مفضال mifḍāl pre-eminent, most
outstanding, most excellent; very
generous, very liberal
تفضيل tafḍīl preference, preferment,
favoring; esteem, high estimation │ اسم
التفضيل ism at-t. noun of preference =
elative (af‘āl2; gram.)
فضل mul/i44la compariaon, weighing
تفضل tafaḍḍul deigning, condescension,
complaisance, courteousness, courtesy,
favor, grace │ لبسة التفضل libsat at-t.
careless manner of dressing for around the
house
تفاضل tafāḍul rivalry for precedence;
quantitative disparity (of two services
rendered; Isl. Law) │ O حساب التفاضل
differential calculus
O تفاضلي tafāḍulī differential (adj.)
فاضل fāḍil remaining, leftover, left,
surplus, exceeding, in excess; (pl. فواضل
fawāḍil2) remainder, remnant, residue,
rest, leftover, surplus, overplus, excess; --
(pl. -ūn, فضلاء fuḍalā’2) outstanding,
eminent, very good, first-rate, superior,
excellent, distinguished, deserving;
learned; man of culture and refinement
مفضل mufaḍḍal preferable, preferred
فضو) and فضي) فضا faḍā u ( فضو fuḍūw, فضاء
faḍā’) to be or become spacious, wide,
large (space); to be empty, void, vacant II
to empty, void, vacate ( ھ s.th.) IV to
come, attain ( الى to), arrive ( الى at), reach (
الى s.o., s.th.); to lead ( الى ب s.o. to; الى to,
e.g., to results); to inform, notify ( ب الى
s.o. of), announce ( ب الى to s.o. s.th.) V to
have free time, have leisure ( ل for)
فضاء faḍā’ vast and unlimited space,
empty space; space (phys.); cosmic space;
sky; vast expanse, vastness, void │ سفينة
الفضاء spaceship; رمى به في الفضاء to throw
s.th. in the air; -- (pl. افضية afḍiya) open
area, open tract of land, open country
فضائي faḍā’ī: سفينة فضائية spaceship
فاض fāḍin empty, vacated, vacant;
unoccupied, not busy, at leisure, free (of
commitments)
فطح faṭaḥa a (faṭḥ) and II to spread out, make
broad and flat, flatten ( ھ s.th.)
افطح afṭaḥ2 and مفطح mufaṭṭaḥ broadheaded,
broad-nosed
فطاحل faṭāḥil2 (pl. of فطحل fiṭaḥl) important,
outstanding, leading men or personalities,
luminaries, celebrities, stars │ زمن الفطحل
zaman al-fiṭaḥl primeval times, preadamic
period
فطر faṭara u (faṭr) to split, cleave, break apart (
ھ s.th.); -- ( فطور fuṭūr) to break the fast,
eat and drink after a fast; to breakfast,
have breakfast; -- (faṭr) to make, create,
bring into being, bring forth ( ھ s.th.; of
God); to endow ( على ه s.o. with; of God);
pass. fuṭira to have a natural disposition (
على for); فطر على (fuṭira) ... is native of
him, ... is in his nature IV to break the
fast, eat and drink after a fast; to breakfast,
have breakfast V to be split, be cleft, be
broken VII = V; انفطر بالبكاء (bi-l-bukā’) to
break into tears
فطر faṭr pl. فطور fuṭūr crack, fissure,
rift, cleavage, rupture
فطر fiṭr fast breaking │ صدقة الفطر
ṣadaqat al-f. almsgiving at the end of
Ramadan (īsl. Law); عيد الفطر ‘īd al-f. Feast
of Breaking the Ramadan Feast, or Lesser
Bairam, celebrated on the 1st of Shawwal
فطر fuṭr (coll.; n. un.) fungi,
mushrooms 719
فطري fuṯrī fungal, fungus, fungi-,
myco- (in compounds); فطريات fuṯrīyāt
parasitic fungi; mushrooms; fungal
cultures │ المرض الفطري (maraḍ) mycosis
فطرة fiṭra creation; (pl. فطر fiṭar) nature,
(natural) disposition, constitution,
temperament, innate character, instinct;
fiṭratan by nature
فطري fiṭrī natural; instinctive, native,
inborn, innate │ الإنسان الفطري (insān)
natural man; الديانات الفطرية natural religions
فطور faṭūr breakfast
فطير faṭīr unleavened; immature,
unbaked; fresh, new, newly made;
unleavened bread
فطيرة faṭīra (coll. فطير faṭīr) pl. فطائر
faṭā’ir (unleavened) bread; pastry made of
water, flour and shortening (sometimes
with sugar added); a cake-like white bread
(made with eggs and butter; eg.)
فطايري faṭāyirī pl. فطايرية faṭāyirīya
(ṭun.) maker or seller of faṭira (see above)
فطاطري faṭāṭirī pl. فطاطرية faṭāṭirīya
(eg.) maker or seller of faṭira (see above)
افطار ifṭār fast breaking; breakfast; first
meal after sunset during Ramadan
الفاطر a-fāṭir the Creator (= God)
فطس faṭasa i ( فطوس fuṭūs) to die II to kill ( ه
s.o.); to suffocate, strangle, choke to death
ه) s.o.) VII to become flattened (nose)
فطيس faṭīs suffocated, stifled
فطيسة faṭīsa pl. فطائس faṭā’is2 corpse,
body; carrion, carcass
افطس afṯas2 flat-nosed, snub-nosed
فطم faṭama i (faṭm) to wean ( ه s.o.; an infant or
a young animal) VII to be weaned; to
abstain ( عن from)
فطام fiṭām weaning, ablactation
فطيم faṭīm pl. فطم fuṭum weaned
فاطمي fāṭimī Fatimid (adj. and n.);
الفاطميون the Fatimids
فطن faṭina a, faṭana u and faṭuna u ( فطنة fiṭna)
to be or become clever, smart, discerning,
sagacious, perspicacious, bright,
intelligent; to notice, realize, comprehend,
understand ( ب or ل or الى s.th.); to be or
become aware ( ب or ل or الى of); to think (
الى of s.th.) II to make intelligent ( ه s.o.);
to make ( ه s.o.) realize or understand (، ب
ل، الى s.th.), explain ( ب، ل، الى ه to s.o.
s.th.); to remind( ب، الى ه s.o. of) V to
comprehend, understand ( ل s.th.)
فطن faṭin clever, smart, astute,
sagacious, perspicacious, bright,
intelligent
فطنة fiṭna pl. fitan cleverness,
astuteness, sagacity, perspicacity, acumen,
intelligence
فطن faṭin pl. فطناء fuṭanā’2 clever, smart,
bright, intelligent
فطانة faṭāna cleverness, smartness
تفطن tafaṭṭun intelligence; intellection
فظ faẓẓ pl. افظاظ afẓāẓ crude, rude,
coarse, blunt, gruff, impolite, uncivil,
uncouth, boorish, uneducated; -- walrus
فظاظة faẓāẓa crudeness, rudeness,
coarseness, bluntness, gruffness,
impoliteness, uncouthness, boorishness
فظع faẓa‘a u ( فظاعة faẓā‘a) to be or
become abominable, detectable, hideous,
ugly, repulsive, disgusting, shooking,
odious, heinous, atrocious, horrid, horrible
X to find ( ھ s.th.) abominable. detestable,
etc. (see I); to call abominable, revolting,
shocking ( ھ s.th.)
فظع fazi‘ abominable, detectable,
hideous, ugly, repulsive, disgusting,
shocking, odious, heinous, atrocious,
horrid, horrible 720
فظيع faẓī‘ abominable, detestable,
hideous, ugly, repulsive, disgusting,
shocking, odious, heinous, atrocious,
horrid, horrible
فظاعة faẓā‘a pl. فظائع faẓā’i‘2,
abominableness, hideousness, ugliness,
repulsiveness, odiousness, heinousness,
atrocity, horridness, horror; pl. atrocities
مفظع mufẓi‘ abominable, detestable,
hideous, ugly, repulsive, disusting,
shocking, odious, heinous, atrocious,
horrid, horrible
فعل fa‘ala a (fa‘l, fi‘l) to do ( ھ s.th.); to act; to
perform, some activity; to have an
influence or effect ( في or ب on), affect ( في
or ب s.o., s.th.); to do ( ب to s.o., s.th.; في ھ
s.th. with) │ فعل فيه فعلا كريھا (fi‘lan) to
have an unpleasant effect on s.o. II to scan
ھ) a verse) VI to interact, interplay;
(chem.) to enter into combination, form a
compound; to combine ( مع with) VII to be
done; to be or become influenced or
affected ( ل by), be under the influence of
s.o. or s.th. ( ل); to b. agitated, excited,
upset VIII to concoct, invent, fabricate (
كذبا على (kidban kidban a lie against); to
falsify, forge ( ھ s.th., e.g., a handwriting);
to invent ( ھ s.th.)
فعل fi‘l activity, doing, work, action,
performance; function; -- (pl. افعال af‘āl,
فعال fi‘āl) deed, act, action; effect, impact;
-- (pl. افعال af‘āl) verb (gram.); pl. افاعيل
afā‘īl2 great deeds, exploits, feats;
machinations │ فعلا fi‘lan or بالفعل indeed,
in effect, actually, really, practically; بالفعل
out of, because of, due to
فعلي fi‘lī actual, factual, real; effective,
efficacious, efficient; practical; de facto;
verbal (gram.)
فعلة fa‘a pl. -āt deed, act, action
فعال fa‘‘āl effective, efficacious,
efficient
فعالية fa‘‘ālīya effectiveness, efficacy,
efficiency; activity
افعل af‘al2 more effective, more
efficacious
تفعيل taf‘īl pl. تفاعيل tafā‘īl2 foot of a
verse; (poet.) meter
تفاعل tafā‘ul pl. -āt interaction,
interplay; formation of a chemical
compound, chemical process. chemical
reaction
انفعال infi‘āl (state of) being affected,
acted upon, or influenced, passivity;
stimulation. irritation (biol.); (pl. -āt)
agitation. excitement, excitation,
commotion
انفعالي infi‘ālī excitable, irritable,
susceptible (biol.); caused by affect,
affective (philos.)
انفعالية infi‘ālīya excitability, irritability
(biol.)
فاعل fā‘il efective; efficacious, efficient;
(pl. -ūn) doer, actor, perpetrator; (pl. فعلة
fa‘ala) worker, workman, laborer; --
active subject of a verbal clause (gram.) │
اسم الفاعل ism al-f. nomen agentis, active
participle (gram.); ذو راديوم فاعل radioactive
فاعلية fā‘ilīya effectiveness, efficacy;
activity
مفعول maf‘ūl object (gram.); مفعول به
do.; -- (pl. مفاعيل mafā‘īl2) effect,
impression, impact; effectiveness, validity
│ اسم المفعول ism al-m. nomen patientis,
passive participle (gram.); سرى مفعوله sarā
maf‘ūluhū to be or become effective, be
valid ( على for); ساري المفعول sārī l-m. valid
(e.g., an identity card); مفعول رجعي (raj‘ī)
retroactive force, retroactivity
منفعل munfa‘il excited, agitated, upset;
irritable
مفتعل mufta‘al artificial, fabricated,
forged, falsified, false, spurious 720
فعم IV to cram, jam, pack, fill to overflowing,
fill up ( ب ھ s.th. with)
مفعم muf‘am brimful, chock-full, filled
to capacity or overflowing, replete,
overfull, filled entirely, crammed,
jampacked ( ب with)
افعى af‘an f., pl. افاع afā‘in adder, viper, asp
افعوان uf‘uwān adder, viper, asp
فغرة fugra a u (fagr) to open ( ھ the mouth)
wide, gape VII to open wide, be agape
(mouth)
فغرة fugra pl. فغر fugar mouth of a
valley
فغفوري fagfūrī fine porcelain
فاغية fāgiya henna blossom
فقأ faqa’a a ( فق faq’) to knock out, gouge out
ھ) an eye); to lance, open ( ھ an abscess,
and the like) │ فقأ عينيه (‘ainahū) to deal
s.o. (an opponent, an enemy) a heavy
blow, ruin s.o. V to burst, explode, pop
فقحة faqḥa pl. فقاح fiqāḥ anus, anal orifice
فقد faqada i (faqd, فقدان fiqdān, fuqdān) to fail
to find ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to lose ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to have lost, miss ( ھ , s.o., s.th.); not
to have ( ھ s.th.), be bereaved ( ه of s.o.), be
deprived, bereft, destitute ( ھ of s.th.); to
mislay, have mislaid ( ھ s.th.); to miss ( ھ
an opportunity, and the like) │ فقد صوابه
(ṣawābahū) to go out of one’s mind IV to
cause ( ه s.o.) to lose or miss or forfeit ( ھs.
th.); to bereave, deprive, dispossess, rob
ھ ه) s.o. of s.th.) V to seek ( ھ s.th.), look,
search ( ھ for s.th.); to examine, study,
survey, inspect, check, investigate ( ھ
s.th.); to visit ( ھ s.th.), review, inspect ( ھ
troops, and the like) VIII = V; to miss (, ھ
ه s.o., s.th.) X to miss ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
فقد faqd loss; bereavement
فقيد faqīd lost, missing; dead, deceased;
deceased person │ فقيد العلم f. al-‘ilm one
whose death is deplored by science; الفقيد
الراحل the deceased
فقد fiqdān, fuqdān loss; bereavement │
فقدان الصواب f. aṣ-ṣawāb folly, madness;
فقدان الذاكرة loss of memory, amnesia
تفقد tafaqqud pl. -āt examination, study,
survey, inspection, check, investigation;
review, inspection (e.g., of troops); visit
افتقاد iftiqā examination, study, survey,
inspection, check, investigation; review,
inspection (e.g., of troops); visit
فاقد fāqid devoid, destitute, bereft,
deprived (of s.th.; with foll. genitive),
bereaved (of s.o.; with foll. genitive);
-less, un-, in-; loser │ فاقد الشعور
unconscious; insensible, senseless; فاقد
الضمير unconscionable, unscrupulous,
unhesitating; فاقدو التھذيب people without
education, unmannered people
مفقود mafqūd lost, missing, nonexistent,
absent, lacking, wanting; missing person
متفقد mutafaqqid controller, inspector
فقر faqara u i (faqr) to pierce, bore, perforate (
ھ s.th.); -- faqura u ( فقارة faqāra) to be or
become poor, needy II to pierce, bore,
perforate ( ھ s.th.) IV to make poor,
impoverish ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), reduce ( ه s.o.)
to poverty; to put ( ه s.o.) in need ( الى of
s.th.) VIII to become poor; to need ( الى
s.o., s.th.), lack, require ( الى s.th.), be in
need, be in want ( الى of s.o., of s.th.)
فقر faqr poverty; need, lack, want
فقرة fiqra pl. fiqrāt, fiqarāt, فقر fiqar
vertebra; section, paragraph, passage,
article
فقري fiqrā spinal, vertebral │ السلسلة
الفقرية (silsila) or العمود الفقري (‘amūd) spine,
vertebral column; حيوانات فقرية (ḥayawānāt)
vertebrates 722
فقار faqār (coll.; n. un. ة) vertebra;
faqār spine, vertebral column
فقير faqīr spinal, vertebral │ السلسلة
الفقارية (silsila) spine, vertebral column
فقير faqīr pl. فقراء fuqarā’2 poor,
poverty-stricken; poor man, pauper;
mendicant dervish, Sufi mendicant
افتقار iftiqār need, requirement, want,
lack ( الى of)
فقوس faqqūs a kind of large cucumber (= (فقوص
مفقس mifqas pl. مفاقس mafāqis2 incubator
فقش faqaāa i (faqš) to break, crush ( ھ s.th.)
فقش faqš: لوز فقش (lauz) thin-shelled
almonds
فقص II to hatch, incubate ( ھ an egg; of a bird)
فقوص faqūṣ (coll.; n. un. ة) a kind of
large cucumber
تفقيص tafqīṣ hatching, incubation │ آلة
لتفقيص البيض (t. il-baiḍ) or آلة التفقيص
incubator
فقط II: فقط الحساب faqqaṭa l-ḥisāba to
write the word فقط faqaṭ “only” after the
total on an invoice so as to prevent
fraudulent additions; to spell out the
figures of an invoice
فقط faqaṭ only, no more (postpositive);
altogether, total (after figures)
فقع faqa‘a a to burst, pop, explode II to crack,
snap, pop VII = faqa‘a
فقاعة fuqqā‘a pl. فقاقيع faqāqī‘2 bubble
فاقع fāqi‘ bright yellow; bright, intense,
brilliant, vivid (color)
فاقعة fāqi‘a pl. فواقع fawāqi‘2 blister,
vesicle; pustule
فقم faqima a (faqam, faqm, فقوم fuqūm), faquma
u ( فقامة faqāma) and VI to be or become
grave, serious, critical, dangerous,
increase dangerously, become aggravated,
reach alarming proportions, come to a
head
فقم fuqqam, fuqm (coll.; n. un. ة) seal
(zool.)
تفاقم tafāqum aggravation, increasing
gravity
فقنس faqnas phoenix
فقه faqiha a (fiqh) to understand, comprehend (
ھ s.th.); -- faqiha a (fiqh) and faquha u (
فقاھة faqāha) to have knowledge, esp.,
have legal knowledge II to teach ( ه s.o.),
instruct ( في ه s.o. in) IV to teach ( ھ ه s.o.
s.th.), instruct ( ھ ه s.o. in s.th.) V to
understand, comprehend ( ھ s.th.); to study
the fiqh (q.v.); to apply o.s. to the
acquisition of knowledge ( في in), study ( في
s.th.), devote one’s studies to ( في ), work at
or on s.th. ( في ); to gain information, get a
clear picture, obtain a clear idea
فقه fiqh understanding, comprehension;
knowledge; الفقه jurisprudence in Islam,
fiqh │ فقه اللغة f. al-luga (indigenous,
Arabic) philology
فقھي fiqhī juristic(al); relating to
jurisprudence in Islam
فقيه faqīh pl. فقھاء fuqahā’2 legist,
jurisprudent (and theologian), expert of
fiqh (q.v.); -- (popular usage; eg.,
pronounced fiqī) reciter of the Koran;
elementary school teacher
فك fakka (1st pers. perf. fakaktu) u (fakk)
to separate, disjoin, disconnect, sever,
sunder ( ھ s.th.); to break (open) ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., a seal); to open ( ھ s.th., e.g., the
hand); to dislocate, disjoint ( ھ s.th., e.g., a
bone); to take apart, disassemble,
dismount, take to pieces, disintegrate,
break up, decompose, dismember,
fragmentize ( ھ s.th.); to dismantle, tear
723 down ( ھ s.th.); to untie. unbind,
unfasten, undo ( ھ s.th.); to detach,
disengage, take off ( من ھ s.th. from); to
unbutton ( ھ s.th.); to unscrew ( ھ s.th.); to
lift, raise ( الحجز al-ḥajza the confiscation,
عن of s.th.); to solve ( ھ s.th., e.g., a
problem); (eg.) to change ( ھ money); --
fakka (1st pers. perf. fakaktu) u (fakk, فكاكز
fikāk, fakāk) to ransom, redeem, buy off,
liberate, emancipate, release, set free ( ه
s.o.); -- fakkka u (fakk, فكوك fukūk) to
redeem ( ھ s.th., e.g., a pledge) II to
loosen, unfasten ( ھ s.th.); to take to
pieces, take apart, disassemble, dismount (
ھ s.th.); to disrupt, shatter, fragmentize ( ھ
s.th.) V to be taken apart, be
disassembled, be dismounted; to be
disrupted, be shattered, be fragmentized;
to break apart (e.g., a ship); to split,
fissure, fission, break up, dissolve,
disintegrate, come apart VII to be
separated, be disjoined, be disconnected,
be loosened, be unfastened, be undone, be
untied, be unbound, be unbuttoned, be
unscrewed; to separate o.s., detach o.s.
disengage o.s. ( من from), rid o.s. ( من of) │
لم ينفك (with foll. imperf. or predicative
aco.) not to atop doing, keep doing VIII to
redeem ( ھ s.th., e.g., a pledge); to
dissolve, break up, separate, disintegrate,
destroy ( ھ s.th.); to snatch away ( من ھ
s.th. from s.o.)
فك fakk redemption (of a pledge); (pl.
فكوك fukūk) jawbone, jaw │ الفك الأسفل the
lower jaw, mandible; الفك الأعلى (a‘lā) the
upper jaw, maxilla
فكة fakka small change, coins
فكاك fikāk, fakāk disengagement;
redemption, liberation, emancipation,
release; ransom
مفك mifakk pl. -āt screw driver
تفكيك tafkīk fragmentation,
dismemberment, decomposition │ O تفكيك
الذرة t. ad-darra nuclear fission
تفكك tafakkuk fragmentation, breakup,
dissolution, disruption, rupture, disunion,
split; disintegration, decomposition
انفكاك infikāk disengagement
افتكاك iftikāk redemption (of a pledge)
مفكوك mafkūk loose
مفكك mufakkak disconnected, disjointed,
incoherent (words, phrases)
فكر fakara u i (fakr) to reflect, meditate,
cogitate, ponder, muse, speculate ( في on),
revolve in one’s mind, think over,
contemplate, consider ( في s.th.); to think (
في of, also ب) II = I; to remind ( في or ھ ه
s.o. of) IV = I; V to reflect, meditate,
cogitate, ponder, muse, speculate ( في on),
revolve in one’s mind, think, over,
contemplate, consider ( في s.th.); to think (
في of) VIII = V; to remember, recall,
recollect ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.)
فكر fikr pl. افكار afkār thinking,
cogitation, reflection, meditation,
speculation, contemplation, consideration;
thought, ideas, notion, concept; opinion,
view │ شارد الفكر absent-minded,
distracted; مشوش الفكر mušawwaš al-f.
confused, bewildered, perplexed,
dismayed, embarrassed
فكرة fikra pl. فكر fikar thought, idea,
notion, concept; qualm, scruple, demur,
hesitation │ صاحب الفكرة (father to the
thought =) the originator, author; على فكرة
(eg.) incidentally …, by the way ...,
speaking of ..., apropos (of) ...
فكرى fikrī ideational, ideative,
speculative, mental; intellectual
فكير fakīr pensive, meditative,
cogitative, thoughtful
تفكير tafkīr thinking, cogitation,
meditation, reflection; speculation,
contemplation, consideration; thought 724
تفكر tafakkur thinking, cogitation,
meditation, reflection; speculation,
contemplation, consideration
مفكر mufakkir thinking, reflecting,
meditating, pondering, musing; pensive,
meditative, cogitative; thinker
مفكرة mufakkira notebook │ مفكرة يومية
(yaumīya) diary, journal
مفكرات mufakarāt thoughts,
considerations
فكش fakaša u to sprain VII to be
sprained
فكه fakiha a (fakah, فكاھة fakāha) to be
or become gay, merry, cheerful, sportive,
jocular, humorous II to amuse ( ه s.o.) with
jokes III to joke, jest, make fun ( ه with),
banter ( ه s.o.) V to amuse o.s., have fun ( ب
with), be amused ( ب by); to joke, make
fun
فكه fakih gay, merry, gleeful, jolly,
cheerful, sportive, fun-loving, jocular,
humorous; amusing (thing)
فكاھة fukāha joking, jesting, funmaking;
humor
فكاھي fukāhī humorous, humoristic;
humorist
افكوھة ufkūha joking, jesting, funmaking;
humor; pl. افاكيه afākīh2 jokes,
jests, pranks, antics
تفكھة tafkiha amusement, exhilaration,
delectation
مفاكھة mufākaha bantering talk, joking,
kidding
تفكه tafakkuh delight, enjoyment,
amusement, diversion; humorous talk,
joking, banter
فاكه fākih gay, merry, gleeful, jolly,
funny; humorous
فاكه fākiha (coll.) pl. فواكه fawākih2
fruit(s)
فاكھاني fākihānī fruit seller, fruit dealer
فل 2 falla u (fall) to dent, notch, blunt ( ھ
s.th., e.g., a sword); to break ( ھ s.th.); --
falla to flee, run away │ فل غربه
(garbahū), فل من حدته (ḥiddatihī) and فل
حديده to weaken s.o.; to dampen, subdue
s.o.; فل من شباه (šabāhu) to weaken s.o. II to
dent, notch, blunt ( ھ s.th., e.g., a sword)
فل fall pl. فلول fulūl dent, notch, jag; --
fall (for sg. and pl.) pl. فلول fulūl, افلال
aflāl, فلال fullāl defeated, vanquished;
scattered remnants of an army
مفلول maflūl dented, jagged, notched,
blunt
فل 2 fill, full (eg.) Arabian jasmine (Jasminum
sambac L.; bot.)
فل 3 fall, fill cork
فلة 4 villa pl. -āt villa, country house
فلامنكى see فلمنكي
فلت falata i (falt) to escape ( من s.o., s.th.;
from), slip away, get away ( من from s.o.,
from s.th.); to he freed, he set free, be
released, be liberated, he set at liberty; to
let ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) escape or slip away or
get away, let loose, free, release, liberate,
set free, set at liberty ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) IV =
I; V to escape ( من s.o., s.th.; from), slip
away, get away ( من from s.o., from s.th.);
to free o.s., extricate o.s. ( من from); to be
freed, be set free, be released, be liberated,
be set at liberty VII to escape ( من s.o.,
s.th.; from), slip away, get away ( من from
s.o., from s.th.); to free o.s., extricate o.s. (
من from); to he finished ( من with); to be
freed, he set free, he released, he liberated,
he set at liberty
فلت falat escape
فلتة falta pl. falatāt unexpected event,
unexpected, turn; extravagance; slip,
oversight, error. lapse; faltatan suddenly,
unexpectedly 725
فلاتي falātī pl. فلاتية falātīya (eg.)
licentious, wanton, dissolute, debauched;
debauchee, libertine, roué, rake; good-fornothing,
ne’er-do-well
افلات aflāt escape
انفلات infilāt escape
فالت fālit escaped, free, at liberty, at
large; escapee; (pl. فلتاء fu1atā’2)
licentious, wanton, dissolute, debauched;
debauchee, libertine, roué, rake; good-fornothing,
ne’er-do-well
فلج 1 falaja u i (falj) to split, cleave ( ھ s.th.);
pass. fulija to be semiparalyzed II to split,
cleave ( ھ s.th.) VII to be semiparalyzed
فلج falj pl. فلوج fulūj crack, split, crevice,
fissure, cleft, rift
فالج fālij semiparalysis, hemiplegia
مفلوج maflūj semiparalyzed, hemiplegic
فيلج 2 pl. فيالج look up alphabetically
□ فلجان filjān = فنجان finjān
فلح falaḥa a (falḥ) to split, cleave ( ھ s.th.); to
plow, till, cultivate ( الأرض al-arḍa the
land) │ ان الحديد بالحديد يفلح (yuflaḥu) lit.:
iron is cleft with iron, i.e., approx.:
rudeness must be met with rudeness IV
and X to thrive, prosper, become happy;
to have luck or success, be lucky, be
successful في in, with)
فلاح falāḥ thriving, prosperity;
salvation; welfare; success
فلاحة filāḥa cultivation, tillage;
agriculture, farming, husbandry
فلاح fallāḥ pl. -ūn, فلاحة fallāḥa tiller of
the soil, husbandman; peasant, farmer,
fellah
فلاحة fallāḥa pl. -āt peasant woman;
peasant girl
فلاحي fallāḥī peasant’s, farmer’s,
farming, country, rural, rustic, agricultural
فالح fāliḥ lucky, fortunate, successful
مفلح mufliḥ lucky, fortunate, successful;
one who prospers, one who is well off
فلذة 1 filda pl. filadāt, فلذ filad, افلاذ aflād a piece
(of meat) │ فلذة كبذه f. kabidihī his own
blood, his own child; افلاذ الأرض a. al-ard
the hidden treasures of the earth
فولاذ 2 and فولاذي look up alphabetically
فلور look up alphabetically
فلز filizz, filazz pl. -āt (nonprecious) metal
فلس II to declare ( ه s.o.) bankrupt or insolvent
IV to be or become bankrupt or insolvent,
to fail; to be ruined
فلس fals (colloq. pronounced fils) pl.
فلوس fulūs fels, a small coin, in Iraq and
Jordan = 1/1000 of a dinar; pl. فلوس (eg.)
money; scales (of a fish)
تفليس taflīs (n. vic. ة) declaration of
bankruptcy; (pl. تفاليس tafālīs2) bankruptcy,
insolvency, failure │ مأمور التفليسة receiver
(in bankruptcy; Eg.)
افلاس iflās bankruptcy, insolvency,
failure
مفلس muflis pl. مفاليس mafālīs2 bankrupt,
insolvent
فلسطين filāsṭīn2 Palestine
فلسطيني filasṭīnī Palestinian; (pl. -ūn) a
Palestinian
فلسف falsafa to philosophize II tafalsafa do.; to
pretend to be a philosopher
فلسف falsafa philosophy
فلسفي fallafī philosophic(al)
فيلسوف failasūf pl. فلاسفة falāsifa
philosopher
مفلسف mufalsif pl. -ūn philosopher
متفلسف mutafalsif philosophaster,
philosophist 726
ڤلط volṭ pl. اڤلاط avlāṭ volt (el.)
فلطح falṭaḥa to make broad, broaden, flatten( ھ
s.th.)
فلطاح filtāḥ broad, flattened, flat
مفلطح mufalṭiḥ broad, flattened, flat
فلع fala‘a a (fal‘) to split, cleave, rend, tear
asunder ( ھ s.th.) II do.
فلع fal‘, fil‘ pl. فلوع fulū‘ crack, split,
crevice, fissure, cleft, rift
فلفل falfala to pepper ( ھ s.th.)
فلفل fulful, filfil (coll.; n. un. ة) pepper;
n. un. فلفلة peppercorn │ فلفل احضر (ahḍar)
green peppers; دارفلفل dārafilfil (eg.) a
variety of pepper (Piper Chaba Hout.;
bot.)
فلفلي fulfulī, filfilī pepperlike, peppery,
pepperish
مفلفل mufalfal peppered
فلق falaqa i (falq) to split, cleave, rive, sunder,
tear asunder ( ھ s.th.); to cause ( ھ dawn)
to break, dispel the shadows of night (of
God) II to split, cleave, rive, sunder, tear
asunder ( ھ s.th.) V to be split, be cleft, be
torn apart; to split, cleave, crack, fissure,
be or become cracked, be full of cracks or
fissures VII = V; to burst; to break
(dawn); (eg.) infaliq go hang yourself! go
to hell!
فلق falq pl. فلوق faq crack, split, crevice,
fissure, cleft, rift
فلق falaq daybreak, dawn
فلقة filqa pl. فلق filaq one half (of a split
thing)
فلقة falaqa a device for holding the legs
of the delinquent during the bastinado
فلاق fallāq pl. ة bandit, highwayman,
highway robber
فليق failaq pl. فيالق fayāliq2 a large
military unit; army corps; corps
فلك 1 II to have round breasts (girl); (syr.) to
predict the future, prophecy
فلك falak pl. افلاك aflāk celestial sphere;
celestial body, star; circuit, orbit (of
celestial bodies) │ علم الفلك ‘ilm al-f.
astronomy; astrology
فلك fulk (m. and f.) ship, (also coll.)
ships; (Noah’s) Ark
فلكي falakī astronomic(al); astrologic(al)
(pl. -un, فلكية falakīya) astronomer,
astrologer │ عالم الفلك do.
مفلوك maflūk ill-starred, unlucky,
unfortunate
مفلك mufallik girl with round breasts
فلوكة 2 falūka pl. فلائك falā’ik2 sloop, felucca;
boat
فلائكي falā’ikī ( فلايكي ) boatman
فلكن falkana to vulcanize ( ھ s.th.)
فلم film pl. افلام aflām film; motion picture │ فلم
مجسم (mujassam) 3 D film; فلم ملون
(mulawwan) color film; فلم ناطق sound film
فلمندي falamandī Flemish; Fleming
فلمنكي falamankī Dutch, Hollandish,
Netherlander
فلان 1 fulān, f. فلانة fulāna2 (substituting for an
unnamed or unspecified person or thing)
so-and-so
فلاني fulānī adjective of the above │ في
الساعة الفلانية at such and such an hour
فلين 2 look up alphabetically
فلندرة falandra Flanders
فلنكة falanka pl. -āt (railroad) tie, sleeper (eg.)
فلو filw pl. افلاء aflā’; فلو faluw, fuluw pl. افلاء
aflā, فلاوى falāwā colt, foal 727
فلا falan (coll.; n. un. فلاة falāh) pl. فلوات
falawāt, افلاء aflā’ waterless desert; open
country; open space
المفالي al-mafālī the pastures, the
grazing grounds
فلور filūr fluorine (chem.)
O مفلور mufalwir fluorescent
فلى 1 falā i (faly) to delouse, search for lice ( ھ
s.th.); to examine, scrutinize, investigate (
ھ s.th.) II to delouse, search for lice, rid of
lice ( ھ s.th.) V to louse o.s.
فالية fāliya spotted dung beetle;
touchhole (of old-time firearms)
فليا 2 fulayyā = فلية (see below)
الفليبين al-filībīn the Philippine Islands
فلين fallīn and فلينة fallīna cork
فلية , فليه fulayya (eg.) pennyroyal (Mentha
pulegium L.; bot.)
فليون falyūn godchild (Chr.)
فم fam (construct state also فو fū) pl. افواه afwāh;
(eg.) fumm pl. افمام afmām mouth; muzzle;
orifice, aperture, hole, vent; mouth,
embouchure (of a river), head (of a canal,
etc.); mouthpiece (esp., of a cigarette, of a
pipe, etc.); cigarette holder │ فم الحوت fam
al-ḥūt star α in the constellation Piecis
Australis, Fomalhaut; آلات الفم wind
instruments
فن II to diversify, vary, variegate ( ھ s.th.),
bring variety or diversity ( ھ into s.th.); to
mix, mingle, jumble ( ھ s.th.) V to be or
become manifold, multifarious, varied,
variegated, diverse, many-sided, versatile;
to use different kinds; to be a specialist, an
expert, a master ( في in a field), master ( في
s.th.) VIII = V
فن fann pl. فنون funūn, افنان afnān, افانين
afānīn2 kind, specimen, variety; pl. افانين
Various sides (of s.th.), diversity │ افانين
من all kinds of, sundry, various; الجنون فنون
(junūn) insanity has many varieties,
manifests itself in many ways; -- (pl. فنون
funūn) scientific discipline, field of work,
special field, specialty; art │ الفن الحربي
(ḥarbī) art of war, strategy; الفنون الجميلة or
الفنون الرفيعة or O الفنون المستظرفة
(mustaẓrafa) the fine arts; فن المكتبات f. almaktabāt
library science; الفن الصحفي
(ṣuḥfī) science of journalism; journalism
فني fannī specialist(ic); expert,
professional; technical; artistic(al);
tactical, strategic(al); technician; artist
فنية fannīya artistry
فنن fanan pl. افنان afnān branch, twig (of
a tree), of a shrub)
فنان fannān pl. -ūn artist │ O عامل فنان
pl. عمال فنانون (‘umm`al) artistic
handicraftsman, commercial artist
فنانة fannāna woman artist
افنون ufnūn pl. افانين afānīn2 branch, twig
(of a tree)
تفنن tafannun diversity, variety,
multiplicity, multifariousness; manysidedness,
versatility ( في in); varied
activity, activity in various fields;
mastery; skillful, workmanlike or chic
manner
افتنان iftinān diversity, variety,
multiplicity, multifariousness; manysidedness,
versatility ( في in); varied
activity, activity in various fields; mastery
متفنن mutafannin many-sided, versatile
مفتن muftann masterful, expert,
mastering one’s field
فنار fanār pl. -āt lighthouse
فنجال finjāl pl. فناجيل fanājīl فنجان = 2
فنجان finjān and فنجانة finjāna pl. فناجين
fanājīn2 cup; coffee cup │ جعل زوبعة في
فنجان ٧٢٨ (zauba‘alan) to cause a tempest
in a teapot
فنجر fanjara: فنجر عينيه (‘ainaihi) to stare, glare
في) at s.o., at s.th.)
فنخ fanaka a to squeeze ( ھ s.th.); to invalidate,
nullify, void ( ھ s.th.); to break ( ھ a
contract, an agreement)
فند II to call ( ه s.o.) a liar, prove ( ه s.o.) wrong,
disprove, confute, refute, rebut ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to classify, specify ( ھ s.th., e.g., the
items of an invoice); to detail,
particularize, itemize ( ھ s.th.) IV to prove
ه) s.o.) wrong; to disprove, confute, refute,
rebut ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
فندق funduq pl. فنادق fanādiq2 hotel, inn
فنار pl. -āt look up alphabetically
فانوس pl. فوانيس look up alphabetically
فنط II to detail, particularize, itemize, enumrate
item by item ( ھ s.th.)
فنطاس finṭās pl. فناطيس fanāṭīs2 water tank,
reservoir, cistern; large container
فنطيس finṭīs pl. فناطيس fanāṭīs2 broadnosed
فنطيسة finṭīsa pl. فناطيس fanāṭīs2 snout
(of swine)
فنغراف funugrāf pl. –āt phonograph
فنق V to live in ease and affluence
فنك 1 fanak fennec (zool.)
فنيك 2 look up alphabetically
فنلندا finlandā Finland
فنلندي finlandī Finnish; Finn
فني faniya a ( فناء fanā’) to pass away, perish,
cease to exist, come to nought; to come to
an end, cease, wane, dwindle, evanesce,
vanish; to be extinguished, become
extinct; to be exhausted, be consumed, be
spent; to undergo obliteration of the self;
to become totally absorbed ( في by) │ لا
يفنى imperishable, inexhaustible IV to
annihilate, bring to nought, ruin, destroy (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to exhaust, consume, wear
out, spend ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to cause ( ھ
s.th.) to become absorbed or consumed ( ھ
by) VI to annihilate each other; to be
consumed ( في by), lose o.s. ( في in),
identify o.s. completely ( في with); to
dedicate o.s. with heart and soul, give o.s.
over wholeheartedly ( في to some activity)
فناء fanā’ passing away, cessation of
being; perdition, ruin, destruction,
annihilation; evanescence, vanishing,
termination, extinction; exhaustion;
nonbeing, nonexistence, nonentity;
extinction of individual consciousness,
recedence of the ego, obliteration of the
self (myst.)
فناء finā’ pl. افنية afniya courtyard; open
space in front or at either side of a house;
open hall │ رحابة فناء raḥābat al-f.
hospitable reception, generous
entertainment; سار يخطو في فناء الغرفة (yakṭū,
f. il-gurfa) he walked about the room
افناء ifnā’ annihilation, ruination, ruin,
destruction
تفان tafānin mutual annihilation; selfdenial,
self-sacrifice (in an activity)
فان fānin evanescent, transitory,
transient, ephemeral, vain; exhausted; far
advanced in years, very old
فنيقي finīqī Phoenician
فنيقية finīqīya2 and فنيقيا finīqiyā
Phoenicia
فنيك (Fr. phénique) finīk phenol, carbolic acid,
also حامض الفنيك
فھاھة fahāha weakness, impotence
فھد fahd pl. فھود fuhūd, افھد afhud lynx (also the
term for cheetah and panther) 729
فھرس fahrasa ( فھرسة fahrasa) to compile an
index ( كتابا for a book), to index ( كتابا a
book)
فھرس fihris and فھرست fihrist pl. فھارس
fahāris2 table of contents, index;
catalogue; list
فھم fahima a (fahm, faham) to understand,
comprehend, realize ( ھ s.th.); to note ( ھ
s.th.), take note, take cognizance ( ھ of
s.th.); to hear, learn ( ھ من of s.th. from),
be informed ( ھ من of s.th. by); فھم عنه to
understand s.o., understand what s.o. says
or means │ يفھم ان (yufhamu) it is reported,
it is said that …, we understand that ... II
to make ( ه s.o.) understand or see ( ھ s.th.),
instruct ( ه ھ s.o. in s.th.), give ( ھ ه s.o.
s.th.) to understand IV = II; V to try to
understand or comprehend ( ھ s.th.); to
understand gradually, come to understand
ھ) s.th.); to penetrate, fathom ( ھ s.th.); to
understand, comprehend ( ھ s.th.) VI to
understand one another; to communicate
with each other; to reach an
understanding, come to an agreement,
come to terms ( مع with, على in, about); to
be comprehended, be understood VIII to
understand, comprehend ( ھ s.th.) X to
inquire ( عن or s. of s.o. about s.th.), ask (
عن or ھ s.o. s.th. or about s.th.)
فھم fahm pl. افھام afhām understanding;
comprehension. grasp; perceptive faculty,
perceptivity; brains, intellect;
discernment, acumen, penetration, insight,
intelligence │ سوء الفھم sū’ al-f.
misapprehension, misunderstanding
فھم fahim quick-witted, of acute
discernment
فھيم fahīm pl. فھماء fuhamā’2 discerning,
judicious, sensible, intelligent
فھامة fahāma very understanding,
extremely sympathetic
تفھيم tafhīm instruction, orientation
تفھم tafahhum gradual understanding;
understanding, comprehension, grasping,
grasp
تفاھم tafāhum mutual understanding,
mutual agreement, concurrence, accord;
understanding ( مع with, على on, about);
agreement, arrangement ( مع with) │
سوء التفاھم sū’ at-t. (mutual)
misunderstanding, discord, disharmony,
dissension
استفھام istifhām inquiry ( عن about; also
على ); question │ علامة الاستفھام ‘alāmat alist.
question mark
استفھامي istifhāmī interrogative (gram.)
مفھوم mafhūm understood;
comprehensible, intelligible,
understandable; known; sense, meaning,
signification; (pl. مفاھيم mafāhīm2) notion,
concept │ بالمفھوم in the literal sense,
literally; unequivocally, unambiguously,
clearly; المفھوم ان it is said, it is reported
that …
فو fū see فم fam
فوال (Fr.) fuwāl voile (dress material)
فوة fuwa (eg.) madder (Rubia tinctorum L.;
bot.)
فات (فوت ) fāta u (faut, فوات fawāt) to pass away,
vanish; to be over, be past; to go by s.o. (
ه), pass s.o. ( ه); to escape, elude ( ه s.o.),
slip away; to abandon, give up, leave
behind, relinquish ( ھ s.th.); to anticipate,
forestall ( ه s.o.); to exceed, surpass ( ب ه
s.o. by) │ فات الوقت (waqt) it is (too) late;
فاته ان it escaped him that ...; he omitted,
neglected, failed, or forgot to ...; he failed
to see that ..., he overlooked the fact that
لم يفته ان ;… (yafuthu) he did not fail to ...,
he did not neglect to ...; فاتته الفرصة fātatu
l-furṣatu he missed the opportunity; فاته
القطار he missed the train II to make ( ھ
s.th.) escape ( على s.o.); to cause ( على s.o.)
to miss ( ھ s.th.); to let ( ه s.o.) pass; to
alienate, sell ( ھ s.th., tun.) IV to make 730
ھ) s.th.) escape ( ه s.o.); to make ( ه s.o.)
miss ( ھ s.th.) VI to differ, be different, be
dissimilar VIII to offend against s.th. (
على ), act contrary to ( على ), belie, betray (
على s.th.)
فوت faut escape; -- (pl. افوات afwāt)
distance, interval; difference
فوات fawāt passing, lapse │ فوات الأجل f.
al-ajal the passing of the appointed time,
expiration of the deadline; الفوات بالمدة (bil-
mudda) superannuation; بعد فوات الوقت
الأوان ) ) (f. il-waqt, il-awān) too late; قبل
فوات الوقت (الأوان ) before it is too late
فويت fuwait (m. and f.) one following
his, or her, own opinion only, acting in
his, or her, way only
تفويت tafwīt pl. -āt alienation, transfer,
sale (tun.)
تفاوت tafāwut difference, dissimilarity,
disparity, contract; disharmony
افتيات iftiyāt treason ( على to), betrayal (
على of), offense ( على against)
فائت fā’it past, elapsed (time); passing;
transitory, transient; passerby
متفاوت mutafāwit different
فوتوغرافيا (It. fotografia) fotūgrāJfiyā
photography
فوتوغرافي fotūgrāfiya photographic;
photographer
فوتيه (Fr. fauteuil) fūtēh pl. -āt armchair,
fauteuil
فوج fauj pl. افواج afwāj group, crowd, troop,
band; detachment; party; shift (in a mine);
battalion (Ir. till 1922; Syr., Leb.);
regiment (Ir. since افواجا ;( 1922 afwājan in
droves, in crowds │ تبدل الفوج tabaddul alf.
change of shift
فاح (فوح ) fāḥa u (fauḥ, فوحان fawaḥān) to
diffuse an aroma, exhale a pleasant odor,
be fragrant; to spread, diffuse, emanate
(fragrance) │ فاح منه شذا القداسة (šāda lqadāja)
he was reputed to be a holy man
فوحة fauḥa fragrant emanation, breath
of fragrance
فواح fawwāḥ exhaling, diffusing
(fragrance)
فود faud pl. افوھد afwād temple; hair around the
temples
فار (فور 1 ) fāra u (faur, فور fawarān) to boil,
simmer, bubble; to boil over (also fig.); to
effervesce, fizz; to flare up, burst into
passion; to gush forth, well forth, gush up,
shoot up (water from the ground) II to
make ( ھ s.th.) boil (also fig., e.g., the
blood); to excite, stir up ( ھ s.th.) IV to
make ( ھ s.th.) boil
فور faur boiling, simmering, bubbling,
ebullition, etc. (see I); فورا fauran at once,
right away, instantly, forthwith, on the
spot, without delay, promptly,
immediately, directly; فور faura (prep.)
immediately after │ من الفور or من فوره (من
فورھا etc.) or على الفور at once, right away,
instantly, forthwith, on the spot, without
delay, promptly, immediately, directly
فورى faurī prompt, instantaneous,
instant, immediate, direct
فورة faura flare-up, outburst, tantrum
فوار fawwār boiling up, ebullient;
effervescent, fizzing; bubbling (spring,
etc.); foaming, frothy; hot-headed,
irascible
فوارة fawwāra spring, fountain, jet
d’eau
فوران fawarān boiling, simmering,
bubbling, ebullition; flare· up, outburst
فائرة fā’ira uproar, riot; commotion,
agitation, excitement 731
فار 2 pl. فيران and فارة look up alphabetically
فورشة = فورشة furša
فورشينة (It. forcina) furšīna hairpin
فوريقة = فاوريقة look up alphabetically
فاز (فوز ) fāza u (fauz) to be successful,
be victorious, triumph; to attain, achieve,
accomplish, obtain, gain, win ( ب s.th.); to
defeat, beat ( على an opponent, ب with;
sports, etc.); to escape ( من s.th.) │ ما فاز
بطائل (bi-ṭā’ilin) to fail, be unsuccessful,
accomplish nothing II to cross the desert,
travel through or in the desert
فوز success, triumph, victory;
obtainment, attainment, achievement,
accomplishment; escape
مفازة mafāza pl. -āt, مفاوز mafāwiz2
desert
فائز fā’iz successful, victorious,
triumphant; victor, winner
فائزة fā’iza victress, winner
فاس fās = فأس fa’s
فوسفات fusfāt phosphate
فاشي and فاشية look up alphabetically
فوصفور fuṣfūr phosphorus
فوض II to entrust, consign, commit ( ھ ل or الى
to s.o. s.th.); to entrust, charge ( ھ ل or الى
s.o. with), commission s.o. ( ل or الى ) to do
s.th. ( ھ ); to authorize, empower, delegate
ل) or الى s.o.), give full power ( ل or الى to
s.o.) ill to negotiate ( ھ s.th.), treat, parley,
confer ( في on, about, ه، مع with) VI to
negotiate or treat or parley with one
another, confer ( في on, about); to negotiate
في) s.th.), treat, parley, confer ( في on,
about; مع with)
فوضى fauḍā disorder, disarray,
confusion, tohubohu, chaos; anarchy
فوضوي fauḍawī anarchic; chaotic
فوضوية fauḍawīya anarchism
تفويض tafwīḍ entrustment, commitment,
consignment, commission(ing), charging;
authorization, empowerment, delegation
of authority; authority, warrant,
authorization, mandate, mandatory power,
procuration, proxy, power of attorney │
تفويض مطلق (تام ) (muṭlaq, tāmm) general
power of attorney, unlimited authority;
وثيقة التفويض warrant of attorney
مفاوضة mufāwaḍa pl. -āt negotiation,
parley, talk, conference; partnership (Isl.
Law) │ فتح باب المفاوضات to open
negotiations
مفوض mufawwaḍ authorized agent,
deputy, proxy, mandatory; commissioner
│ وزير مفوض minister plenipotentiary
(dipl.); المفوض السامي (sāmī) the High
Commissioner (formerly in Syr.)
مفوضية mufawwaḍīya pl. -āt legation
(dipl.); commissariat │ المفوضية العليا
(‘ulyā) the High Commissariat (formerly
in Syr.); مستشار المفوضية mustašār al-m.
counselor of legation (dipl.)
فوطة fūṭa pl. فوط fuwaṯ apron. pinafore; napkin,
serviette; towel
فوعة fau‘a: فوعة الشباب fau‘at aš-šbāb prime of
youth
فوف fūf pellicle, membrane
فوفة fūfa pellicle, membrane
مفوف mufawwaf: ثوب مفوف (taub) whitestriped
garment
فاق (فوق ) fāqa u (fauq, فواق fawāq) to surpass,
excel, overtop ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), tower (، ھ
هabove); to be superior ( ه to s.o.); to
outweigh, outbalance; to transcend,
exceed ( ھ s.th.); -- to remember ( على s.th.)
│ فاق بنفسه (فووق fuwūq, فواق fuwāq) to give
up the ghost, expire, die II to direct, level (
الى ه a weapon at), aim ( الى ھ s.th. at); 732
to (a)waken, wake up, revive, restore to
consciousness ( ه s.o.); to clear, sober ( ھ
the head); to remind ( ه s.o.) IV to recover,
recuperate, convalesce ( من from), regain
health; to wake up, awake; to get up ( من
النوم min an-naum from sleep); to be
awake; to come to, regain consciousness (
من after, e.g., after a swoon, after a state of
intoxication); to awaken, arouse, stir up (
من ه s.o. from) V to be superior ( على to),
surpass, excel, overtop ( على s.o., s.th.).
tower ( على above); to do excellent work,
show outstanding skill ( ب in, with); to
pass an examination with distinction ( ل in
a course) X to recover, recuperate,
convalesce ( من from), regain health; to
wake up, awaken; to get up ( من النوم min
an-naum from sleep); to be awake; to
come to, regain consciousness ( من after,
e.g., after a swoon, after a state of
intoxication)
فوق fauqu (adv.) up, upstairs, on top,
above; fauqa (prep.) above, over; on, on
top of; beyond, more than │ فوق الحد f. al-
ḥadd boundless, unlimited, infinite,
excessive, exaggerated; فوق ذلك moreover,
besides, furthermore, in addition to that,
beyond that; فوق البنفسجي (banafsajī)
ultraviolet; فوق الطبيعة supernatural; فوق
العادة extraordinary, unusual, exceptional;
special, emergency (e.g., meeting); فوق انه
in addition to the fact that it ..., beyond its
being ...; فما فوقه and upward, and more
(than that); من فوقه min fauqihī above it;
from above it, from atop it
فوقاني fauqānī located higher or above,
higher, upper
فاقة fāqa poverty, want, neediness,
indigence
فواق fuwāq hiccup(s); gasping of a
dying person, death rattle
افاويق afāwīq2 (pl. of فيقة fīqa) milk
(gathering in the udder between two
milkings); (fig.) boons, kindness,
benefactions │ ارضعني افاويق بره arḍa‘anī
a. birrihī he showered me with kindnesses
افاقة ifāqa recovery, recuperation,
convalescence; awakening; revival,
restoration to consciousness
تفوق tafawwuq superiority;
preponderance, predominance,
ascendancy, supremacy; above-average
performance, talent │ تشجيع التفوق
promotion of young talent
فائق fā’iq superior; surpassing,
excellent, exquisite, first-rate; outstanding,
remarkable, striking; pre-eminent;
exceeding, extraordinary; going far
beyond (a restriction, etc.); awake,
waking, wakeful
مفيق mafīq awake, waking, wakeful
متفوق mutafawwiq superior; surpassing,
excellent, exquisite, first-rate, outstanding,
remarkable, striking; pre-eminent; victor
مستفيق mustafīq awake, waking, wakeful
فول fūl (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt bean(s); broad
bean(s), horse bean(s) │ فول مدمس (eg.,
mədammis) cooked broad beans with oil
(national dish in Egypt); فول سوداني
(sūdānī) peanut(s)
فوال fawwāl seller of beans
فولاذ fūlād steel
فولاذي fūlādī and فلاذي fulādī steel (adj.),
of steel, made of steel; steely, steel-like,
steel-hard
فولت volt volt (el.)
فوم fūm = ثوم tūm
فونوغراف funūgrāf pl. -āt phonograph
فاه (فوه ) fāha u (fauh) to pronounce, utter,
voice, say ( ب s.th.) V = I
افواه afwāh pl. of فم fam; -- افواه afwāh,
افاويه afāwīh aromatic, spices 733
فوة fuwa (eg.) madder (Rubia tinctorum
L.; bot.)
فوھة fūha pl. -āt, افواه afwāh, فوائه
fawā’ih2 mouth; opening, aperture, orifice,
hole, vent; muzzle; crater; abyss, gulf,
chasm; hydrant (syr.)
افوه afwah2 broad-mouthed
مفوه mufawwah eloquent
في fī (prep.) in; at; on; near, by; within, during;
among, in the company of, with; about,
on; concerning, regarding, with reference
to, with regard or respect to, as to j
dealing with, treating of, consisting in (in
book titles); for the sake of, on behalf of,
because of, for; according to; in
proportion to; (as to syntactical regimen
see under the respective verb) │ ھل لك في
... do you feel like ...? would you like
to ...? do you want to ...? خمسة في ثلاثة five
times three; خمسة امتار في عشرة five meters
by ten (width and length); كذب في كذب
(kidb) lie after lie; كلام في كلام (kalām) just
so many words, idle talk; نحن اقارب في اقارب
our social relations are those of kinsfolk;
فيما مضى fīmā maḍā or فيما مضى من الزمان
(zamān) in the past; formerly, before; فيما
يلي (yalī) and فيما بعد (ba‘du) in the
following, in what follows, below; فيما اعتقد
(a‘taqidu) as I believe; فيما بينھم among
themselves, among them; تبسم في خبث
tabassama fī kubt he smiled maliciously
فيما fīmā (conj.) while; in that, as │ فيما
اذا in case that …, if
فاء (فيأ 1 ) fā’a i ( فيء fai’) to return; to shift from
west to east (shadow) II to afford shadow,
be shady (tree) IV to give as booty ( ھ على
to s.o. s.th.); to give, afford, grant, award (
ھ على to s.o. s.th.), bestow ( ھ على upon
s.o. s.th.) V to shade o.s. ( في or ھ with
s.th.), seek shade ( في or ھ under s.th.)
فيء fai’ pl. افياء afyā’, فيوء fuyū’
(afternoon) shadow
فئة 2 see فئ
فيتامين fītāmīn pl. -āt vitamin
فيتنام viyetnām Vietnam
فيتو vītō, vētō veto (pol.) │ حق الفيتو ḥaqq al-v.
veto power (pol.)
فيتون faitūn phaeton (light four-wheeled
carriage)
افيح afyaḥ2, f. فيحاء faiḥā’2 fragrant, redolent,
aromatic, sweet-smelling; wide, vast,
extensive; الفيحاء epithet of Damascus
فياح fayyāḥ heavy-scented, strongsmelling
فيد) ) IV to benefit, help, avail ( ه s.o.), be of use,
of help, bring advantages ( ه to s.o.), be
useful, helpful, beneficial, profitable,
advantageous ( ه for s.o.); to teach ( ھ ه s.o.
s.th.); to notify, advise ( ب or ھ ه s.o. of),
acquaint ( ب or ھ ه s.o. with s.th.), inform (
ب or ھ ه s.o. of, about), let ( ه s.o.) know ( ب
or ھ about); to report ( ب or ھ s.th., also,
e.g., to the police; بان or ان that); to
acquire, gain, win ( ھ s.th.); to derive
benefit, profit, or advantage ( من from),
profit, benefit ( من by), turn ( من s.th.) to
account or advantage; (gram.) to convey a
complete, self-contained meaning X to
acquire, gain, win ( ھ s.th.); to learn, be
told, be informed ( ھ about); to derive
benefit profit, or advantage ( ب or من
from), profit, benefit ( ب or من by), turn ( ب
or من s.th.) to account or advantage; to
utilize, turn to profitable use, use ( ب or من
s.th.), make use ( ب or من of s.th.); to
gather, conclude, deduce, infer ( من from)
افيد afyad2 more useful; more profitable
افادة ifāda utility, usefulness, benefit,
advantage; (pl. -āt) notice, notification,
communication, information, message;
734 testimony, deposition (in court) │ افادة
الاستلام acknowledgment of receipt
استفادة istifāda utilization, use
فائدة fā’ida pl. فوائد fawā’id2 utility,
avail, benefit, advantage; gain, profit;
interest (on money); useful lesson, moral;
use (e.g., of a medicine)
مفيد mufīd useful, beneficial,
advantageous; favorable, profitable;
instructive
مفاد mufād contents, substance, purport,
meaning (e.g., of an article) │ اشاعة مفادھا
ان išā‘atun mufāduhā an a rumor to the
effect that ...
فيدرالي fīdirālī federalistic │ دولة فيدرالية (daula)
federal state
فيروز fairūz and فيروزج fairūzaj turquoise
فيروز vairus pl. -āt virus
فيزا ، ڤيزا (Engl.) vīzā visa
فيزياء fīziyā’ physics
فيزيائي fīziyā’ī physical
فيسيولوجيا fīsiyōlōjiyā physiology
فيش 1 (Fr. fiche) fīš pl. -āt (electric) plug (syr.)
فياش 2 fayyāš braggart, show-off, self-inflated
person
فيصل faiṣal see فصل
فاض (فيض ) fāḍa i (faiḍ, فيضان fayaḍān) to
overflow, flow over, run over; to inundate,
flood, deluge ( على s.th.); to flow, stream,
pour forth, issue, emanate; to abound,
super abound, be abundant, plentiful,
superabundant; -- (faiḍ) to spread (of
news); -- (faiḍ, فيوض fuyūḍ): فاضت روحه or
نفسه (rūḥuhū, nafsuhū) to give up the ghost
IV to pour forth; to fill ( ھ s.th.) to
overflowing; to pour, pour out, pour forth
على ھ) s.th. over), shed ( ھ s.th., esp.
tears); to be prolix, long-winded, verbose (
في in one’s speech); to abandon o.s.
without restraint ( في to s.th.); to speak or
report extensively, in detail, at great
length ( ب about), dwell ( ب on), describe in
detail ( ب على to s.o. s.th.); to pronounce
distinctly ( ب a word) X to pour forth.
spread ( على over), flood ( على s.th.); to
spread (of news); to be superabundant, be
too much; to be elaborate, complete in
detail, exhaustive, thorough
فيض faiḍ flood, inundation, deluge;
emanation; superabundance, plenty,
copiousness, abundance; (pl. فيوض fuyūḍ)
stream
فياض fayyāḍ overflowing, effusive,
exuberant; elaborate, exhaustive (speech);
munificent, bountiful, liberal, generous │
فياض الخاطر brilliant, overflowing with
ideas
فيضان fayaḍān flood, inundation, deluge
│ فيضان النبل the annual inundation of the
Nile
مفيض mafīḍ outlet, vent, drain; escape,
way out │ ليس لنا منه مفيض we cannot help
doing it, we cannot but do it; لا يجد مفيضا من
(yajidu) he must by all means ...; لا يجد
مفيضا الى الكلام he can’t find an opportunity
to speak freely
افاضة ifāḍa elaborateness, detailedness,
exhaustiveness
استفاضة istifāḍa (super)abundance,
plenty; profusion
فائض fā’iḍ abundant, copious, plentiful,
profuse, superabundant; surplus; (pl.
فوائض fawā’iḍ2) interest (on money)
مستفيض mustafīḍ elaborate, detailed,
extensive, exhaustive, thorough
□ فايظ (< فائض see above) fāyiẓ usury (eg.)
فايظجي fāyiẓgī usurer (eg.)
فيفاء faifā’2 pl. فياف fayāfin desert
فيكونت (Fr. vicomte) vikōnt and (Engl.)
vaikaunt viscount 735
فال (فيل 1 ) fāla i ( فيولة fuyūla, فيلولة failūla) to be
erroneous (view)
فيل 2 fīl pl. فيلة fiyala, فيول fuyūl, افيال afyāl
elephant; bishop (chess) │ سن الفيل sinn alf.
ivory
فيلا villā pl. فيلات villa, country house
ديدان الفيلاريا dīdān al-fīlāriyā filaria (zool.)
الفيلبين al-fīlibīn the Philippines
فيلج failaj, فيلجة failaja pl. فيالج fayālij2 cocoon
of the silkworm
فيلسوف failasūf pl. فلاسفة falāsifa philosopher
فيلق failaq pl. فيالق fayāliq2 large military unit;
army corps; corps
فيلم = فلم film film
فيلولوجيا fīlōlōjiyā philology
فيم fīma = فيما fī-mā why? wherefore?
فيما fīmā see في
فينة faina pl. -āt time, point of time, instant,
moment │ الفينة بعد الفينة (al-fainata), الفينة
بعد الأخرى al-fainata ba‘da l-ukrā, بين الفينة
والفينة ، في الفينة بعد الفينة from time to time,
now and then, once in a while, at times,
sometimes
فينان fainān having beautiful, luxuriant
hair; luxuriant, long, flowing (hair)
فينا، فيينا (It. Vienna) fiyennā, viyēnnā Vienna
فينوس fīnūs Venus
فينيسيا fīnīsiyā Venice
فينيقي fīnīqī Phoenician; (pl. -ūn) a Phoenician
فھيق II tafaihaqa to be prolix, longwinded,
circumstantial
فيھقة faihaqa prolixity, long-windedness
الفيوم al-fayyūm El Faiyūm (town in N
Egypt)
ق
ق abbreviation of دقيقة daqīqa minute
قادس qādis2 Cádiz (seaport in SW Spain)
قادوس qādūs pl. قواديس qawādīs2 water-wheel
bucket, scoop (used in irrigation; Eg.)
قازوزة (It. gasosa) gāzūza soda water (saud.-
ar.)
قاشاني qāšānī faïence; porcelain, china
قاف qāf name of the letter جبل القاف │ ق jabal
al-q. in Islamic cosmology, name of the
mountains surrounding the terrestrial
world
قاقلة 1 qāqulla cardamom (bot.)
قاقلى 2 qāqullā a variety of saltwort (Salsola
fruticos; bot.)
قاقم qāqum ermine
قالب qālab, qālib pl. قوالب qawālib2 form; mold;
cake pan; model; matrix; last, boot tree,
shoe tree │ قالب جبن (jubn) a (chunk or loaf
of) cheese; قالب سكر (sukkar) sugar loaf;
قالب صابون (ṣābūn) a cake or bar of soap;
قلبا وقالبا (qalban) with heart and soul;
inwardly and outwardly
قالوش (Fr. galoche) galōš pl. -āt galosh,
overshoe
قاموس qāmūs pl. قواميس qawāmīs2 ocean;
dictionary, lexicon
احمر قان aḥmar2 qān(in) blood-red, deep-red
قانئ qāni‘ blood-red, deep-red (= قان qānin)
قانون qānūn pl. قوانين qawānīn2 canon;
established principle, basic rule, axiom,
norm, regulation, rule, ordinance,
prescript, precept, statute; law; code; tax,
impost; (Tun.) tax on olives and dates; a
stringed musical instrument resembling
the zither, with a shallow, trapezoidal
sound box, set horizontally before the
performer │ القانون الأساسي (asāsī) basic
constitutional law; statutes; قانون التأسيس
statutes, constitution; القانون الجنائي (jinā’ī)
criminal law; penal law; قانون الأحوال
الشخصية (šakšīya) personal statute; القانون
الدستوري (dustūrī) constitutional law; القانون
الدولي (duwalī) international law; قانون
المرافعات q. al-murāfa‘āt code of procedure
(jur.; Eg.); قانون اصول المحاكمات الحقوقية
(Syr.); قانون السلك الإداري as-silk al-idārī
administrative law; قانون كيماوي (kīmāwī)
chemical formula; القانون المدني (madanī)
civil law
قانوني qanūnī canonical; legal, statutory;
lawful, legitimate, licit, accordant with
law or regulations, valid, regular; legist,
jurisprudent, jurist │ صيدلي قانوني (ṣaidalī)
certified and licensed pharmacist; غير
قانوني gair q. illegal
قانونية qānūnīya legality, lawfulness
قاورمة qāwirma (eg.) mutton or beef cut in
small pieces and braised with squash
(qar‘) or onions and tomatoes
قاوق qāwuq and قاووق qāwūq pl. قواويق
qawāwīq2 a kind of high headgear made of
felt
قاوون qāwūn melon
قايش qāyiš pl. قوايش qawāyiš leather thong,
strap, belt, girth; strop
قب 1 qabba u (qabb) to chopoff, cut off ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., the hand); to straighten up, draw o.s.
up, become erect; to rise, ascend; to stand
on end, bristle (hair)
قب qabb pl. اقب aqubb hub, nave (of a
wheel); lever, beam (of a balance)
قبة qubba pl. قباب qibāb, قبب qubab
cupola, dome; cupolaed structure, domeshaped
edifice; domed shrine, memorial
shrine, kubba (esp., of a saint) │ قبة الجرس
q. al-jaras belfry, bell tower; قبة الإسلام q.
al-islām epithet of the city of Basra
مقبب muqabbab cupolaed, domed,
spanned by a cupola or dome; convex
قب 2 qabba pl. -āt collar (of a garment)
قبج qabj, qabaj (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. قباج qibāj a
kind of partridge
قبح qabuḥa u (qubḥ, qabḥ, قباحة qabāḥa) to be
ugly, repulsive, repugnant, disgusting
(physically or morally); to be
ignominious, infamous, shameful,
disgraceful, foul, vile, base, mean II to
make ugly, repulsive, or repugnant,
disfigure ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to denounce
s.o.’s action ( عليه فعله ‘a. fi‘lahū) as ugly,
ignominious, infamous, shameful, or
disgraceful; to censure, rebuke ( عليه فعله
s.o. for his action) X to find ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.) ugly, repugnant, or repulsive, find (
ھ s.th.) ignominious, infamous, shameful,
disgraceful, foul, vile, base, or mean; to
disapprove ( ھ of s.th.), dislike ( ھ s.th.)
قبح qubḥ, qabḥ ugliness; ignominy,
infamy, shamefulness │ قبحا له shame on
him!
قبيح qabīḥ pl. قباح qibāḥ, قباحى qabāḥā,
قبحى qabḥā ugly, repulsive, repugnant,
disgusting (physically or morally);
ignominious, infamous, shameful,
disgraceful, foul, vile, base, mean;
impudent, shameless, insolent, impertinent
قبيحة qabīḥa pl. قبائح qabā’iḥ قباح , 2 qibāḥ
abomination, shameful deed, dirty trick,
low act
قباحة qabāḥa ugliness; ignominy,
infamy, shamefulness 737
اقبح aqbaḥ2 uglier; more infamous;
fouler, viler
مقابح maqābiḥ2 ugly traits, repulsive
qualities
قبار 1 qubbār, qabbār capers (bot.)
قبر 2 qabara u i (qabr, مقبر maqbar) to bury,
inter, entomb ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.)
قبر qabr pl. قبور qubūr grave, tomb,
spulcher
قبر maqbar pl. مقابر maqābir2 tomb,
burying place, burial ground; cemetery,
graveyard
مقبرة maqbura, maqbara pl. مقابر
maqābir2 tomb, burying place, burial
ground; cemetery, graveyard
مقبري maqburī, maqbarī caretaker of a
cemetery; gravedigger
قبر 3 qubbar (coll.; n. un. ة) lark (zool.)
قبرص qubruṣ2 and قبرس qubrus2 Cyprus
قبرصي qubruṣī Cyprian, Cypriote (adj.
and n.); القبارصة al-qabāriṣa the Cypriotes
قبس qabasa i (qabs) to derive, acquire, loan,
borrow, adopt, take over ( من ھ s.th. from)
VIII to take, or seek to take, fire ( من from,
also نارا من ); to acquire or seek to acquire
knowledge ( من from, also علما من ); to learn
ھ) s.th.); to loan, borrow, adopt, take over
من) or ھ عن s.th. from)
قبس qabas firebrand; live coal
قبسة qabsa firebrand
قابوس qābūs nightmare
اقتباس iqtibās learning, acquisition (of
knowledge); loaning, loan, borrowing
(fig); adoption, taking over, acceptance,
adaptation (of a literary text or passage);
quotation, citation (of another’s literary
work or ideas)
مقتبسات muqtabasāt loans, borrowings
(fig.)
قبص qabaṣa i (qabṣ) to take up with finger and
thumb ( ھ s.th.), take a pinch ( ھ of s.th.)
قبصة qabṣa, qubṣa as much as may be
taken between the finger and the thumb, a
pinch
قبض qabaḍa i (qabḍ) to seize, take, grab,
grasp, grip, clasp, clutch ( على or ب or ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.), take hold, take possession ( على
or ب or ھ، ه of); to hold ( على، ب ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to apprehend, arrest ( على s.o.); to
receive, collect ( ھ s.th., e.g., money); to
contract, constringe ( ھ s.th.); to constipate
البطن) al-baṭna the bowels); to oppress,
deject, dishearten, dispirit, depress ( ه s.o.);
pass. qubiḍa or قبضت روحه qubiḍat rūḥuhū
to die │ قبضه لله or قبض لله روحه (rūḥahū)
God made him die; قبض يده عن (yadahū) to
keep o.s. from seizing s.o. or s.th.; to be
ungenerous, be stingy toward; قبض الصدر
النفس )) (ṣadr, nafs) to oppress, deject,
dishearten, dispirit, depress II to contract,
constringe ( ھ s.th.); to give ( ھ s.th.) into
s.o.’s ( ه) possession; to pay ( ھ a price) │
قبض الصدر (النفس ) (ṣadr, nafs) to oppress,
deject, dishearten, dispirit, depress V to
contract, become contracted; to shrink,
shrivel; to be constipated (bowels) VII =
V; to be received; to shut o.s. off ( عن
from, to), close one's mind ( عن to); to be
dejected, depressed, dispirited, ill at ease,
also انقبض صدره (ṣadruhū)
قبض qabḍ gripping, grasping, seizing,
seizure, holding; taking possession,
appropriation; apprehension, arrest ( على of
s.o.); receiving, receipt (esp., of money);
contraction, constriction, constipation │
القبض والدفع (daf‘) revenues and
expenditures; القى القبض عليه (alqā l-qabḍa)
to arrest s.o.
قبضة qabḍa pl. qabaḍāt seizure; grip,
hold, clasp, grasp; handful; (Eg.) a 738
linear measure of 12.5 cm; -- (pl. قباض
qibāḍ) handle, haft, hilt │ قبضة اليد q. alyad
fist; في قبضته in s.o.’s possession, in
s.o.’s hands, in s.o.’s power; في قبضة يده
do.; وقع في قبضته to fall into s.o.’s hands
قبضة qubḍa pl. قبض qubaḍ handful
قباضة qibāḍa raising, collecting, levying
(of funds, of taxes)
قبضاى qabaḍāy pl. -āt (syr., leb.)
strong-arm (esp. one serving as bodyguard
for politicians and prominent
personalities); tough, bully
مقبض maqbiḍ, miqbaḍ pl. مقابض
maqābḍ2 handle, haft, hilt
مقبض miqbaḍ pl. مقابض maqābiḍ2
handle, knob, grip (also, e.g., of a walking
stick)
تقابض taqābuḍ (Isl. Law) a reciprocal
taking possession (of a commodity and its
monetary equivalent by buyer and seller
respectively)
انقباض inqibāḍ contraction, shriveling,
shrinking, shrinkage; constipation (of the
bowels); oppression, anguish, anxiety,
dejectedness, depression, low spirits,
gloom, also انقباض الصدر inq. aṣ-ṣadr
قابض qābiḍ constipating, costive
(med.); grievous, distressing,
embarrassing; receiver, recipient; gripper,
clamp, claw, catcher, tongs, holder
(techn.); (pl. -ūn, قباض qubbāḍ) (tax)
collector │ عضلة قابضة (‘aḍala) flexor;
قابض على الأمر (amr) ruler, potentate
مقبوض maqbūḍ: مقبوض عليه person under
arrest; (pl. -āt, مقابيض maqābīḍ2) revenue
(fin.)
منقبض mungabiḍ oppressed, worried,
dispirited, disheartened, downcast,
dejected, depressed, ill at ease │ منقبض
الصدر (النفس ) m. aṣ-ṣadr (or an-nafs) do.
قبط 1 II قبط وجھه (wajhahū) to knit the brows,
frown, scowl, glower
القبط 2 al-qibṭ, al-qubṭ pl. الأقباط al-aqbāṭ the
Copts
قبطي qibṭī, qubṭī Coptic; Copt
قبطان 3 qubṭān pl. قباطين qabāṭīn قباطنة , 2 qabāṭina
captain (of a ship and, in Tun., as a
military rank = Fr. capitaine)
قبع qaba‘a a ( قبوع qubū‘) to retract the head
(hedgehog); to crouch, squat, sit; -- (qab‘,
قباع qibā‘, qubā‘) to grunt (hog); to
trumpet (elephant); -- (qab‘) to drink in
hasty gulps (eg.)
قبعة qubba‘a pl. -āt hat; cap; (syr.)
small felt cap
مقبع muqabba‘ wearing a bat, hatted
قبقب qabqaba to swell, bulge
قبقاب qabqāb pl. قباقيب qabāqīb2 wooden
clog, patten │ قبقاب انزلاق skate
قباقيبي qabāqībī: مسمار قباقيبي (mismār)
small nail, blue tack (eg.)
قبل qabila a ( قبول qabūl, qubūl) to accept ( ب or
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to receive (kindly,
hospitably) ( ه s.o.), give ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) a
friendly reception, receive ( ھ s.th.)
favorably, approve ( ھ، ه of s.o., of s.th.);
to acquiesce ( ھ in s.th.), put up ( ھ with
s.th.), agree, consent, assent ( ھ to, also ;(ب
to admit ( في ھ، ه s.o., s.th. to); to obey ( من
s.o.), yield, give in ( من to s.o.), submit to
s.o.’s ( من ) command; -- qabila a and
qabala u i ( قبالة qabāla) to guarantee,
vouch, be surety ( ب for) │ قبل الذھاب معي
(dahāba) he was willing to go with me;
qabila with acc. of a maṣdar frequently
corresponds to an English adjective in
-able, -ible, -ive, -al, e.g., داء يقبل الشفاء
(šifā’a) a curable disease, بضائع تقبل الالتھاب
(highly) combustible merchandise; اثمان لا
تقبل المزاحمة (muzāḥamata) prices that are
beyond competition; قبل شكا (šakkan) to
admit doubt II to kiss ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.);
(eg.) to go 739 south(ward) III to b. or
stand exactly opposite s.o. or s.th. ( ,(ھ، ه
be face to face ( ھ، ه with); to confront,
face, counter ( ه s.o.; ھ ب s.th. with, e.g., a
situation with caution); to meet ( ه s.o.; ب
ھ s.th., e.g., a danger, with, by); to
encounter ( ه s.o.), run across s.o. ( ه); to
visit ( ه s.o.), call on s.o. ( ه); to meet, get
together, have a talk or interview ( ه with
s.o.); to interview ( ه s.o.); to receive (in
audience) ( ه s.o.), grant an audience ( ه to
s.o.); to receive ( ب، ھ s.o., s.th. with, e.g.,
a news with joy); to repay, return, requite
ب ھ) s.th. with); to compare, collate ( على
or ب ھ s.th. with) │ قابله على الرحب والساعة
(raḥb, sā‘a) to welcome s.o. or s.th.; قابله
بالمثل (bi-l-mitl) to return like for like IV to
turn forward; to draw near, come close to
s.o. or to a place ( على ), approach ( على s.o.,
a place); to advance ( على to, toward); to
turn ( على to. toward); to embark, enter ( على
upon s.th.), engage ( على in); to give one’s
attention, devote o.s. ( على to s.o., to s.th.),
dedicate o.s., apply o.s., attend ( على to
s.th.), occupy o.s. ( على with); to take an
interest, become or be interested ( على in);
to go, come ( الى to); to be abundant (crop);
(with foll. imperf.) to begin to do │ اقبل
عليه الدھر (dahru) or اقبل عليه الدنيا (dunya)
luck is on his side, fortune smiles on him
V to accept, receive ( ھ s.th.); to hear,
grant ( دعاءه du‘ā’ahū s.o.’s prayer; of
God) VI to be opposite each other, face
each other; to meet (e.g., two persons); to
get together, have a meeting; meet ( مع
with); to be compared, be collated VIII to
receive ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to apply o.s.
gladly and willingly ( ھ to s.th.) X to turn
one’s face ( ھ، ه to s.o., toward s.th.); to go
to meet, to meet ( ه s.o.); to face, confront,
meet ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to take upon o.s.,
assume ( ھ s.th.); to receive ( ه a visitor, a
guest; ھ s.th., e.g., a radio broadcast)
قبل qablu (adv.) or من قبل min qablu and
قبلا qablan previously, formerly, earlier,
before; من ذي قبل (qablu), عن ذي قبل (after a
comparative) ... than before; qabla (prep.)
before, prior to │ قبل كل شيء qabla kull
šai’in first of all, above all; من قبل min
qabli before, prior to; قبل ان (conj.) before
قبلئذ qabla’idin previously, formerly,
once, in former times
قبيل qubaila (prep.) shortly before, prior
to; قبيل ان (conj.) shortly before
قبل qubl, qubul fore part, front part,
front, face │ من قبل (qubulin) in front;
from the front, from in front
قبل qibal power, ability; -- qibala
(prep.) in the presence of, before. near; in
the direction of, toward │ لا قبل له (qibala)
he has no power over it, it is not in his
power; he is incapable of accomplishing
it; من قبل min qibali on the part of, from,
by; من قبل نفسه by himself (or itself), of his
(or its) own accord; لي قبله دين lī qibalahū
dain he owes me a debt, he is indebted to
me
قبلة qubla pl. qublāt, qubulāt, قبل qubal
kiss
قبلة qibla kiblah, direction to which
Muslims turn in praying (toward the
Kaaba); recess in a mosque indicating the
direction of the Kaaba, prayer niche │ اولى
القبلتين ūlā l-qiblatain the first of the two
kiblahs, i.e. Jerusalem; قبلة الأنظار q. alanẓār
focus of attention, target of all eyes,
ideal, goal sought after and aspired to; قبلة
الاھتمام object of widespread interest, focus
of attention
قبلى qiblī southern, south │ الوجه القبلي
(wajh) Upper Egypt
قبول qabūl, qubūl (friendly) reception;
welcome; acceptance; concurrence,
consent, assent, approval, admission,
admittance; with foll. maṣdar
corresponding 740 to English abstract
nouns in -ability, -ibility, -ivity, -ality,
e.g., عدم قبول التفرقة ‘adam q. at-tafriqa
indivisibility
قبيل qabīl guarantor, bail(sman), surety;
kind, specimen, species, sort; tribe │ من
ھذا القبيل of this kind, like this, such; in this
respect; من قبيل الإيضاح (q. il-īḍāḥ by way
of illustration, as an explanation; من كل قبيل
ودبير (dabīr) of every origin (whatsoever);
ليس من ھذا الأمر في قبيل ولا دبير he is not in the
least involved in this affair, he has
absolutely nothing to do with this affair
قبيلة qabīla pl. قبائل qabā’il2 tribe
قبلي qabalī tribal
قبالة qabāla bail, guaranty, suretyship,
liability, responsibility; contract,
agreement
قبالة qibāla midwifery, obstetrics
قبالة qubālata (prep.) opposite, face to
face with, vis-à-vis, in front of
تقبيل taqbīl kissing
قبال qibāla (prep.) opposite, face to face
with, vis-à-vis, in front of
مقابلة muqābala encounter; meeting;
conversation, talk, discussion; interview;
audience; reception; comparison, collation
│ مقابلة ذلك muqābalata d. or في مقابلة ذلك in
return for that, in exchange for that, in
compensation for that, as an equivalent for
that, for that, therefor; تشريح المقابلة
comparative anatomy; المقابلة بالمثل (bi-lmitl)
requital; retaliation, reprisal; أخذ
بالمقابلة to return like for like
اقبال iqbāl drawing near, advance,
approach; coming, arrival, advent;
turning, application, attention, response,
responsiveness ( على to), concern ( على for),
intereot ( على in), demand; good fortune,
prosperity, welfare │ اقبالا وادبارا iqbālan
wa-idbāran back and forth, to and fro, up
end down
تقبل taqabbul receptivity, susceptibility,
sensibility
اقتبال iqtibāl reception
استقبال istiqbāl pl. -āt reception;
opposition (astron.); full moon (as an
astronomical aspect); the future; استقبالا
istiqbālan in the future │ آلة الاستقبال
receiving set, receiver; غرفة الاستقبال gurfat
al-ist. reception room, parlor; كان في استقباله
he was present to greet him, he had come
to meet him, he received him
قابل qābil obstetrician, accoucheur;
coming, next (e.g., month); subject, liable,
susceptible, disposed ( ل to s.th.); O
receiver (radio); with foll. ل and maṣdar
corresponding to English adjectives in
-able, -ible, -ive, -al, e.g., قابل للموت (li-lmaut)
mortal; قابل للشفاء curable; قابل للالتھاب
(highly) combustible, inflammable; قابل
للتوصيل conductive (el.); غير قابل للرجوع
irrevocable; يكون جواز السفر قابلا للتجديد اربع
مرات (jawāz as-safar, arba‘a marrātin) the
passport can be renewed four times
قابلة qābila pl. -āt, قوابل qawābil2
midwife, accoucheuse; -- (pl. قوابل
qawābil2) receptacle, container; -- pl. قوابل
beginnings
قابلية qābilīya faculty, power, capacity,
capability, ability; aptitude, fitness;
tendency, disposition, liability,
susceptibility, sensibility, receptivity ( ل
to); appetite │ قابلية للتوصيل conductivity
(el.); قابلية القسمة q. al-qisma divisibility; cf.
قابل
مقبول maqbūl acceptable, reasonable;
satisfactory (as an examination grade;
Eg.); pleasing, obliging, complaisant,
amiable; well-liked, likable, popular,
welcome
مقبلات muqabbilāt appetizers, hors
d’oeuvres
مقابل muqābil facing, opposite; counter-
(in compounds); equivalent, wages, 741
remuneration, recompense │ مقابل ذلك
(muqābila) or في مقابل ذلك accordingly, in
accordance with that, in return for that, in
exchange for that, in compensation for
that, as an equivalent for that, for that,
therefor; مقابل تقديم الكوبون upon presentation
of the coupon; مائة سفينة مقابل خمسين في العام
السابق (mi’at safīna m. kamsīn 100 ships as
compared with 50 the previous year; بدون
مقابل or من غير مقابل without compensation,
for nothing, gratis
مقبل muqbil coming, next (e.g., month,
year)
مقتبل muqtabal: في مقتبل العمر fī m.
il-‘umr in the prime of life; مقتبل الليل
(muqtabala l-lail) at the beginning of the
night, early at night
مستقبل mustaqbil receiving set, receiver
(radio)
مستقبل mustaqbal front part, front, face;
future (adj.); the future
قبن II to weigh (with a steelyard) ( ھ s.th.)
قبان qabbān steelyard; scale beam;
platform scale, weighbridge
قباء 1 qabā’ pl. اقيةن aqbiya an outer garment
with full-length sleeves
قبا (قبو 2 ) qabā u to vault, arch, camber, curve,
bend ( ھ s.th.)
قبو qabw pl. اقبية aqbiya vault; vaulted
roof; cellar; tunnel, gallery, drift, adit
(mining); O prompt box │ O قبو الوقاية من
الغارات الجوية (jawwīya) air-raid shelter
قبوة qabwa vault
قباء qibā’ interval, interspace, distance
قبودان qabūdān captain
قت qatta u (qatt) to render falsely,
misrepresent, depreciate, belittle,
minimize ( ھ s.th.); to lie VIII to uproot,
root out, extirpate ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
قتات qattāt slanderer, calumniator
قتب qatab pl. اقتاب aqtāb (eg.) hunch, hump
مقوتب muqautab hunchbacked
قتاد qatād tragacanth (Astragalus; bot.)
│ على قتاد he was sitting on a bed of thorns
قتر qatara u i (qatr, قتور qutūr) and II to be
stingy, tightfisted, niggardly,
parsimonious ( على toward s.o.), keep ( على
s.o.) short, stint ( على s.o.) IV do.; to live in
straitened circumstances, be or become
poor
قتر qatr stinginess, niggardliness,
parsimony ( على toward)
قترة qatara dust
قتار quṭār aroma, smell (of s.th. fried or
cooked)
تقتير taqtīr stinginess, niggardliness,
parsimony ( على toward)
قاتر qātir stingy, tightfisted, miserly,
niggardly, parsimonious ( على toward)
مقتر muqattir, muqtir stingy, tightfisted,
miserly, niggardly, parsimonious ( على
toward)
قتل qatala u (qatl) to kill, slay, murder,
assassinate ( ه s.o.); to mitigate, alleviate (
ھ s.th., e.g., البرد al-barda the cold, الجوع
al-jū‘a the hunger); to mix, dilute ( ب ھ
s.th. with, e.g., wine with water); to know,
master ( ھ s.th., e.g., a skill) │ قتله خبرا
علما )) (kubran, ‘ilman) or قتله درسا وبحثا
(darsan wa-baḥtan) to know or master
s.th. (e.g., a skill, a field of study)
thoroughly; قتل الموضوع بحثا (baḥtan) to
study a topic most thoroughly, treat a
subject exhaustively; قتل الدھر خبرة (dahra
kibratan) to have long experience with
life, be worldly wise II to kill, massacre (
ھم people), cause carnage ( ھم among
people) III to combat, battle ( ه s.o.), fight (
ه s.o., with s.o., or against s.o.) │ قاتله لله
lit.: may God fight him! i.e., 742 approx.:
damned bastard! VI and VIII to fight with
one another, combat each other X to risk
one’s life, defy death
قتل qatl killing; manslaughter,
homicide; murder, assassination │ قتل بسبب
(bi-sababin) indirect killing (Isl. Law); قتل
الخطأ q. al-kaṭa’ accidental homicide (jur.);
القتل العمد (‘amd) or القتل العمدي (‘amdī) or
القتل عمدا (‘amdan) or القتل العمد مع سبق
الإصرار (sabqi l-iṣrār) premeditated
murder
قتل qitl pl. اقتال aqtāl enemy, foe,
adversary, opponent
قتيل qatīl pl. قتلى qatlā killed; killed in
battle, fallen; one killed in battle, casualty
│ قتيل الحرب q. al-ḥarb man killed in war
قتال qattāl murderous, deadly, lethal
اقتل aqtal2 deadlier, more lethal in effect
مقتل maqtal murder, death; murderous
battle; (pl. مقاتل maqātil2) vital part of the
body (the injury of which will bring about
death), mortal spot, mortal organ;
Achilles’ heel, vulnerable spot │ ضربه في
مقاتله (ḍarabahū) or اصاب منه المقتل (aṣāba)
he hit him at his most vulnerable spot
مقتلة maqtala pl. -āt butchery, slaughter,
carnage, massacre
تقتيل butchery, slaughter, carnage,
massacre
قتال qitāl fight, struggle, contention
(against); combat, strife, battle │ ساحة القتال
battlefield
مقاتلة muqātala fight, struggle,
contention (against); combat, strife
تقاتل taqātul mutual struggle
قاتل qātil killing, murdering; deadly,
lethal, mortal, fatal; (pl. قتال quttāl, قتلة
qatala) killer, manslayer; murderer,
assassin
قاتلات qātilāt lethal agents ( ل against)
مقتل muqattal experienced, practiced,
tried, tested
مقاتل muqatil fighter, combatant,
warrior; fighting, combat-, battle- (in
compounds)
مقاتلة muqatila (coli.) combatants,
warriors, fighting forces
مقاتلة muqātila pl. -āt combat plane,
light bomber
مقتتل muqtatal battlefield, battleground
مستقتل mustaqtil death-defying, heroic
قتم qatama u ( قتوم qutūm) to rise (dust) IX to be
dark(-colored), blackish
قتمة qutma, qatama dark or blackish
color, darkness, gloom
قتام qatām dark or blackish color,
darkness, gloom
اقتم aqtam2 dark-colored, blackish, dark
قاتم qātim pl. قواتم qawātim2 black, dark
│ اسود قاتم pitch-black
قث 1 qatta u (qatt) and VIII to pull out, tear out,
uproot ( ھ s.th.)
قثاء 2 qittā’, quttā’ (coll.; n. un. ة) cucumber
قثاطير qatāṭīr2 catheter
O قثطرة qatṭara catheter
قح 1 qaḥḥa to cough
قح 2 quḥḥ pl. اقحاح aqḥāḥ pure, sheer, unmixed,
unadulterated; genuine
قحبة qaḥba pl. قحاب qiḥāb whore, harlot,
prostitute
قحط qaḥaṭa a (qaḥṭ, قحوط quḥūṭ) and
qaḥiṭa a (qaḥaṭ) to be withheld, fail to set
in (rains); active and pass. quḥiṭa to be
rainless (year) II to pollinate ( النخلة annaklata
the palm tree); (eg.) to scratch 743
off, scrape off ( ھ s.th.) IV to be rainless
(year)
قحط qaḥṭ want of rain, rainleseness;
drought, dryness; famine; dearth, lack,
want, scarcity
قحطان qaṭān2 legendary ancestor of the South
Arabians
قحف qaḥafa a (qaḥf) to swallow, gulp down ( ھ
s.th.); to sweep away, carry away ( ھ s.th.;
of a river) VIII = I
قحف qiḥf pl. قحوف quḥūf, اقحاف aqḥāf,
قحفة qiḥafa skull; cranium, brainpan
قحاف quḥāf torrential (river)
قحل qaḥila a (qaḥal) and pass. quḥila to be or
become dry or arid, dry up, wither
قحل qaḥal dryness aridity
قحل qaḥil dry, arid
قحولة quḥūla dryness, aridity
قحلاء qaḥlā’ f. dry
قاحل qāḥil dry, arid
قحم IV to push, drag ( في ه s.o. into s.th.),
involve ( في ه s.o. in); to introduce forcibly,
cram ( في ه s.th. into) │ اقحم نفسه بينھم
(nafsahū) he squeezed himself between
them VIII to plunge, rush, hurtle ( ھ into
s.th.); to break ( ھ into s.th.), intrude,
invade ( ھ s.th.); to burst ( ھ into a room);
to jump, leap, dive ( ھ into s.th.); to rush,
dart ( ھ at); to storm, take by storm ( ھ
s.th.); to embark boldly ( ھ upon s.th.); to
defy ( ھ danger, hardships, etc.)
قحمة kuḥma pl. قحم quḥam danger one
rushes into. hazardous undertaking
مقحام miqḥām pl. مقاحيم maqāḥīm2 one
who plunges heedlessly into danger,
reckless, daring, foolhardy
اقحام iqḥām dragging in, implicating,
involvement
اقتحام iqtiḥām brooking in, inrush,
irruption, intrusion, obtrusion; inroad,
invasion, incursion; storming, capture by
storm
اقحوان uqḥuwān pl. اقاح aqāḥin, اقاحي aqāḥīy
camomile (bot.); daisy (bot.)
قد 1 qad (particle) with foll. perf. indicates the
termination of an action; sometimes
corresponding to English “already”; with
foll. imperf.: sometimes, at times;
perhaps, or English “may”, “might”
قد 2 qadda u (qadd) to cut lengthwise, cut into
strips ( ھ s.th.); to cut off ( ھ s.th.); to chop
off ( ھ s.th.); to cut out, carve out ( ھ s.th.)
│ قد قلبه من حجر qudda qalbuhū min
ḥajarin to have a heart of stone II = I; to
cut into strips and dry ( ھ s.th., e.g., meat,
fruits), to jerk ( ھ meat) VII to split, burst
(also, e.g., with laughter) VIII = I
قد qidd pl. اقد aqudd strip (of leather),
strap, thong
قدة qidda pl. قدد qidad rail; ruler │ طرائق
قددا tafarraqū ṭarā’iqa qidadan to split into
many parts or groups, break up, dissolve
قديد qadīd meat cut into strips and dried,
jerked meat
قد qadd pl. قدود qudūd shape, build,
frame, physique, stature, height, figure;
(eg.) size, bulk, volume, quantity │ على
قده of the same size, of equal size, just as
(large)
قدح qadaḥa a (qadḥ) to bore, pierce ( في s.th.);
to slander, defame, malign, vilify ( في s.o.);
to rebuke, censure, blame ( في s.o.); to
reprove, reproach, chide ( في s.o.); to reject
as objectionable ( في a witness, a
testimony); to impair, depreciate, belittle,
lessen, diminish, degrade ( ب or في s.th.),
detract ( ب or في from); to violate, infringe
في) s.th.), offend ( في ٧٤٤ against); to strike
fire (with a flint) (also with النار an-nāra)
│ قدح زناد الفكر (z. al-fikr) to ponder, think
hard, rack one’s brain; قدح فكره (fikrahū) to
think hard; قدح شررا (šararan) to strike or
emit sparks VIII to strike fire (with a
flint), also اقتدح النار ; to weigh, consider ( ھ
s.th.)
قدح qadḥ slander, calumniation,
calumny, defamation, vilification,
aspersion; censure, rebuke, reproof,
reproach; depreciation, detraction ( ب of في
from), impairment
قدح qidḥ, pl. قداح qidāḥ, اقدح aqduḥ, اقداح
aqdāḥ, اقاديح aqādīḥ2 arrow shaft; arrow;
divining arrow, arrow used for oracles │
القدح المعلى (mu‘allā) the seventh of the
divining arrows used in the ancient
Arabian game of maisir, i.e., the best of
them which won seven shares of the
slaughtered camel, hence: له القدح المعلى في
to be the principal agent in, have a major
impact on, exert decisive influence on, be
of crucial importance for
قدح qadaḥ pl. اقداح aqdāḥ drinking
bowl; (drinking) cup; goblet; glass,
tumbler; tea glass; keddah, a dry measure
(Eg. = 1/ اردب 96 ardabb = 2.0621)
قداح qaddāḥ and قداحة qaddāḥa pl. -āt
flint; fire steel, fire iron (for striking
sparks from flint); flint and steel; lighter
(e.g., for cigarettes)
مقدحة miqdaḥa fire steel, fire iron (for
striking sparks from flint)
قدر qadara u i (qadr) to decree, ordain, decide
ھ) s.th.; of God) -- qadara i ( قدرة qudra,
مقدرة maqdura, maqdara, maqdira) and
qadira a (qadar) to possess strength,
power, or ability; to have power ( على over
s.th.), be master ( على of s.th.), be equal (
على to s.th.), be up to s.th. ( على ); to have
the possibility to do ( على s.th.), be in a
position to do s.th. ( ان or على ), be able to
do s.th. ( ان or على ), be capable ( ان or على
of) II to appoint, assign, determine,
ordain, decree ( ھ s.th., على for s.o.; of
God); to predetermine, foreordain,
(pre)destine ( ھ ھ s.th.; of God); to
appraise ( ھ s.th.; with respect to its worth
and amount), assess, estimate, calculate,
tax, evaluate, value, rate ( ب ھ s.th. at); to
anticipate, foresee ( ھ s.th.); to surmise,
guess, presume, suppose, believe, think,
be of the opinion ( ان that); to esteem
highly, value, treasure, prize, cherish ( ه
s.o., ھ s.th., ھ ل s.th. in s.o., because of
s.th. s.o.); to appreciate ( ھ s.th.); to enable
على ه) s.o. to do s.th.), put ( ه s.o.) in a
position ( على to do s.th.); (gram.) to imply
in an expression ( ل or ھ ) another ( ب or (ھ
as virtually existing │ لا قدر لله (which)
God forbid! قدر فكان (quddira) the
inevitable happened! قدره حق قدره (ḥaqqa
qadrihi) to attach the proper value to s.o.
or s.th., fully appreciate the value of s.o.
or s.th.; لا يقدر lā yuqaddaru inestimable,
invaluable, immeasurable, immense, huge,
enormous, tremendous IV to enable ( على ه
s.o. to do s.th.), put ( ه s.o.) in a position (
على to do s.th.) V to he appointed,
assigned, determined, ordained, destined,
fated, decreed VIII = I qadara i X to ask ( ه
God) for strength or ability
قدر qadr pl. اقدار aqdār extent, scope,
quantity, amount, scale, rate, measure,
number; sum, amount; degree, grade;
worth, value, standing, rank; divine decree
│ ليلة القدر lailat al-q. the night in which,
according to sura 97, the Koran was
revealed, celebrated during the night
between the 26th and 27th of Ramadan; قدر
من a certain extent of, a certain degree of;
قدر qadra, بقدر bi-qadri, على قدر
commensurate with, corresponding to,
according to, in proportion to; بقدر ما biqadri
mā in the same measure 745 as, to
the same extent as, as much as, as large
as; على قدر ما ‘alā qadrin mā to a certain
extent, relatively; قدر المستطاع qadra lmustaṭā‘,
بقدر المستطاع, على قدر المستطاع، قدر
الطاقة qadra ṭ-ṭ., قدر الإمكان qadra l-imkān,
بقدر الإمكان and على قدر الإمكان as far as
possible, as much as possible, in the best
way possible, to the best of one’s abilities;
اغلبية قدرھا مائة صوت aglabīya qadruha
mi’atu ṣautin a majority of a hundred
votes; ذوو قدرة dawū q. people of
distinction, important people
قدر qadar pl. اقدار aqdār divine foreordainment,
predestination; fate, destiny,
lot │ مذھب القدر madhab al-q. fatalism;
القضاء والقدر (qaḍā’) fate and divine decree;
قضاء وقدرا qaḍā’an wa-qadaran or بالقضاء
والقدر by fate and divine decree; قدر جاء على
he arrived just at the right time
القدرية al-qadarīya a theological school
of early Islam asserting man’s free will
قدر qidr m. and f., pl. قدور qudūr
cooking pot, kettle, pot
قدرة qidra cooking pot, kettle, pot
قدرة qadara small bottle, flask
قدرة qudra faculty ( على of), power,
strength ( على for), potency; capacity,
ability, capability, aptitude; omnipotence
(of God) │ O القدر على العمل (‘amal) power,
capacity (techn., phys.); O القدر على الانتقاء
selectivity (radio)
قدير qadīr possessing power or strength,
powerful, potent; having mastery ( على
over s.th.), capable ( على of s.th.);
omnipotent, almighty, all-powerful (God)
اقدر aqdar2 mightier, more powerful;
more capable ( على of), abler ( على to do
s.th.)
مقدرة maqdura, maqdara, maqdira
faculty ( على of), power, strength ( على for),
potency; capacity, ability, capability,
aptitude │ O المقدرة الحربية (ḥarbīya)
military resources, military potential
مقدار miqdār pl. مقادير maqādīr2
measure; extent in space and time; scope,
extent, scale, rate, range; quantity; amount
│ مقدار ادنى (adnā) a minimum; مقدار اقصى
(aqṣā) a maximum; بمقدار ما bi-miqdāri mā
to the same extent or degree as …; as
much as ...; بھذا المقدار to such an extent or
degree, so much; بمقدار to a certain extent
or degree, somewhat, a little
تقدير taqdīr pl. -āt, تقادير taqādīr2
estimation, appraisal, assessment,
taxation, rating; calculation, estimate,
valuation; appreciation; esteem;
assumption, surmise, supposition,
proposition; implication of a missing
syntactical part (gram.); (pl. -āt) grading,
evaluation (of achievement; school,
university); تقديرا taqdīran by implication,
implicitly, virtually │ تقديرا لھذا in
appreciation of this; على اقل تقدير ‘alā
aqalli t. at least; على اكثر التقدير at most; عن
مبلغ تقديري ‘an mablagi taqdīrī as far as I
can judge for myself
اقتدار iqtidār might, power, strength,
potency; ability, capability, faculty,
capacity, efficiency, aptitude
قادر qādir possessing power or strength,
powerful, potent; having mastery (
على vover s.th.), being equal ( قدر to s.th.);
capable ( على of s.th.), able ( على to do
s.th.); efficient, capable, talented
مقدور maqdūr decreed ( على against, by
fate); (pl. مقادير maqādīr2) destiny, fate;
(pl. -āt) faculty, capability, ability;
potential, resources │ في مقدوره ان to be
able to …, be capable of ..., be in a
position to ..., have the possibility to ...
مقدر muqaddir estimator, appraiser,
assessor, taxer
مقدر muqaddar decreed, foreordained,
predestined; implied, implicit, virtual;
مقدرات fates, destinies; estimates,
preliminary calculations 746
مقتدر muqtadir possessing power or
strength, powerful, potent; having mastery
على) over s.th.), being equal ( على to s.th.);
able ( على to do s.th.), capable ( على of);
efficient capable, talented
قدس 1 qadusa u (quds, qudus) to be holy, be
pure II to hallow, sanctify ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.);
to dedicate. consecrate ( ھ s.th.); to declare
to be holy, glorify ( لله God); to hold
sacred, venerate, revere, reverence,
worship ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); (Chr.) to
canonize ( ه s.o.); (Chr.) to say Mass,
celebrate │ قدس لله سره (sirrahū) may God
sanctify his secret! (eulogy used when
mentioning the name of a deceased
Muslim saint) V to be hallowed, be sacred
or sanctified
قدس quds, qudus holiness, sacredness,
sanctity; (pl. اقداس aqdas) sanctuary,
shrine; القدس al-quds Jerusalem │ قدس
الأقداس the holy of holies (Chr., Jud.); روح
القدس، الروح القدس (ar-)rūḥ al-qudus the
Holy Ghost (Chr.)
قدسي qudsī holy, sacred; saintly; saint
قدسية qudsīya holiness, sacredness,
sanctity; saintliness
قداس quddās pl. -āt, قداديس qadādīs2
Mass (Chr.)
قداسة qadāsa holiness, sacredness,
sanctity; saintliness │ قداسة البابا His
Holiness the Pope
قدوس qaddūs, quddūs most holy; القدوس
the Most Holy, the All-Holy (God)
قديس qiddīs pl. -ūn holy, saintly;
Christian saint │ عيد كل القديسين ‘īd kull alq.
All Saints’ Day (Chr.)
اقدس aqdas2 more hallowed, more
sacred, holier
بيت المقدس bait al-maqdis Jerusalem
تقديس taqdīs sanctification, hallowing;
dedication, consecration; celebration
(Chr.); Consecration (as part of the
Roman Catholic Mass; Chr.); reverence,
veneration, worship
مقدس muqaddis reverent, reverential,
venerative
مقدس muqaddas hallowed. sanctified,
dedicated, consecrated; holy, sacred; pl.
-āt sacred things, sacrosanct things │
الأرض (البلاد) المقدسة (arḍ) the Holy Land,
Palestine; البيت المقدس (bait) Jerusalem; البيت
ال مقدس the Holy Scriptures, the Holy
Bible (Chr.)
متقدس mutaqaddis hallowed, sanctified,
dedicated, consecrated; holy, sacred
قادس 2 qādis Cādiz (seaport in SW Spain)
قادوس 3 pl. قواديس look up alphabetically
قدم qadama u (qadm, قدوم qadūm) to
precede ( ه s.o.); -- qadima a ( قدوم qudūm,
قدمان qidmān, مقدم maqdam) to arrive ( ھ at
a place); to come; to get ( الى or على or ه to
s.o.; ھ to a place). reach ( الى or على، ه s.o.;
ھ a place); to have the audacity to do s.th.
على) ); -- qaduma u (qidam) to be old, be
ancient II to make or let ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
precede, go before, or lead the way; to
send forward, send ahead, send off,
dispatch, send on in advance ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to set forth beforehand, premise ( ل
ھ s.th. as introductory to s.th., e.g., a
preface to a book); to place ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.) at the head; to set forward, set ahead
ھ) a clock); to do earlier, do beforehand,
do before s.th. else ( ھ s.th.); to give
precedence ( على ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.
before), give priority ( على ھ to s.th. over);
to prefer ( على ھ، ه s.o., s.th. to s.o. or s.th.
else), give preference ( على ھ، ه to s.o., to
s.th. over); (Tun.) to appoint as legal
guardian ( على ه s.o. for); to prepare, ready,
keep ready, provide, set aside, earmark ( ل
ه s.th. for); to provide, 747 make
provisions ( ل for); to offer, proffer, tender,
extend, present, produce, exhibit, display (
ھ s.th., الى or ل to s.o.); to hand over,
deliver ( ھ s.th., الى or ل to s.o.); to submit,
refer (o s.th., الى or ل to s.o.), lay s.th. ( (ھ
before s.o. ( الى or ل); to give u a present ( ھ
s.th., الى or ل to s.o.), offer up, present ( الى
or ل ھ، ه s.o., s.th. to s.o., to s.th.); to
dedicate ( الى or ل ھ s.th., e.g., a book, to
s.o.); to file, turn in ( ھ s.th., e.g., a report),
send in, submit ( ھ s.th., e.g., an
application, الى or ل to), lodge ( ھ e.g., a
complaint, الى or ل before); to give (o an
answer); to take (o an examination); to
bring s.o. ( ه) before a proper authority,
esp., before a tribunal ( امام or الى ), arraign
s.o.; to introduce, present ( ل or الى ه s.o. to
s.o. else), make ( ه s.o.) acquainted ( ل or الى
with s.o. else); (intr.) to precede; to be fast
(clock) │ قدمه بين يديه (baina yadaihi) to
send s.th. ahead of s.th. else, let s.th.
precede s.th. else; قدم له الثمن (tamana) to
pay the price to s.o. in advance, advance
the price to s.o.; قدم خدمة (kidmatan) to
render a service; قدم خطوة (kidmatan) to
make a step forward; قدم الشكر له (šukra) to
extend one’s thanks to s.o., thank s.o.; قدم
نفسه الى البوليس to give o.s. up to the police;
ما قدمت وما اخرت (akkartu) what I have ever
committed; ما قدمت يداك (yadāka) what you
have committed or perpetrated; يقدم رجلا
ويؤخر أخرى yuqaddimu rijlan wa-yu’akkiru
ukrā to hesitate, waver, be undecided; فرق
شھور لا تقدم ولا تؤخر farqu šuhūrin lā
tuqaddimu wa-lā tu’akkiru a difference of
a few months which is of no consequence
IV to be bold, audacious, daring; to make
bold, have the audacity to do s.th. ( على ); to
venture, risk, undertake, tackle ( على s.th.),
set about s.th. ( على ); to brave ( على s.th.),
embark boldly ( على upon), dare to engage
على) in), venture upon s.th. ( على ); to attack
على) s.o., s.th.) V to precede ( عن or على or
ھ، ه s.o., s.th., in space and time), go
before s.o. or s.th. ( عن، على، ھ، ه ); to head
على) or ھم a group of people), be at the
head ( على or ھم of a group of people); to
belong to an earlier, older time; to go
forward, move (for, ward), proceed ( نحو
toward), advance march ( نحو against,
toward); to progress, make progress; to
come on, come closer, move nearer ( الى
to); to approach ( الى s.o. or s.th.), accost (
الى s.o.); to step up ( الى to); to present o.s. (
بين يديه or الى to), step before ( بين يديه or ;(الى
o to meet, face ( ل or الى an opposing team,
in sports); to turn, apply ( ب ل or الى to s.o.
with a request); to submit ( ل or الى to s.o.
ب s.th., e.g., a request); to order, direct,
commission ( ب الى s.o. to do, to bring, etc.,
s.th.) │ تقدم به to further, advance, promote,
improve s.th.; تقدمت به السن (sinnu) to get
older, be advanced in years; كما تقدم already
mentioned; غفر لله ما تقدم من ذنبه وما تأخر
(danbihī, ta’akkara) God has forgiven all
his sins; وقت بغداد متقدم ساعتين من وقت اوربا
الوسطى waqtu bagdada mutaqaddimun
sā‘ataini ‘an waqti ūrubbā l-wusṭā
Baghdad time is two hours ahead of
Central European time; تقدم نحوه (naḥwahū)
to step up to s.o.; تقدم منه to approach s.o.,
head for s.o.; تقدم للامتحان to submit o.s. to
an examination VI to become antiquated,
grow obsolete, get out of date, become
old, age │ تقادم (zamanu) much time has
gone by (since); تقادم عھده (‘ahduhū) it
happened long ago, it belongs to the put, it
is of early date X to ask ( ه s.o.) to come,
send ( ه for s.o.), summon ( ه s.o.)
قدم qidm time long since put, old times;
قدما qidman in old(en) times, in former
times, once, of old, of yore
قدم qidam time long since put, old
times; remote antiquity, time immemorial;
oldness; ancientness; infinite 748 preexistence,
sempiternity, timelessness (of
God); seniority │ منذ القدم from times of
old, by long tradition, of long standing; قدم
عھده ب (qidamu ‘ahdihī) his long, standing
familiarity with
قدم qadam (usually f.) pl. اقدام aqdām
foot (also as a measure of length); step قدم
مكعبة (muka‘‘aba) cubic foot; سمت القدم alq.
nadir (astron.); اصبع القدم iṣba‘ al-q. toe;
على قدميه (qadamaihi) on foot (of several:
على الأقدام): على اطرف قدميه on tiptoe; على قدم
الحذر (q. al-ḥadar) anxious, timid, fearful;
على قدم الاھبة والاستعداد (q. il-uhba) in a state
of extreme alertness; جرى (قام) على قدم وساق
(wa-sāqin) to become fully effective, be in
full progress, be in full swing; ليس له قدم he
has no part in ..., he is not involved in ...
قدم qudum: مضى (سار) قدما (quduman) to
go straight ahead or forward
قديم qadīm pl. قدماء qudamā’ قدامى , 2
qudāmā, قدائم qadā’im2 old, ancient;
antique; existing from time immemorial,
eternally pre-existent, sempiternal; القديم
the Infinitely Pre-existent, the
Sempiternal, the Eternal (as an attribute of
God) │ قديما qadīman or في القديم in old(en)
times, in ancient times, in former times,
once, of old, of yore; من قديم or منذ القديم
from times of old. by long tradition, of
long standing; قديم العھد ب (q. al-‘ahd) of
long familiarity or acquaintance with, long
familiar or acquainted with; of longstanding
experience in, long-experiensed
in, (being) a long-time holder of; دراسات
قديمة classical studies
قدوم qudūm coming, advent, arrival
قدوم qadūm pl. قدم qudum bold,
audacious, daring, intrepid, undaunted,
courageous, brave, valiant
قدوم qadūm, qaddūm pl. قدائم qadā’im2,
قدم qudum adz
قدام quddām fare part, front part;
quddāma (prep.) in front of
قيدوم qaidūm prow, bow of a ship
اقدم aqdam2 older, mare ancient; الاقدمون
the ancients
اقدمية aqdamīya seniority
مقدم maqdam coming, advent; arrival
مقدام miqdām bold, audacious, daring,
intrepid, undaunted, courageous, brave,
valiant; a military rank, approx.: staff
sergeant (Eg. 1939)
تقديم taqdīm sending forward, sending
off, dispatching, etc., see II; presentation;
submission, turning in, filing; offering up,
oblation; dedication; offer, proffer, tender,
bid; memorial; (pl. تقاديم taqādīm)
officially established guardianship (Tun.)
تقدمة taqdima offer, proffer, tender, bid;
dedication; (social) introduction,
presentation; offering up, oblation,
offertory (Chr.); (pl. -āt, تقادم taqādim2)
present, gift
اقدام iqdām boldness, audacity, daring,
intrepidity, fearlessness, undauntedness,
stoutheartedness, pluck, courage,
enterprise, initiative
تقدم taqaddum precedence, priority;
(ad)vantage, lead; advance, drive, push;
advancement, progression, progress
تقدمي taqaddumī progressive,
progressionist
تقادم taqādum: ( الزمن) تقادم العھد t. al-‘ahd
(az-zaman) progression or lapse of time;
مع تقادم الزمن in the course of time
قادم qādim pl. -ūn, قدوم qudūm, قدام
guddām one arriving, arriver, arrival,
newcomer; -- coming, next (e.g., year,
month, and the like)
مقدم muqaddim offerer, tenderer,
presenter, giver, donor │ مقدم الطلب m. aṭ-
ṭalab applicant 749
مقدم muqaddam put before s.th. ( ,(على
prefixed, prefaced ( على to s.th.),
anteceding, preceding ( على s.th.); front,
face; fore part, front part; prow, bow (of a
ship); o nose (of an airplane, and the like);
antecedent of a proportion (math.);
overseer, supervisor; foreman; a military
rank, approx.: major (Ir., U.A.R.);
lieutenant colonel (formerly syr.);
officially appointed legal guardian (Tun.);
administrator or trustee of a wakf estate
(Tun.); مقدم عليه a legal minor placed under
officially established guardianship (Tun.);
مقدما muqaddaman in advance, beforehand
مقدمة muqaddima, muqaddama pl. -āt
fore part, front part; front, face; prow, bow
(of a ship); foreground; foremost rank or
line, forefront, head, lead; advance guard,
vanguard, van; foreword, preface,
introduction, prologue, proem, preamble;
prelude; premise
متقدم mutaqaddim preceding,
antecedent; moving forward, advancing;
well-advanced; (being) in front, ahead, in
the fore part; foremost; aforesaid, beforementioned;
advanced; senior (athlet.) │
المتقدم ذكره (dikruhū) the aforesaid, the
before-mentioned; (متقدم في السن (في العمر
(sinn, ‘umr) advanced in age, well along
in years, old; متقدم على ابانه (ibbānihī)
premature, precipitate, untimely; المتقدمون
والمتأخرون (wa-l-muta’akkirūn) the earlier
and the later = all
قدو) and قدي) قدا qadā u (qadw) and قدي qadiya
a ( قدى qadan, قداوة qadāwa) to be tasty,
savory (food) VIII to imitate, copy ( ب s.o.,
s.th.), emulate ( ب s.o.), follow s.o.’s ( (ب
model or example, be guided ( ب by)
قدوة qudwa, qidwa model, pattern,
example, exemplar
قدي qadīy tasty, savory, palatable (food)
اقتداء iqtidā’ imitation, emulation; اقتداء
ب iqtidā’an bi following the model or
example of
قذة qudda pl. قذذ qudad, قذاذ qidād feather of an
arrow │ حذو القذة بالقذة (ḥadwa) exactly
identical, deceptively alike
قذر qadira a (qadar) and qadura u ( قذارة
qadāra) to be or become dirty, unclean,
filthy II to make dirty, soil, sully,
contaminate, pollute, defile ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.) X to find or deem ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
dirty, unclean, impure, filthy, squalid
قذر qadar uncleanliness, impurity; (pl.
اقذار aqdār) dirt, filth, squalor
قذر qadir, qadr dirty, unclean, impure,
filthy, squalid
قذر qadir dainty, fastidious, squeamish
قذارة qadāra dirtiness, uncleanliness,
impurity, filthiness, squalidness
قاذورة qādūra pl. -āt dirt, filth, squalor;
rubbish, garbage; (moral) defilement
مقاذر maqādir2 dirty things, dirt, filth
قذع qada‘a a (qad‘) to defame, malign, vilify ( ه
s.o.), backbite, wag an evil tongue, make
slanderous remarks
قذف qadafa i (qadf) to throw, cast ( ب or
ھ s.th.); to throw away, discard ( ب or ھ
s.th.); to fling, hurl, toss ( ب or ھ s.th.); to
hurl down, toss down ( ب or ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to push, shove ( ب or ھ، ه s.o., s.th.);
to row, oar ( ب or ھ s.th.); to eject, emit,
discharge ( ب or ھ s.th.); to expel ( ب or ، ب
ه s.o., s.th.); to evict, oust ( ب or ه s.o.); to
drop ( ب s.th.); to pelt ( ب ھ، ه s.o. with); to
defame, slander, calumniate ( ه s.o.); to
accuse ( ب ه s.o. of), charge ( ب ه s.o. with);
to vomit │ قذفه بالقنابل to bomb s.th., strafe
s.th. with bombs; قذف عليه الشتائم to hurl
abusive language at s.o. II to row, oar 750
VI to pelt one another ( ب with); to throw
to each other, throw back and forth ( ھ
s.th.); to shove around, push around ( ه or
ب s.o.) │ تقاذفت به الأمواج (amwāju) to be
tossed about by the waves VII to be
thrown, be cast, be flung, be hurled, be
tossed, be flung off
قذف qadf defamation; calumny, slander,
false accusation (esp., of fornication; Isl.
Law); rowing, oaring │ القذف بالقنابل
bombing, bombardment; طائرة قذف القنابل
bomber
قذفي qadfī slanderous, libelous,
defamatory
قذاف qaddāf: طيارة قذافة (ṭayyāra)
bomber
قذيفة qadīfa pl. قذائف qada’if2 projectile;
bomb; shell; fuse, detonator │ قذيفة نسافة
(nassāfa) torpedo; قذيفة يدوية (yadawīya)
hand grenade
مقذف miqdaf pl. مقاذف maqādif2 oar,
paddle
مقذاف miqdāf pl. مقاذيف maqādīf2 oar,
paddle
تقذيف taqdīf rowing, oaring
قاذفة qādifa: قاذفة القنابل pl. قاذفات القنابل
bomber; قاذفة اللھب q. al-lahab or قاذفة النار
flame thrower
مقذوف maqdūf pl. مقاذيف maqādīf2 and
مقذوفة maqdūfa pl. -āt missile; projectile
قذال qadāl pl. قذل qudul, اقذلة aqdila occiput
قذى IV: اقذى عينه (‘ainahū) to vex, annoy, gall
s.o., cause s.o. worry
قذى qadan (coll.; n. un. قذاة qadāh) s.th.
that gets in one's eye or into a beverage, a
floating impurity, mote, speck; foreign
body in the eye │ قذى في عينه (‘ainihī) an
odious thing, approx.: an eyesore, a thorn
in the flesh; اغضى على القذى (agḍā) to bear
annoyance patiently, grin and bear it,
swallow the bitter pill; غمض جفونه على القذى
(gammaḍa jufūnahū) do.
قذى qidan pl. اقذاء aqdā’ fine dust; pl.
اقذاء particles floating in the air
قر qarra (1st pers. perf. qarartu) i, (1st
pers. perf. qarirtu) a ( قرار qarār) to settle
down, establish o.s., become settled or
sedentary, take up one's residence, rest,
abide, dwell, live, reside, remain, stay,
linger ( ب or في in, at a place) │ قر الرأي على
(ra’yu) it was decided to ..., the decision
was reached to …, a resolution was passed
on s.th. or to the effect that; قر رأيه على
(ra’yuhū) to resolve, determine on s.th.,
make up one’s mind to (do s.th.), decide,
make a decision for or on or to do s.th.; لا
يقر له حال to be flighty, be of unstable
temperament; لا يقر له قرار (qarār) to be
restless, restive, uneasy, wavering,
undecided; -- qarra a i (qarr) to be cold,
chilly, cool │ قر عينا (‘ainan) to be of good
cheer; قرت عينه (‘ainuhū) to be glad, be
delighted ( ب at) II to settle, make
sedentary ( في ه s.o. in, at a place), establish
في ه) s.th. in); to fix, settle, appoint, assign,
schedule, determine, stipulate, regulate ( ھ
s.th.); to decide ( ھ s.th.); to determine,
resolve, decide ( ھ on s.th.); to confirm,
establish, affirm, aver ( ھ s.th.); to report,
relate, tell ( ھ s.th.); to make a report, give
a paper ( عن on); to make a statement; to
force s.o. ( ه) to confess or acknowledge
s.th. ( على or ب), make s.o. ( ه) confess or
acknowledge s.th. ( على or ب) IV to settle,
make sedentary ( في ھ s.o. in, at a place),
establish ( في ھ s.th. in); to safeguard ( ھ
s.th.); to have ( ه s.o.) sit down, seat ( ه s.o.,
في in, in a seat); to set up, institute ( ھ
s.th.); to found, establish ( ھ s.th.); to
install, instate ( في s.o. in an office); to
confirm, establish, affirm, aver ( ھ s.th.);
to agree, consent ( ب or ھ to); to
acknowledge, own ( ب or ھ s.th.); to
confess, avow, admit ( ب s.th.), own ( ب to
s.th.); to concede, 751 grant ( ھ or ب ل to
s.o. s.th.) │ اقر عينه (‘ainahū) (to cool
s.o.’s eye =) to gladden, delight s.o. V to
be fixed, be settled, be appointed, be
scheduled, be determined, be regulated, be
stipulated, be decided; to resolve itself
(situation) X to settle down, establish o.s.
become settled or sedentary, take up
one’s residence ( ب or في in. at a place); to
come to rest ( ب or في in, at a place); to
rest, abide, dwell, live, reside, remain,
stay, linger ( ب or في in, at a place, الى with
s.o.); to be firmly embedded, got stuck,
get lodged ( في in); to be firm, solid,
enduring, durable, lasting, stable; to
become stabilized, stabilize, be
consolidated (situation, conditional;
ultimately to attain ( على a state or
condition), finally find a firm position (
على in); to become finally ( على s.th.),
ultimately turn into s.th. ( على ); to be
established, settled, fixed; to be stationary
│ استقر خاطره على (kāṭiruhū) his mind
dwelled on …; استقر الرأي على (ra’yu) it
was decided to the decision was reached
to ...; a resolution was passed on s.th. or to
the effect that; استقر رأيه على (ra’yuhū) to
resolve, determine on s.th., make up one’s
mind to (do s.th.), decide, make a decision
for or on or to do s.th.; استقر له الأمور his
situation had stabilized; لا يستقر له قرار
(qarārun) to be restless, restive, uneasy,
wavering, undecided; لم نستقر بعد على حال
(ba‘du) we haven’t yet arrived at, a lasting
solution, we haven’t yet attained a
definitive position; استقر امره على he finally
became ..., he ended up as ...; استقر في نفسه
to be a positive fact with s.o., be beyond
doubt for s.o.; (استقر به المقام (المكان
(muqāmu, makānu) to settle down
permanently; to sit down; not to move
from one’s seat; استقر به المجلس (majlisu) to
sit down, get seated, take a seat; استقر به
الحال to be firmly established, be settled; to
be in a secure position
قر qarr cold, chilly, cool
قر qurr cold, coldness, chilliness,
coolness
قرة qirra cold, coldness, chilliness,
coolness
قرة العين qurrat al-‘ain consolation for
the eye; delight of the eye; joy, pleasure,
delight; darling; (bot.) cress
قرار qarār sedentariness, settledness,
stationariness, sedentation; fixedness,
fixity; firmness, solidity; steadiness,
constancy, continuance, permanency,
stability; repose, rest, stillness; duration;
abode, dwelling, habitation; residence;
resting place; bottom (e.g., of a
receptacle); depth (of the sea); (pl. -āt)
decision, resolution │ لا قرار له (lā qarāra)
inconstant, changeable, unstable;
bottomless, unfathomable, immeasurable;
دار القرار the hereafter, the world to come;
O قرار الموجه q. al-maujah wave trough
(techn.); قرارات التعديل modifying
regulations
قرارة qarāra bottom; low ground,
depression, depth │ في قرارة النفس (q. innafs)
in the depth of the heart
قرير qarīr: قرير العين q. al-‘ain happy,
gratified, delighted, glad
قارورة qārūra pl. قوارير qawārīr22 longnecked
bottle
مقر maqarr pl. مقار maqārr2 abode,
dwelling, habitation; residence; storage
place; seat center; site, place; station;
position (at sea) │ مقر العمل m. al-‘amal
place of employment; مقر القيادة
headquarters; مقر الوظيفة official seat, seat
of office
تقرير taqrīr establishment, settlement;
fixation; appointment, assignment,
regulation, arrangement, stipulation;
determination; decision; (pl. تقارير
taqārīr2) report, account │ تقرير المصير
self-determination (pol.); حق الشعوب في
تقرير مصيرھا (ḥaqq aš-š.) the right of
peoples to self-determination; تقرير الحالة
الجوية ٧٥٢ (gawwīya) weather report; تقرير
الشرطة t. aš-šurṭa police report
إقرار iqrār settling, settlement (of
nomads); setting up, institution,
establishment; foundation; installation,
instatement; delivery of a confirmation or
assurance; confirmation, affirmation,
averment; assurance; acknowledgment;
confession, avowal, admission
استقرار istiqrār sedentariness,
settledness, stationariness, sedentation;
remaining, abiding, lingering, stay,
sojourn; settling, settlement,
establishment; steadiness, constancy,
continuance, permanency; strengthening,
consolidation, stabilization, stability;
repose, rest, stillness
قار qārr sedentary, settled, resident;
standing, permanent; fixed, stationary;
cold, chilly, cool │ الأداءات (غير) القارة
(adā’āt) (in)direct taxes (magr.); لجنة قارة
(lajna) permanent committee, standing
committee
قارة qārra pl. -āt continent, mainland
مقرر muqarrir pl. -ūn reporter (in
general and of a newspaper)
مقرر muqarrar established, settled;
fixed, determined, decided, appointed,
assigned, scheduled, regulated, stipulated,
decreed; (pl. -āt) curriculum; مقررات
decisions │ مقرر الميزانية m. al-mīzānīya the
proposed budget; حقيقة مقررة accomplished
fact; اموال مقررة direct taxes
مستقر mustaqirr sedentary, settled,
resident; firmly established, deep-seated,
deep-rooted; fixed, immobile, stationary;
firm, solid, enduring, durable, lasting,
stable
مستقر mustaqarr abode, dwelling,
habitation; residence; seat; resting place
قرأ qara’a a ( قراءة qirā’a) to declaim, recite ( ھ
s.th., esp. the Koran; ھ على to s.o. s.th.); to
read ( ھ s.th.; ھ ل or على s.o. s.th.); to
peruse ( ھ s.th.); to study ( ھ ھ على under
s.o. s.th.) │ قرأ عليه السلام (salāma) to greet,
salute s.o.; to extend greeting, to s.o.; قرأ
حسابه ل to reckon with s.th., take s.th. into
account; قرأ له الف حساب (alfa ḥ.) to have a
thousand apprehensions about s.th. IV to
make or have ( ه s.o.) read ( ھ s.th.); to
teach ( ه s.o.) the art of reciting ( ه s.th.); to
teach ( ه s.o.) how to read ( ھ s.th.) │ اقرأه
السلام (salāma) to extend greetings to s.o.
X to ask s.o. ( ه) to recite or read; to
investigate, examine, explore ( ھ s.th.),
search ( ھ into s.th.); to study thoroughly (
ھ s.th.)
قرء qur’ pl. قروء qurū’ menses,
menstruation
قراءة qirā’a pl. -āt recitation, recital
(esp. of the Koran); reading (also, e.g., of
measuring instruments; parl.); manner of
recitation, punctuation and vocalization of
the Koranic text │ قراءة الكف q. al-kaff
chiromancy, palmistry
القرآن al-qur’ān the Koran
قرآني qur’ānī Koranic, of or pertaining
to the Koran
استقراء istiqrā’ pl. -āt investigation,
examination, exploration; see also under
قرو
استقرائي istiqrā’ī see under قرو
قارئ qārī’ pl. -ūn, قراء qurrā’ reciter
(esp. of the Koran); reader │ قارئ الكف q.
al-kaff chiromancer, palmist
مقروء maqrū’ read (past part.); legible,
readable; worth reading
مقرئ muqri’ reciter of the Koran
قراج qarāž pl. -āt (Saudi Arabian spelling)
garage
قرب 1 qaruba u (qurb, مقربة maqraba) to be near
الى) or من to s.o., to s.th.); to come near,
get close ( الى or من to s.o., to s.th.), close
in ( الى or من on s.o., on s.th.), approach
753
الى) or من s.o., s.th.); to approximate ( الى
or من s.th.); - qariba a to be near ( ھ، ه to
s.o., to s.th.); to come near, get close ( ھ، ه
to s.o., to s.th.), close in ( ھ، ه on s.o., on
s.th.), approach ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
approximate ( ھ s.th.); to draw near, be
coming on, approach │ ما يقرب من
(yaqrubu) (with foll. figure)
approximately, about, some, circa II to
cause or allow ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) to come
near or get close ( الى or من to s.th.), make
or let ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) approach ( الى or من
s.th.), bring close ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.; الى or من
to s.th.), advance, move ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.; الى
or من toward s.th.), approximate (o s.th.;
الى or من to); to bring home ( ھ من or الى to
s.o. s.th., e.g., an idea); to take as associate
or companion ( من ه s.o. for o.s.); to bring
closer to comprehension, reveal more
fully ( ھ s.th.), clarify the concept,
facilitate the understanding ( ھ of s.th.) ; to
offer up, present ( ھ ل to God as sacrifice);
(Chr.) to administer Communion ( ه to
s.o.); to sheathe, put into the scabbard ( ھ
the sword) │ قرب بينھم to bring people
closer together, make peace among
people, reconcile people III to be near (، ھ
ه to s.o., to s.th.); to come near, come
close, get close ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.), close
in ( ھ، ه on s.o., on s.th.), approach ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to approximate ( ھ s.th.); to be
almost equivalent ( ھ with s.th.), amount
to almost the same thing ( ھ as s.th.); to be
on the point ( ان of doing s.th.), be about (
ان to do s.th.); to bring (close) together ( بين
و – different things) V to approach ( من or
الى s.o., s.th.), come or get near s.o., near
s.th. ( من or الى ), come close, get close ( من
or الى to s.o.), gain access ( من or الى to
s.o.); to seek to gain s.o.’s ( الى ) favor,
curry favor ( الى with s.o.); (Chr.) to
receive Communion VI to be or come
near each other, approach one another,
approximate each other VIII to approach (
من s.o., s.th.), come, advance, or get near
s.o. or s.th. ( من ), come close, get close ( من
to) X to find near, regard as near ( ھ s.th.)
قرب qurb nearness, closeness,
proximity, vicinity; qurba (prep.) in the
vicinity of, near, toward │ قرب الظھر
qurba ẓ-ẓuhr toward noon; بقرب or بالقرب
من in the vicinity of, near, close to; عن قرب
from a short distance, from close up
قربة qirba pl. -āt, قرب qirab waterskin;
-- (pl. قرب qirab) bagpipe
قربى qurbā relation, relationship,
kinship │ ذو القربى pl. ذوو القربى dawū l-q.
relative, relation
قريب qarīb near (in place and time),
nearby, close at hand; in the neighborhood
or vicinity ( الى or من of s.o., of s.th.), close
الى) or من to s.o., to s.th.), adjacent ( الى or
من to s.th.); easily understood, simple; (pl.
اقرباء aqribā’2) relative, relation; قريبا
qarīban soon, before long, shortly, in the
near future; recently, lately, not long ago,
the other day │ من قريب and عما قريب
(‘ammā q.) soon, before long, shortly, in
the near future; لا – من قريب او بعيد not -- in
the least, not by a far cry; في القريب العاجل in
the immediate future; قريب من الحسن
(ḥasan) fair, fairly good (as a schoolreport
grade); قريب العھد q. al-‘ahd recent,
new, young; من عھد قريب since recently, of
late, of a recent date; recently, lately, not
long ago, the other day; قريب العھد ب
having adopted or acquired s.th. very
recently; not long familiar or acquainted
with s.th., inexperienced at s.th., a novice
in s.th.; قريب التناول q. at-tanāwul easy to
understand
قراب qirāb pl. قرب qurub, اقربة aqriba
sheath, scabbard (of a .word); receptacle,
container, case, etui, covering
قرابة qarāba relation, relationship,
kinship 754
قرابة qurāba: قرابة ثلاثة اعوام qurabata
talātati a‘wām almost three years
قربان qurbān pl. قرابين qarābīn2
sacrifice, offering, immolation, oblation;
Mass (Chr.); Eucharist (Chr.) │ قربان الشكر
q. aš-šukr thank offering; عيد القربان ‘īd alq.
Corpus Christi (Chr.); تناول القربان
(tanāwala) to receive Communion (Chr.);
رفع القربان على or قدم القربان على (qaddama) to
read Mass for s.o. (Chr.)
قربانة qurbāna Host; Communion (Chr.)
اقرب aqrab2 nearer, nearest, next; more
probable, more likely; probable, likely; pl.
اقربون aqrabūn, اقارب aqārib2 relations,
relatives │ اقرب الى الفھم (fahm) easier to
understand, more comprehensible; ھم اقرب
الى الصحة (الصواب ) (ṣiḥḥa, ṣawab) it is quite
probable, it is fairly correct, it is rather
exact, it comes fairly close to the troth; في
اقرب وقت (ممكن ) fī aqrabi waqtin
(mumkinin) or باقرب ما يمكن (yumkinu) as
soon as possible, in the shortest time
possible
مقرب maqrab pl. مقارب maqārib2 nearest
or shortest way, short cut
مقربة maqraba, maqruba nearness,
closeness, proximity, vicinity; (pl. مقارب
maqārib2) nearest or shortest way, short
cut │ على مقربة nearby, close at hand; على
مقربة in the vicinity of, near, close to
تقريب taqrīb approximation │ تقريبا
taqrīban, بالتقريب، بوجه التقريب bi-wajh t-t.
or على التقريب approximately, almost,
nearly, roughly, about; محسوس تقريبا just
barely perceptible
تقريبي taqrībī approximate,
approximative
تقرب taqarrub approach; approximation
من) to)
تقارب taqārub mutual approach; mutual
approximation; rapprochement
اقتراب iqtirāb approach; approximation
مقرب muqarrab pl. -ūn close
companion, favorite, protégé, intimate
مقارب muqārib approximate,
approximative, estimated; mediocre,
medium, of medium quality
متقارب mutaqārib close together,
following in close intervals, consecutive,
successive, subsequent; المتقارب name of a
poetical meter
قارب qārib pl. قوارب qawārib2 boat, skiff │
قارب q. az-zubda (eg.) sauceboat for
melted butter; قارب (musallaḥ) gunboat;
قارب النجاة q. an-najāh lifeboat; قارب التنقيب
عن الألغام mine sweeper; قارب ناري
motorboat
قواربي qawāribī boatman
قربوس qarabūs (qarbūs) pl. قرابيس qarābīs2
saddlebow
قربينة qarabīna pl. -āt carbine
قرح qaraḥa a (qarḥ) to wound ( ه s.o.); --
qariḥa a (qaraḥ) to ulcerate, fester; to be
covered with ulcers, be ulcerous II to
wound ( ه s.o.) V to ulcerate, fester; to be
covered with ulcers, be ulcerous VIII to
invent, originate, think up ( ھ s.th.); to
improvise, extemporize, deliver off-hand (
ھ a speech); to demand in a brash or
imperious manner ( ھ or ب على of s.o.
s.th.); to propose, suggest ( ھ على to s.o.
s.th.)
قرح garḥ pl. قروح qurūḥ wound; ulcer,
sore
قرح qariḥ covered with ulcers,
ulcerous, ulcerated; ulcerating, festering
قرحة qarḥa pl. قرح qiraḥ ulcer, sore;
abscess, boil │ القرحة الرخوة (rakwa) soft
chancre, chancroid (med.)
قراح qarāḥ pure, limpid, clear (esp.
water) 755
قريح qarīḥ pure, limpid, clear (esp.
water)
قريحة qarīḥa pl. قرائح qarā’iḥ2 natural
disposition, innate disposition, bent;
genius, talent, gift, faculty
تقرح taqarruḥ ulceration
اقتراح iqtirāḥ invention, improvisation;
(pl. -āt) proposition, proposal, suggestion;
motion
مقرح muqarraḥ covered with ulcers,
ulcerous, ulcerated
متقرح mutaqarriḥ covered with ulcers,
ulcerous, ulcerated; ulcerating, festering
مقترح muqtaraḥ pl. -āt proposition,
proposal, suggestion; motion
قرد qird pl. قردة qirada, قرود qurūd ape,
monkey
قرد qurd (coll.; n. un. ة) tick (zool.)
قراد qurād (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. قردان
qirdān tick, ticks (zool.) │ ابو قردان abū q.
(eg.) white egret (zool.)
مقرود maqrūd exhausted
قريدس quraidis (syr.) shrimp (zool.)
قرس qarasa a (qaras) to he severe, fierce,
biting, grim (the cold) II to freeze, make
torpid, (be)numb, nip ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.; of
the cold)
قارس qāris severe, fierce, biting, grim
(of the cold); very cold, bitterly cold,
freezing, frozen
قرش qaraša i u (qarš) to gnash, grind (one’s
teeth); to nibble, crunch, chew ( ھ s.th.); --
qaraša i (qarī), II and VIII to earn money,
make a living ( لعياله li-‘iyālihī for one’s
family)
قرش qirš shark (zool.); (pl. قروش qurūš)
piaster │ قرش صاغ (eg., = ½ Eg. pound)
standard piaster; قرش تعريفة (eg., = ½ قرش
صاغ ) little piaster
قريش quraiš Koreish, name of an ھ rab
tribe in ancient Mecca
قرشي qurašī of, pertaining to, or
belonging to the Koreish tribe; Koreishite
قريش qarīš, قريشة qarīša sour cheese
مقرش muqriš rich, well-to-do,
prosperous, wealthy, moneyed
قرص qaraṣa u (qarṣ) to pinch, nip, tweak ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to scratch ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
bite, sting ( ه s.o.; of a gnat, flea, and the
like) │ قرصه بلسانه (bi-lisānihī to hurt s.o.
with words II to pinch or nip sharply,
tweak ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to scratch all over (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to shape into round, flat
loaves ( العجين the dough)
قرص qurṣ pl. اقراص aqrāṣ round, flat
loaf of bread; (flat, circular) plate, disk,
discus; phonograph record, disc; sheave,
pulley (mech.); tablet, pastille, lozenge,
troche │ قرص الأرقام dial (of a telephone);
اقراص عجوة a. ‘ajwa a pastry mode of rich
dough with almonds and date paste (syr.);
قرص عسل q. ‘asal honeycomb; جلب النار
لقرصه (nāra) approx.: to feather one’s nest,
have an eye out for one’s own interest,
know on which side one’s bread is
buttered
قرصي qurṣī: قرصي الشكل q. aš-šakl disklike,
disk-shaped, discoid, discous
قرصة qurṣa pl. قرص quraṣ round, flat
loaf of bread
قرصة qarṣa pl. qaraṣāt pinch, nip,
tweak; bite, sting (of s gnat, lies, and the
like); crowbar, pinch bar, handspike, lever
قريص qurraiṣ stinging nettle (Urtica
urens L.; bot.)
قراصة qarrāṣa pincers, nippers
قراصية qarāṣīya (syr.) small, black
plums; (eg.) prunes 756
قارص qāriṣ, biting; stinging; painful,
nipping, tormenting (e.g., cold) │ قوارص
الكلمات q. al-kalimāt biting words
قرصنة qarṣana piracy, robbery on the high seas
freebooting
قرصان qurṣān pl. قراصن qarāṣin قراصين , 2
qarāṣīn2 corsair, pirate, freebooter
قرض qaraḍ i (qarḍ) to cut, sever, cut off, clip (
ھ s.th.); to gnaw ( ھ s.th. or on s.th.),
nibble ( ھ s.th. or at s.th.), bite, champ ( ھ
s.th.), eat ( ھ into s.th.), corrode ( ھ s.th.) │
قرض رباطه (ribāṭahū) to die; قرض الشعر
(ši‘ra) to write poetry, make verses II = I;
IV to loan, lend, or advance, money ( ه to
s.o.); to lend ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.) VI تقارضوا
الثناء (tanā’a) they competed in the recital
of eulogies VII to die out; to become
extinct; to perish VIII to raise a loan ( من
with), borrow ( من from) X to ask for a
loan ( من s.o.)
قرض qarḍ (qirḍ) pl. قروض qurūḍ loan
│ قرض حسن (ḥasan) interest-free loan with
unstipulsted due dste; قرض مالي (mālī)
(monetary) loan; اسھم القرض ashum al-q.
bonds
قريض qarīḍ poetry
قراضة qurāḍa pl. -āt chips, shreds,
parings, shavings, scraps; iron filings
قراضة qarrāḍa clothes moth
مقراض miqrāḍ pl. مقاريض maqārīḍ2
scissors
انقراض inqirāḍ dying out, gradual
disappearance; extinction
اقتراض iqtirāḍ loan
استقراض istiqrāḍ raising of a loan; loan
القوارض al-qawāriḍ the rodents
مقرض muqriḍ pl. -ūn moneylender;
lender
منقرض munqariḍ extinct, exterminated,
perished
قرط qaraṭa u (qarṭ) to cut into small
pieces, chop, mince ( ھ s.th.) II do.; to
snuff, trim ( ھ a candle, a wick); to
squeeze ( على s.th.); (eg.) to urge, ply ( على
s.o.); to be stern, be strict ( على with s.o.);
to beset, harass, press hard ( على s.o.); to
give little ( على to s.o.), be illiberal, be
stingy ( على with s.o.), scrimp ( على s.o.)
قرط qurṭ pl. اقراط aqrāṭ, قراط qirāṭ, قروط
qurūṭ earring; eardrop, pendant for the ear
تقريطة taqrīṭa pl. تقاريط taqārīṭ2 wrapper
worn by women (tun.)
قيراط 2 pl. قراريط look up alphabetically
قرطاجنة see قرطجنة
قرطاس qirṭās pl. قراطيس qarāṭīs2 paper; sheet of
paper; paper bag
قرطبة qurṭuba2 Cordova (city in Spain)
قرطجنة qarṭajanna قرطاجنة , 2 Carthage
قرطس qarṭas paper; sheet of paper
قرطم qarṭ􀀀ama to cut off, clip ( ھ s.th.)
قرطم qirṭim, qurṭum safflower
(Carthamus tinctorius; bot.)
قرطمان qurṭumān oats
قرظ II to praise, commend, laud, extol, acclaim
ه) s.o.); to eulogize ( ھ s.th.), lavish praise
ھ) on)
قرظ qaraẓ pods of a species of sant tree
(Acacia nilotica; bot.)
قريظ qarīẓ eulogy, encomium,
panegyric
تقريظ taqrīẓ pl. -āt, تقاريظ taqārīẓ2
eulogy, encomium, panegyric
قرع qara‘a a (qar‘) to knock, rap ( ھ at
s.th.); to hit, bump ( ھ s.th. or against
s.th.); to strike, beat, thump ( ھ against
s.th.; ب ھ، ه s.o., s.th. with; ب على with
s.th. on or s.th. else); to thrash. spank ( ب ه
ه s.o. with); to clink, touch ( ھ glasses); to
757 ring, sound (e s.th.); -- qari‘a (qara‘)
to be or become bald(headed); to be
empty, bare, stark (place) │ قرع الجرس
(jarasa) to ring the bell; قرع سمعه
(sam‘ahū) to reach s.o.’s ear; قرع سنه
(sinnahū) to gnash one’s teeth; قرع سن الندم
ل (على ) (sinna n-nadam) to repent s.th.;
قرعه ضميره ḍamīrahū) his conscience
tormented or smote him, he had a guilty
conscience, he felt grave compunctions;
قرع الكأس (ka’sa) to touch glasses, drink to
s.o.’s ( ل) health II to scold, chide, opbraid
ه) s.o.), snap ( ه at s.o.); to rebuke, blame,
censure ( ه s.o.) III to fight, come to blows
ه) with s.o.); to bottle, fight ( ه s.o.); to
contend by force of arms ( ه عن with s.o.
for s.th.); to cast or draw lots ( ه with s.o.)
VI to hump against each other, clash; to
cast lots among each other ( على for) VIII
to cast lots among each other ( على for); to
vote, take a vote ( على on); to draw lots ( ه
for s.o.). choose by lot ( ه s.o.); to muster,
recruit ( ه s.o.; mil.); to elect ( ھ , s.o., s.th.)
قرع qar‘ knock(ing), rap(ping), beating,
striking, thumping; ring(ing)
قرع qar‘ (coll.; n. un. ة) gourd, pumpkin
│ قرع صروف (eg.) bottle gourd, calabash
(Lagenaria vulgaris Ser.; bot.); قرع كوسى
q. kūsā (eg., syr.) zucchini (bot.)
قرع qara‘ boldness, boldheadedness;
emptiness, bareness, starkness
قرعة qar‘a (n. vic.) knock, rap, blow,
stroke, thump; -- (n. un.) gourd, pumpkin;
skull, head
قرعي qar‘ī gourd-, pumpkin- (in
compounds), cucurbitaceous
قرعة qur‘a pl. قرع qura‘ lot; ballot; lotcasting;
(mil.) conscription, recruitment
(by lot), balloting │ قرعة عسكرية
(‘askarīya) enlistment, draft, recruitment
(mil.); انفار القرعة drafted recruits
قراع qurā‘, مرض القراع maraḍ al-qurā‘ a
skin disease, ringworm (med.)
قريع qar‘ exquisite, select │ قريع الدھر q.
ad-dahr the greatest hero of his time
اقرع aqra‘2 bald; baldheaded; empty,
bare, stark; scabby, scurfy
مقرعة miqra‘a pl. مقارع maqāri‘2
knocker, rapper (of a door); whip, switch;
cudgel, club
تقريع taqrī‘ chiding, scolding, reproof,
rebuke, censure
مقارعة muqāra‘a fight, struggle (with
genit. = against)
اقتراع iqtirā‘ pl. -āt balloting,
recruitment, draft (mil.); vote ( على on);
election
قارعة qāri‘a pl. قوارع qawāri‘2 (sudden)
misfortune, calamity; adversity; القارعة the
hour of the Last Judgment │ قارعة الطريق
middle of the road, roadway; road,
highway; على قارعة الطرق (ṭuruq) on the
open road
قرف qarafa i (qarf) to peel, pare, bark, derind (
ھ s.th.); -- qarifa a (qaraf) to loathe ( ھ
s.th.), feel disgust ( ھ for), be nauseated ( ھ
by) II to peel, pare, bark, derind ( ھ s.th.);
to be loathsome, arouse disgust III to let
o.s. be tempted ( ھ to a sin), yield (e to a
desire) VIII to commit, perpetrate ( ھ a
crime)
قرف qaraf loathing, disgust, detestation
قرفة qirfa pl. قرف qiraf rind, bark, skin,
crust; scab, scurf; cinnamon
قرافة qarāfa (eg.) cemetery, specif.,
graveyard below the Mokattam Hills near
Cairo
قريفة qarīfa ill humor, ill temper
قرفان qarfān (eg.) disgusted, nauseated,
sink and tired
اقتراف iqtirāf commission, perpetration
(of a crime) 758
مقرف muqrif loathsome, disgusting,
nauseating, repulsive, detestable
مقترف muqtarif perpetrator (of a crime)
قرفص qarfaṣa to squat on the ground (with
thighs against the stomach and arms
enfolding the legs)
قرفصاء qurfuṣā’2 squatting, squatting
position │ جلس (قعد) القرفصاء (qurfuṣā’a) to
squat on one’s heels
قرفال qarfāl (coll.; n. un. ة) vetch
قرق qaraqa u (qarq) to cluck (hen)
قرقذان qarqadān squirrel
قرقر qarqara ( قرقرة qarqara) to roll; to rumble
(stomach); to bray (camel); to coo
(pigeon); to purr (cat)
قرقرة qarqara pl. قراقر qarāqir2
rumbling noise (in the stomach); gurgle;
braying (of a camel); cooing (of a pigeon);
purr(ing) (of a cat)
قرقوش qarqūš pl. قراقيش qarāqīš2 cartilage
قرقوشة qarqūša pl. قراقيش qarāqīš2 (eg.)
a kind of crisp cookies
مقرقش muqarqaš (eg.) crisp(ed)
قرقض qarqaḍa (eg.) to gnaw, bite ( ھ on s.th.)
│ قرقض على اسنانه to gnash one’s teeth
قرقع qarqa‘a to be noisy, boisterous; to creak,
grate; to crack, pop │ قرقع ضاحكا (بالضحك
or) (ḍaḥk) to burst into loud laughter,
laugh noisily, guffaw; قرقع بسوطه (bisauṭihī)
to crack the whip
قرقعة qarqa‘a uproar, din, noise;
creaking, creaks, grating; crack(ing),
pop(ping); rumble, rumbling
قرقوز qaraqōz (from Turk. karagöz) chief
character of the Turkish shadow play
قرقول see قرة قرقول
قرم 1 qarama i (qarm) to gnaw ( ھ on s.th.),
nibble ( ھ at s.th.)
قرم qarm pl. قروم qurūm studhorse; lord,
master
قرام qirām blanket, carpet, curtain
مقرم miqram pl. مقارم maqārim2
bedcover, bedspread.
قرمة 2 qurma pl. قرم quram (eg.) tree stump;
log, block of wood; chopping block
القرم 3 al-qirim and القريم al-qirīm the Crimea
قرمد qarmada to plaster, coat with plaster ( ھ
s.th.); to tile, cover with tile ( ھ s.th.)
قرمد qarmad (coll.) plaster; plaster of
Paris
قرميد qirmīd (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. قراميد
qarāmīd2 (fired) brick, roof tile; plaster of
Paris
قرمز qirmiz kermes (the dried bodies of the
female kermes insect, coccus ilicis, which
yield a red dyestuff)
قرمزي qirmizī crimson, carmine; scarlet
│ الحمى القرمزي (ḥummā) scarlet fever
(med.)
قرمش qarmaša (eg.) to eat s.th. dry ( ,(ھ
crunch, nibble
مقرمش muqarmaš dry, crisp
قرمطي 1 qarmaṭī Karmathian (adj. and n.); pl.
قرامطة qarāmiṭa Karmathians
قرموط 2 qarmūṭ pl. قراميط qarāmīṭ2 a variety of
sheatfish (zool.; Eg.)
قرن qarana i (qarn) to connect, link,
join, unite, combine, associate ( الى or ب ھ
s.th. with); to add ( الى ھ s.th. to); to
couple, yoke together, hitch together, put
together, bind together ( ھ s.th.) III to
unite, join forces, associate ( ه with s.o.); to
be simultaneous, go hand in hand ( ھ with
s.th.); to compare ( ب ھ، ه or بين -- وبين s.o.,
s.th. with; بين شيئين two things with one
another), draw a parallel ( بين -- وبين
between -- and; بين شيئين between two
things) IV to combine, 759 interrelate ( بين
شيئين two things) VIII to be connected, be
linked, be joined, be united, be combined,
be associated ( ب with); to combine,
associate, unite ( ب with); to get married,
be married ( ب to), marry ( ب s.o.); to be
coupled, be interconnected, be yoked
together, be tied together, be bound
together; to become interlinked, become
concatenate X to ripen, suppurate, come to
a head (of a furuncle)
قرن qarn pl. قرون qurūn horn (of an
animal; as a wind instrument); feeler,
tentacle, antenna; top, summit, peak (of a
mountain); the lint visible part of the
rising sun; capsule, pod (bot.); century │
ام القرن rhinoceros; وحيد القرن do.; ذو القرنين
dū l-qarnain the two-horned (an epithet
given to Alexander the Great); قرن البحر q.
al-baḥr coral; قرن سمعي (sam‘ī) ear
trumpet (= Fr, cornet acoustique); القرون
الوسطى (wusṭā) the Middle Ages
قرني qarnī horny, corneous, of born,
hornlike; leguminous, pertaining to, or of
the nature of, legumes; centennial,
centenary
قرنية qarnīya cornea (anat.)
قرن qirn pl. اقران aqrān (matched)
opponent in battle; an equal, a peer, a
match; companion, mate, fellow,
associate; equal, like
قرنة qurna pl. قرن quran, قراني qurānī
salient angle, nook, corner
قرين qarīn pl. قرناء quranā’2 connected,
joined, linked, combined, united,
associated, affiliated; companion, mate,
fellow, associate, comrade; husband,
spouse, consort; qarīna (prep.) in
connection with, in conjunction with,
upon, at │ منقطع القرين munqaṭi‘ al-q.
matchless, peerless, unrivaled,
incomparable, unique, singular
قرينة qarīna pl. -āt wife, spouse,
consort; female demon haunting women,
specif., a childbed demon; eclampsia
(med.); -- (pl. قرائن qarā’in) connection,
conjunction, union, relation, affiliation,
association, linkage; (semantic or
syntactical) coherence, context; evidence,
indication, indicium │ السيدة قرينته
(sayyida) his wife (formal style); قرائن
الأحوال the concatenation of circumstances,
the indicia, factual evidence; ضم قرينة الى
قرينة (ḍamm) combination
اقرن aqran2, f. قرناء qarnā’2 horned,
horny; one with eyebrows grown together
│ حية قرن (ḥayya) cerastes, horned viper
قران qirān close union, close
connection: conjunction (astron.);
marriage, wedding
مقارنة muqārana pl. -āt comparison │
مقارنة اللغات m. al-lugāt comparative
linguistics
اقتران iqtirān connection, conjunction,
union, association, affliliation; link,
connectedness, simultaneous interaction;
conjunction (astron.); new moon (as an
astronomical aspect); marriage, wedding
مقرون maqrūn connected, joined,
linked, combined, united, associated,
affiliated ( ب with) │ مقرون الحاجبين m. al-
ḥājibain having joined eyebrows
مقارن muqārin comparative (science)
قرنبيط qarnabīṭ cauliflower
قرنفل quranful carnation; clove
قره جوز (Eg. spelling; pronounced ’aragōz)
Karagōz, chief character of the shadow
play; Punch
قره قول qaraqōl pl. -āt police station; guard
(military, police) │ قره قول الشرف q. aššaraf
guard of honor 760
قرو V to follow up, investigate ( ھ s.th.),
inquire (. into); to check. verify ( ھ s.th.) X
to follow ( ھ s.th.); to pursue ( ھ s.th., e.g.,
a problem); to examine, study, investigate
ھ) s.th.); to explore ( ھ s.th.)
قرو qano pl. J) qurllw watering trough
│ خشب قرو kašab q. oak (wood)
استقراء istiqrā’ induction (philos.); see
also under قرأ
استقرائي istiqrā’ī inductive (philos.)
قرواطيا qaruwāṭiya Croatia
قرواطي qaruwāṭī Croatian
قروي see قرى
قرى qara i ( قرى qiran) to receive hospitably,
entertain ( ه s.o.) VIII = I
قرى qiran hospitable reception,
entertainment (of a guest); meal served to
a guest
قرية qarya pl. قرى quran village;
hamlet; small town; rural community;
القريتان al-qaryatān Mecca and Taif; Mecca
and Medina │ ام القرى umm al-qurā Mecca
قروي qarawī village-, country- (in
compounds), rustic, rural; peasant (adj.);
(pl. قرويون qarawīyūn) villager, rustic,
countryman, inhabitant of the country;
from Kairouan, Kairouan (adj.), an
inhabitant of Kairouan; a member of al
Qarawiya College in Fès (Morocco) │
جامع القرويين mosque and college in Fès
(Morocco); وزارة الشؤون البلدية والقروية
(baladīya) Ministry of Municipal and
Rural Affairs (Eg.)
قروية qarawīya countrywoman, peasant
woman
قرية qarīya pl. قرايا qarāyā yard (naut.)
مقرى miqran vary hospitable
مقراء miqrā’ very hospitable
قار qārin villager
قريدس quraidis (syr.) shrimp (zool.)
قز qazza (1st pers. perf. qazaztu) u to loathe,
detest ( عن or ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) II to vitrify ( ھ
s.th.); to glaze ( ھ s.th.) V to feel disgust (
عن or من at), be nauseated ( عن or من by),
loathe, detest, abhor ( عن or من s.o., s.th.),
have an aversion ( عن or من to)
قز qazz pl. قزوز quzūz silk; raw silk
قزاز qizāz (eg.) glass
قزاز qazzāz silk merchant
قزازة qizāza pl. -āt, قزائز qazā’iz2 (eg.)
bottle
قازوزة look up alphabetically
تقزز taqazzuz loathing, disgust,
detestation, abhorrence, aversion
قزان (Turk. kazan) qazān pl. -āt kettle, large
boiler
قزح II to embellish ( ھ one’s speech)
قوس قزح qausu qazaḥin or qausu
quzaḥa rainbow
قزحية quzaḥīya iris (anat.)
قزع qaza‘ (coll.; n. un. ة) wind-driven, tattered
clouds, scud; tuft of hair
قزعة (eg.) quz‘a dwarf, midget, pygmy
قزيعة qazī‘a tuft of hair
قزقز gazqaza (eg.) to crack ( ھ nuts, shells)
قزل qazal limp(ing)
قزم qazam pl. اقزام aqzām dwarf, midget,
pygmy; Lilliputian; little fellow, shrimp,
hop-o’-my-thumb, whippersnapper
قزموغرافيا quzmūgrāfiyā cosmography
قزموغرافي quzmūgrāfī cosmographic(al)
قزان look up alphabetically
بحر قزوين baḥr qazwīn Caspian Sea 761
قس qassa u (qass) to seek, pursue ( ھ s.th.),
strive ( ھ for), aspire ( ھ to) V do.
قس qass, qiss pl. قسوس qusūs, قسس
qusus priest, presbyter, clergyman,
minister, parson, vicar, curate, pastor
(Chr.); -- qass (= قص) sternum, breastbone
قساس qassās slanderer
قسيس qissīs pl. -ūn, قساوسة qasāwisa,
قسان qussān, اقسة aqissa, (Copt.-Chr.) قساء
qussā’ priest, presbyter, clergyman,
minister, parson, vicar, curate, pastor
(Chr.)
قسوسة qusūsa ministry, priesthood,
presbyterate (Chr.)
رسامة قسوسية risāma qusūsīya ordination
(of a priest; Chr.)
قسر qasara i (qasr) to force, compel, coerce,
constrain ( على ه s.o. to do s.th.); to
conquer, subdue, subjugate ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.)
VIII = I
قسر qasr force, compulsion, coercion,
constraint; قسرا qasran compulsorily,
forcibly, by force; of necessity,
necessarily, inevitably, perforce
اقتسار iqtisār conquest, subdual,
subjugation
قسط II to distribute ( ھ s.th.); to pay in
installments ( ھ s.th.) IV to act justly, in
fairness, equitably
قسط qisṭ justice, fairness, equity,
equitableness, fair-mindedness, rightness,
correctness; (for sg. and pl.) just, fair,
equitable, fair-minded, right, correct; --
(pl. اقساط aqsāt) part; share, allotment;
portion; installment; quantity, amount,
measure, extent │ على اقساط by
installments, gradually; كان على قسط كبير من
to possess s.th. (a quality, a characteristic)
to a large extent, have a great deal of ...
قسط qasaṭ stiffness of a joint, ankylosis
(med.)
اقسط aqsaṭ juster, fairer; more correct
تقسيط taqsīṭ payment in installments │
بالتقسيط in installments, gradually
مقسط muqsiṭ acting justly or with
fairness, doing right; just, fair
قسطر qasṭara to test the genuineness ( ھ of
coins)
قسطاس qusṭās, qisṭās pl. قساطيس qasāṭīs2
balance, scales
قسطل 1 qasṭal pl. قساطل qasāṭil2 water pipe,
water main
قسطل 2 qasṭal (eg.) chestnut
بلاد القساطلة 3 bilād al-qasāṭila Castile, Spain
القسطنطينية al-qasṭanṭīnīya Constantinople
قسم qasama i (qasm) to divide, part,
split ( ھ s.th.); to distribute, deal out,
parcel out ( على ھ s.th. to, among), divide (
على ه s.th. among); to let s.o. ( ل) share ( في
s.th.). give s.o. ( ل) a .hare of s.th. ( ,(في
allot ( في ل to s.o. s.th.); to divide,
subdivide, partition, portion, break up ( الى
ھ s.th. into), arrange, classify ( الى ه s.th.
in); to partition, to compartment ( ھ s.th.);
to assign, apportion, decree, destine,
foreordain ( ھ على or ل to s.o. s.th.; of God
or of fate); to divide ( ھ على a number by
another) II to divide, part, split ( ھ s.th.); to
distribute, deal out, parcel out, divide ( ھ
بين s.th. among); to divide, subdivide,
partition, portion, break up ( ھ s.th., ھ or
الى into), section ( ھ s.th.), arrange, classify
ھ) s.th., ھ or الى in); to partition, to
compartment ( ھ s.th.); (Chr.) to
consecrate, ordain ( ھ s.o.); to exorcise a
devil or demon ( على from s.o., by
adjuration) III to share ( ھ ه with s.o. s.th.);
to bind o.s. by oath ( على ه to s.o. to do
s.th.) IV to take an oath, swear ( ب by; على
ل to s.o. s.th.; على ان to do s.th.) │ اقسم عليه
الا فعله (illā fa‘alahū) to adjure or entreat
s.o. to do s.th.; اقسموا جھد ايمانھم (jahda
aimānihim) 762 they swore by all that is
right and holy, they swore the most
solemn oaths; اقسم بمقدساتا (muqadasātihī)
to swear by all that’s holy V to be divided,
be parted, be split; to be distributed, be
parceled out; to share ( ه، ھ a possession),
divide among themselves ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.);
to scatter, disperse ( ھ s.th.); to drive away,
dispel ( ھ s.th.); to beset grievously, harass
or torment jointly ( ه s.o.) │ تقسموه ضربا
وجيعا (ḍarban) they took turns in dealing
him painful blows, they gave him a severe
beating VI to divide or distribute among
themselves ( ھ s.th.); to beset, harass,
torment ( ه s.o.; thoughts, worries, etc.) VII
to be divided, be parted, be split; to be
distributed, be dispersed, be separated; to
be divided, be subdivided, be portioned,
be broken up ( الى into) VIII to divide or
distribute among themselves ( ھ s.th.) X to
seek an oracle from the deity, cast lots
قسم qism pl. اقسام aqsām part, share,
allotment; portion; division, compartment;
section; department; group, class; district,
precinct; police precinct, police station
(Eg.); administrative subdivision of a
muḥāaẓa (Eg.); subcommittee; kind, sort,
specimen, species
قسمة qisma dividing, division,
distribution, allotment, apportionment;
(math.) division ( على by); (pl. قسم qisam)
part, portion, share, allotment; lot, destiny,
fate (foreordained by God)
قسم qasam pl. اقسام aqsām oath; قسما
qasaman I swear! قسما ب I swear by …!
قسمات qasamāt, qasimāt features,
lineaments (of the face)
قسام qasām and قسامة qasāma beauty,
elegance
قسيم qasīm pl. قسماء qusamā’ اقسماء , 2
aqsimā’2 sharer, partner, copartner,
participant; -- (pl. اقسماء aqsimā’2) part,
portion, share, allotment; counterpart
قسيمة qasīma pl. قسائم qasā’im2 coupon;
receipt
تقسيم taqsīm exorcism; (pl. -āt) dividing,
division, partition, parting, splitting,
sectioning, portioning; distribution,
allotment, apportionment; dealing out;
division, subdivision, partition(ment); pl.
تقاسيم taqāsīm2 structure, build, proportions
(e.g., of the body); -- solo recital (mus.)
تقسيمة taqsīma pl. تقاسيم taqāsīm2 short
solo piece for an instrument (mus.)
مقاسمة muqāsama partnership,
participation, sharing
انقسام inqisām division, split, disruption,
breakup; schism
اقتسام iqtisām dividing, division,
distribution (among themselves)
قام qāsim divider; distributor; divisor,
denominator (math.)
مقسوم maqsūm dividend (math.); مقسوم
عليه divisor (math.)
مقسم muqassim divider; distributor
مقاسم muqāsim sharer, partner, copartner,
participant
قسنطينة qusanṭīna2 Constantine (city in NE
Algeria)
قسا (قسو ) qasā u ( قسوة qaswa, قساو qasāwa) to
be harsh, stern, cruel, merciless,
remorseless ( على toward s.o.); to handle
roughly, treat harshly, severely, cruelly,
without mercy ( على s.o.) II to harden,
indurate, render obdurate or impenitent ( ھ
the heart) III to undergo, suffer, endure,
sustain, bear, stand ( ھ s.th.), bear up ( ھ
against s.th.) IV = II
قسو qasw hardness, harshness,
grimness, sternness, severity, rigor,
austerity
قسوة qaswa, hardness, harshness,
grimness, sternness, severity, rigor,
austerity; cruelty, mercilessness,
remorselessness 763
قساوة qasāwa hardness, harshness,
grimness, sternness, severity, rigor,
austerity; cruelty, mercilessness,
remorselessness
قسى qusīy hard, solid, firm
اقسى aqsā harder, harsher, sterner,
severer; more cruel; more difficult
مقاساة muqāsāh undergoing, suffering,
enduring, sustaining, bearing, standing
قاس qāsin pl. قساة qusāh hard, harsh,
grim, stern, severe, austere, rough; cruel,
inexorable, relentless, merciless,
remorseless; difficult
قسي 1 qasīy see قسو
قسي 2 qusīy, qisīy pl. of قوس qaus
قش qašša i u (qašš) to collect, gather (up), pick
up ( ھ s.th.); to pick up from here and
there ( ھ s.th.); to become dry, dry up,
shrivel up, wither (esp., of a plant) II to
take of this and that
قش qašš straw │ قش الحديد steel wool;
حمى القش ḥummā l-q. bay fever
قشة qašša (n. un.) a straw │ قشة ثقاب
match, matchstick; خيار قشة (eg.) gherkins
قشيش qašīš sweepings, rubbish,
garbage, trash, refuse; offal, waste, scrap
مقشة miqašša (eg.) broom, besom
قشب qišb, qašab pl. اقشاب aqšāb poison
قشيب qašīb pl. قشب qušub new; clean;
polished, burnished
قشد qašada u (qašId) to skim, take off ( ھ the
cream)
قشدة qišda cream
قشر qašara i u (qašr) to peel, pare, shell,
derind, bark, skin, scale, shave off, husk,
shuck ( ھ s.th.) II = I; V to be peeled, be
pared, be shelled, be derinded, be barked,
be skinned, be scaled, be shaved off, be
husked, be shucked; to come off in scales,
scale off, flake off, peel off (skin; coating)
VII = V
قشر qišr pl. قشور qušūr cover(ing),
integument, envelope; shell; peel; rind,
bark; skin, crust; scab; scurf; hull, husk,
shuck; scales (of fish); slough (of a
snake); pl. قشور trash, garbage, refuse;
trivialities, banalities; externals,
superficialities, formalities; dandruff │
قشر الرأس q. ar-ra’s dandruff
قشرة qišra peel, rind (e.g., of a fruit),
shell (of an egg, of a nut); bark; skin;
crust; scab; scurf; hull, husk, shuck; scale;
slough (of a snake)
قشري qišrī scaly, scurfy, scabrous,
squamous; crustaceous │ الاكزيما القشرية
psoriasis (med.); O الحيوانات القشرية
(ḥayawānāt) crustaceans
تقشير taqšīr peeling, paring, shelling;
derinding, barking; skinning; scaling;
shaving off, scraping off; husking,
shucking
قشط qašaṭa i (qašṭ) to take off, strip
(off), remove ( عن ھ s.th. from); to skim ( ھ
cream); to scratch off, scrape off, abrade (
ھ s.th.) II to take off ( ھ s.th.); to strip off (
ھ s.th.); to rob ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), plunder,
strip of his belongings ( ه s.o.)
قشطة (eg.) qišṭa, (syr.) gašṭa cream;
(eg.) sweetsop (Annona squamosa L.;
bot.), custard apple
قشاط qišāṭ (leather) strap, thong;
whiplash; drive belt, transmission belt
قشاط qušāṭ (eg.) pl. -āt jetton. chip,
counter; piece, man (checkers,
backgammon)
O مقشط miqšaṭ pl. مقاشط maqāšiṭ2 eraser,
erasing knife
O مقشطة miqšaṭa pl. مقاشط maqāšiṭ2
milling machine, miller 764
قشع qaša‘a a (qaš‘) to scatter, disperse, drive
away, chase away ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), dispel
ھ) s.th.) IV to scatter, disperse, drive
away, chase away ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), dispel (
ھ s.th.); to scatter, disperse, break up
(crowd), lift, dissolve (clouds, darkness) V
and VII to be scattered, be dispersed, be
driven away, be chased away; to scatter,
disperse, break up (crowd),
lift, dissolve (clouds, darkness)
قشعر) ) IV اقشعر iqša‘'amJ to Ibudder, lhiver,
tremble. quake. Ihake, bave gooae s..b
(witb cold. witb fright) I')":I .:.. ~ •.;.
("I~)'I or) la,'"" laqla"""" m,,,",,
I-;tdud"
a bloodcurdling thing. a borrible.
ghastly thing
'J..~ quk{rira shudder, tremor,
trembling. Ibakos; lhiver(ing); ague
~ qaI'am pl. ~L.:; qaAa'im' lion I ~ rl
"mm q. byena; calamity, disaster
قشف qašifa a (qašaf) and qašufa u ( قشافة
qašafa) to live in squalor and misery; to
have a dirty skin; to pay no attention to
cleanliness II (eg.) to become rough and
chapped, to chap (hands) V = I; to lead an
ascetic life, mortify the bodily appetites;
(eg.) to become rough and chapped, to
chap (skin)
قشفة qišfa (eg.) pl. قشف qišaf crust (of
bread)
تقشف taqaššuf asceticism, mortification
of the flesh; simple, primitive way of life
متقشف mutaqaššif ascetic(al); (eg.)
roughened, chapped (hands); المتقشفة almutaqaššifa
the ascetics
قشقش qašqaša to cure ( من ه s.o. of scabies, of
smallpox); to sweep out, sweep away ( ھ
s.th.)
قشل 1 qašila (qašal) (eg.) to be poor, penniless,
without means
قشلة 2 (Turk. kışla) qašla pl. قشل qišal (military)
barracks (syr.); hospital (eg.)
قشلاق (Turk. kışlak) qušlāq pl. -āt (military)
barracks
قشمش qišmiš a variety of currants (=
seedless raisins)
قاشاني look up alphabetically
قص qaṣṣa u (qaṣṣ) to cut, cut off, clip ( ھ s.th.);
to shear, shear off ( ھ s.th.); to trim,
curtail, dock, crop, lop ( ھ s.th.); -- (qaṣṣ,
قصص qaṣaṣ): قص اثره (atarahū) to follow
s.o.’s tracks, track s.o.; ( قصص qaṣas) to
relate, narrate, tell ( ھ على to s.o. s.th.) II to
out off, shear off, clip, curtail, dock, trim,
crop, lop ( ھ s.th.) III to retaliate ( ه upon
s.o.), return like for like ( ه to s.o.); to
avenge o.s., revenge o.s., take vengeance (
ه on s.o.); to punish, castigate, chastise ( ه
s.o.); (com.) to settle accounts ( ه with s.o.);
to be quits, be even ( ه with s.o.) V اثره
(atarahū) to follow s.o.’s tracks, track s.o.
VIII = V; to tell accurately, relate exactly
ھ) s.th.); to retaliate ( من upon s.o.), return
like for like ( من to s.o.); to avenge o.s.,
revenge o.s., take vengeance ( من on s.o.);
to punish, castigate, chastise ( من s.o.)
قص clippings, outings, chips, snips,
shreds, scraps; sternum, breastbone
قصة quṣṣa pl. قصص quṣaṣ, قصاص qiṣāṣ
forelock; lock of hair
قصة qiṣṣa manner of cutting; cut; (pl.
قصص qiṣaṣ) narrative, tale, story │ قصة ھذا
الشيء ان the matter is so that ..., the thing is
best described by saying that ...
قصص qaṣaṣ clippings, cuttings, chips,
snips, shreds, narrative, tale, story
قصصي qiṣaṣī, qaṣaṣī narrative, epic(al);
(pl. قصصيون ) storyteller, writer of fiction,
novelist, romancer │ الشعر القصصي (ši‘r)
epic poetry 765
قصاصة quṣāṣa (coll. قصاص quṣāṣ, and
قصاصة quṣāṣa) pl. -āt cutting, chip, snip,
shred; scrap (of paper); slip (of paper);
(newspaper) clipping
قصاص qaṣṣāṣ shearer; tracker, tracer of
tracks; writer of fiction, novelist,
romancer
اقصوصة uqṣūṣa pl. اقاصيص aqāṣīṣ2
narrative, tale, novella, novel; short story
مقص miqaṣṣ pl. مقاص maqāṣ (pair of)
scissors, (pair of) shears; (syr.) springs (of
an automobile, of a coach) │ ابو مقص abū
m. earwig; skimmer, scissorbill
(Rhynchops; zool.)
قصاص qiṣāṣ requital, reprisal,
retaliation; punishment, castigation,
chastisement; accounting, clearing,
settlement of accounts
مقاصة muqāṣṣa accounting, clearing,
settlement of accounts; balancing,
adjustment, set off; compensation (com.)
│ غرفة المقاصة gurfat al-m. clearing house
(fin.)
مقصوص maqṣūṣ pl. مقاصيص maqāṣīṣ2
(eg.) lovelock, earlock
مقصوصة maqṣūṣa skimming ladle,
skimmer
قصاج quṣāj pl. -āt pliers, pincers, nippers
قصب qaṣaba i (qaṣb) to out up, carve up ( ھ a
slaughtered animal) II to curl ( ھ the hair);
to brocade, embroider with gold and silver
thread ( ھ s.th.)
قصب qaṣab (coll.) cane(s), reed(s);
sugar cane; stalks (of cereal grasses); gold
and silver thread, gold and silver
embroidery; brocade │ قصب الذھب q.
ad-dahab gold brocade; قصب السكر q. assukkar
sugar cane; القصب الھندي (hindī)
bamboo; احرز قصب السبق ( والغلب ) aḥraza
qaṣaba s-sabq (wa-l-galb) to come
through with flying colors, carry the day,
score a great success
قصبة qaṣaba (n. un.) pl. -āt cane, reed;
pipe, tube; pipestem, pipe tube; writing
pen; windpipe, trachea; shaft (of a well); a
wind instrument resembling the reed pipe;
kassabah, a linear measure (Eg. = 3.55
m); citadel; capital city, metropolis │ قصبة
الرئة q. ar-ri’a windpipe, trachea; قصبة
المريء q. al-marī’ gullet, esophagus
قصابة qaṣāba butcher’s trade, butchery
قصيبة quṣaiba (tun.) oats
قصاب qaṣṣāb butcher, slaughterer; (eg.)
land surveyor
قصابة qaṣāba (reed) pipe
مقصب muqaṣṣab embroidered with gold
and silver thread, brocaded, trimmed with
brocade
قصاج look up alphabetically
قصد qaṣada i (qaṣd) to go or proceed
straightaway ( الى or ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.),
make a beeline ( الى or ھ، ه for), walk up to
s.o. or s.th. ( الى or ھ .); to go to see ( الى، ه
s.o.), call ( الى، ه on s.o.); to betake o.s.,
repair, go ( الى، ه to a place; الى، ه to s.o.),
be headed, be bound ( الى، ه for a place); to
seek, pursue ( الى، ھ s.th.), strive ( الى، ھ
for), aspire ( الى، ھ to), intend, have in
mind ( الى، ھ s.th.; من or ب ھ s.th. with s.th.
else); to aim ( الى، ھ at s.th.); to have in
view, contemplate, consider, purpose ( ھ
s.th.); to mean, try to say ( ھ ب or من by
s.th. s.th.); to adopt a middle course ( في in,
at); to be economical, frugal, thrifty,
provident; to economize, save │ قصد قصده
(qaṣdahū) to walk up to s.o., go toward
s.o.; to follow, imitate s.o. IV to induce to
go ( الى to s.o., to a place; ه s.o.); to
compose kasidas V to be broken, break;
(eg.) to be angry ( ه with s.o.), be mad ( ه at
s.o.) VII to be broken, break VIII to adopt
a middle course ( في in, at; بين between); to
assume a mediatory position ( بين
between), act as mediator; to be
economical, frugal, thrifty, 766 provident,
economize ( في with); to save ( ھ money,
etc.); to compose kasidas
قصد qaṣd endeavor, aspiration,
intention, intent; design, purpose,
resolution; object, goal, aim, end;
frugality; thrift, economy │ قصدا qaṣdan,
عن قصد intentionally, purposely, advisedly,
on purpose; deliberately; عن غير قصد
unintentionally, inadvertently; حسن القصد
ḥusn al.q. good intention; سوء القصد sū’ alq.
evil intention ھو قصدك (qaṣdaka,
qaṣduka) he is in front of you, before you,
opposite you
قصدي qaṣdī intentional; intended
قصاد quṣād (prep.) in front of, before,
opposite (eg.)
قصيد qaṣīd aspired, desired, aimed at,
intended; faultless, without defects (of a
poem); also = بيت القصيد │ قصيدة bait al-q.
(the essential, principal verse of the
kasida, i.e.) the main point, the principal
part, the essence, the core, the gist, the
hest, the hit, the climax of s.th., that which
stands out from the rest, the right thing
قصيدة qaṣīda pl. قصائد qaṣā’id2 kasida,
an ancient Arabic poem having, as a rule,
a rigid tripartite structure) │ = بيت القصيدة
بيت القصيد , see under قصيد
اقصد aqṣad2 directer, directest
مقصد maqṣad pl. مقاصد maqāṣid2 (place
of) destination; intention, intent; design,
purpose, resolution; object, goal, aim, end;
sense, meaning, import, purport,
significance │ سيئ المقاصد sayyi’ al-m.
malevolent, malicious
اقتصاد iqtiṣād saving, economization,
retrenchment; thriftiness, thrift,
providence; economy │ علم الاقتصاد ‘ilm
al-iqt., ( علم) الاقتصاد السياسي (siyāsī)
economics, political economy; اقتصادا في
الوقت iqtiṣādan fī l-waqt in order to save
time
اقتصادي iqtiṣādī economical; saving,
thrifty, provident; economic; economist,
political economist; الاقتصاديات the
economy
قاصد qāṣid direct, straight (way); easy,
smooth, pleasant, short (of travel) │ قاصد
رسولي (rasūlī) (pl. قصاد quṣṣād) apostolic
delegate
قصادة رسولية qiṣāda rasūlīya papal
legation
مقصود maqṣūd aimed at, intended;
intentional, designed, deliberate; meant
قصدير qaṣdīr tin
قصر 2 qaṣura u (qiṣar, qaṣr, قصارة qaṣāra) to
be or become short, too short, or shorter;
to be insufficient, be inadequate; -- qaṣara
u ( قصور quṣūr) to miss, fail to reach ( عن
s.th., e.g., a target), fall short ( عن of); to he
incapable ( عن of), he unable ( عن to do
s.th.), fail to reach, attain, accomplish, or
achieve ( عن s.th.); not to he equal ( عن to
s.th.), not to be up to s.th. ( عن ), he unable
to cope with s.th. ( عن ); to desist, cease,
refrain, abstain ( عن from); -- qaṣara i u
(qaṣr) to make short or shorter, shorten,
cut short, curtail, abridge, reduce, lessen (
ھ s.th.); -- qaṣara u (qaṣr) to hold hack,
restrain, check, curb ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
keep under supervision or control ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.h.); to lock up ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
limit, restrict, confine ( على ھ، ه s.o., s.th.
to); -- qaṣara u (qaṣr, قصارة qiṣāara) to
full, whiten, bleach, blanch ( ھ s.th.) II to
make short or shorter, shorten, cut short,
curtail, abridge, reduce, lessen ( ھ s.th.); to
miss, fail to reach ( عن s.th., e.g., a target),
fall short ( عن of); to he incapable ( عن of),
be unable ( عن to do s.th.); to fail to
accomplish, achieve, reach, or attain ( عن
s.th.); not to be equal ( عن to s.th.), not to
he up to s.th. ( عن ), he unable to cope with
s.th. ( عن ); to be 767 inadequate,
insufficient, inferior; to be remise ( في in,
at, in some work), be derelict ( في to), fall
behind, lag behind ( في in); to be negligent,
careless; to be in, negligent, neglectful ( في
in), neglect ( في s.th.); to desist, cease,
refrain, abstain ( عن from) │ لم يقصر he
spared no pains or expense in or with ...,
he left nothing undone to ..., he did not
fail to ... IV to make short or shorter,
shorten, cut short, curtail, abridge, reduce,
lessen ( ھ s.th.); to desist, cease, refrain,
abstain ( عن from) VI to contract, shrink,
dwindle, become smaller; to be incapable
عن) of); to desist, cease ( عن from); to
refrain. abstain ( عن from) VIII to limit
o.s., restrict o.s., confine o.s., be limited,
restricted, or confined ( على to); to content
o.s., be content ( على with) X to find short,
regard as deficient or inadequate ( ھ s.th.)
قصر qaṣr shortness, brevity; smallness;
incapability, inability; insufficiency,
inadequacy; laxity, slackness, negligence,
neglectfulness; indolence, inertness,
laziness; shortening, curtailment,
abridgment, reduction, diminution;
limitation, restriction. confinement ( على
to); theutmost that is in s.o.’s power, e.g.,
قصرك ان تفعل ھذا (qaṣruka) the most you
can hope to accomplish is to do this; you
must limit yourself to doing this
قصر qaṣr pl. قصور quṣū castle; palace;
palais │ قصر العدلية q. al-‘adlīya (Mor.)
palace of justice, courthouse
قصرية qaṣrīya pl. قصار qaṣārin pot;
flowerpot; chamber pot
قصر qiṣar shortness, brevity; smallness
│ قصر النظر q. an-naẓar nearsightedness,
shortsightedness
قصر qaṣr slackness, laxity, negligence,
neglectfulness; indolence, inertness,
laziness
قصار qaṣār, quṣār: = قصارك ان تفعل ھذا
قصاراك ان تفعل ھذا (see (قصارى
قصار qaṣṣār fuller, bleacher
قصور quṣūr incapability, inability;
insufficiency, inadequacy; deficiency,
shortcoming, lack; reduction, diminution,
decrease; slackness, laxity, negligence,
neglectfulness; indolence, inertness,
laziness; legal minority, nonage │ قصور
الباع powerlessness, impotence,
helplessness, weakness, incapability,
inability ( عن of, to do s.th.)
قصير qaṣīr pl. قصار qiṣār short; small,
short (of stature), low │ قصير الأجل q. alajal
short-term(ed), short-dated, shortlived;
قصير الباع powerless, impotent,
helpless, weak, incapable, unable;
parsimonious, niggardly; قصير اليد q. alyad
do.
قصارة qiṣāra trade of the fuller or
bleacher
قصارى quṣārā the utmost, the limit ( (ه
s.o.’s power) │ قصاراك ان تفعل كذا
(quṣārāka) the most you can accomplish
is to do this; you must limit yourself to
doing this; بذل قصاراه or بذل قصارى الجھد (q.
l-jahd) to exert every conceivable effort ( ل
to, in order to; ب on, for), go to great
lengths, go out of one’s way, do one’s
best, do all in one’s power, leave no stone
untamed ( ل to, in order to); قصارى الأمر q.
l-amr, قصارى القول q. l-qaul in short, in
brief, to make a long story short
اقصر aqṣar2 shorter
الاقصر al-aqṣur Luxor (town in Upper
Egypt)
تقصير taqṣīr shortening, curtailment,
abridgment, reduction, diminution,
limitation, restriction, confinement;
incapability, incapacity, inability;
insufficiency, inadequacy, inferiority;
neglect, dereliction ( في of ), remissness ( في
in); slackness, laxity, negligence, 768
neglectfullness; defect, fault, failing,
deficiency, shortcoming
قاصر qāṣir incapable ( عن of), unable (
عن to do s.th.); limited, restricted,
confined ( على to); reserved ( على for);
intransitive (gram.); (pl. -ūn, قصر quṣṣar)
legally minor, under age; a legal minor │
قاصرة الطرف q. aṭ-ṭarf (of a woman)
chaste-eyed, chaste, demure, modest; قاصر
اليد q. al-yad powerless, impotent,
helpless, weak, incapable, unable;
parsimonious, niggardly
مقصور maqṣūr confined ( على to);
restricted, limited │ مقصورة الطرف m. aṭ-
ṭarf
(woman) chaste-eyed, chaste, demure,
modest; الف مقصورة (alif) the alif that can
be shortened, i.e., final ى, pronounced -ā
(e.g., رمى ramā) and ا, without following
hamza (gram.)
مقصورة maqṣūra pl. -āt, مقاصير maqāṣīr2
palace; cabinet, closet; compartment; box
or stall in a mosque near the mihrab,
reserved for the ruler; (theater, cinema)
box, log.; the detached portion of a
mosque set aside for the communal
prayer, and frequently enclosing the tomb
of the patron saint; (prisoner’s) dock;
chapel (in a church)
مقصر muqaṣṣir slack, negligent,
neglectful
مقتصر muqtaṣir limited, restricted,
confined ( على to)
مقتصر muqtaṣar short, brief, concise,
terse, succinct, summary
قيصر look up alphabetically
قصع qaṣa‘a a (qaṣ‘) to drink in avid gulps,
gulp down, pour down, toss down ( ھ
water); to slake quench ( ھ the thirst); to
grind, crush. bruise, squash, mash ( ھ
(s.th.)
قصعة qaṣ‘a pl. qaṣa‘āt, قصع qiṣa‘, قصاع
qiṣā‘ large bowl (made of wood or
copper); (ir.) kettle
قصف qaṣafa i (qaṣf) to break, shatter,
smash ( ھ s.th.); to beset, harass, press
hard, oppress ( ه s.o.), bear down ( ه upon
s.o.); to bomb ( ه s.th.); to thunder, roar
(esp., of cannon); to roll, rumble, grumble,
peal (of thunder); -- u (qaṣf, قصوف quṣūf)
to feast, revel, carouse; to lead a life of
opulence; -- qaṣifa a (qaṣaf) to break; to
be frail, delicate, brittle, fragile V and VII
to be broken, break, snap
قصف qaṣf thunder, roar (e.g., of
cannon); revelry, carousal
قصف qaṣif frail, delicate, brittle, fragile;
broken
قصيف qaṣīf frail, delicate, brittle,
fragile; broken
قصوف quṣūf revelry, carousal
مقصف maqṣaf pl. مقاصف maqāṣif2
refreshment room; post exchange,
canteen; casino; bar; buffet, refreshment
counter
قصقص qaṣqaṣa to break, shatter ( ھ s.th.); (eg.)
to snip off the ends ( ھ of s.th.), clip, trim,
crop ( ھ s.th.)
قصل qaṣala i (qaṣl) to cut off, mow (off) ( ھ
s.th.) VIII to cut off ( ھ s.th.)
قصل qaṣal chaff, husks, shucks, awns
(of grain); (n. un. ة) stalks
قصال qaṣṣāl sharp, cutting, sharppointed
قصيل qaṣīl (eg.) winter barley
مقصل miqṣal sharp, cutting, sharppointed
O مقصلة miqṣala pl. -āt, مقاصل maqāṣil2
guillotine
قاصل qāṣil sharp, cutting
قصم qaṣama i (qaṣm) to break, shatter ( ھ s.th.)
│ قصم ظھره (ẓahrahū) (to break s.o.’s back
=) to be a mortal blow to s.o. V to be
broken, break, snap VII = V 769
قصم qaṣim easily broken, brittle,
fragile
قصيم qaṣīm easily broken, brittle, fragile
قاصم qāṣim pl. قواصم qawāṣim2 breaking
│ قاصمة الظھر qāṣimat aẓ-ẓahr mortal
blow, catastrophe, disaster; ضربات قواصم
(ḍarabat) mortal blows, crushing blows
قصو) and قصي) قصا qaṣā u ( قصو qaṣw,
quṣuw, قصاء qaṣā’) and قصي qaṣiya a (، قصا
قصى qaṣan) to be far away, be far
removed, be at a great distance ( عن from),
be remote, distant; to go far away ( عن
from) IV to take far away, send far away (
عن ه s.o., s.th. from); to remove ( عن ه s.o.
from); to drive away ( عن ه s.o. from); to
drag away ( عن ه s.o. from); to dismiss ( ه
s.o., عن الخدمة from a job); to reach the
utmost limit ( ھ of s.th.) │ لا يقصيه البصر lā
yuqṣīhi l-baṣaru out of sight, not within
view, invisible V to go far away ( عن
from); to penetrate deeply, inquire ( ھ into
a problem, and the like), examine, study,
investigate ( ھ s.th.), go to the root (0 of
s.th.); to follow out, follow to a.
conclusion ( ھ s.th.); to examine, feel out,
palpate ( ھ s.th.) X to penetrate deeply,
inquire ( ھ into a problem, and the like),
examine, study, investigate ( ھ s.th.), go to
the root ( ھ of s.th.); to inquire, make
inquiries ( عن about)
قصا qaṣan and قصاء qaṣā’ distance,
remoteness
قصي qaṣīy pl. اقصاء aqṣā’ far (away),
distant, remote
اقصى aqṣā, f. قصوى quṣwā, pl. اقاص
aqāṣin more distant, remoter, farther
(away);
most distant, remotest, farthest; utmost,
extreme, ultimate; maximal, maximum;
the farthermost part; the utmost, extreme,
extremity; end │ المسجد الأقصى (masjid)
name of a mosque on the Temple Square
in Jerusalem; الشرق الأقصى (šarq) the Far
East; المغرب الأقصى (magrib) (the extreme
west =) Morocco; الغاية القصوى من the
utmost degree of, the maximum of; اقاصي
الأرض aqāsī l-arḍ the remotest parts of the
earth, the ends of the world; عند الضرورة
القصوى (ḍarūra) in case of dire necessity,
when worst comes to worst; الى اقصى حد
aqṣā ḥaddin to the extreme limit, to the
utmost; as far as possible; من اقصاه الى اقصاه
or من ادناه الى اقصاه (adnāhu) from one end
to the other, throughout, everything
without exception
تقص taqaṣṣin thorough examination,
close study, minute investigation
استقصاء istiqṣā’ thorough examination,
close study, minute investigation; inquiry
عن) about)
قاص qāṣin pl. قاصون qāṣūn, اقصاء aqṣā’
distant, remote, far (away) │ القاصى والدانى
(lit.: the distant one and the near one =)
everybody, all people; في القاصية والدانية near
and far
قض qaḍḍa u (qaḍḍ) to pierce, bore,
perforate ( ھ s.th.); to break into pieces,
crush, bray, bruise, pulverize ( ھ s.th.); to
tear down, demolish ( ھ a wall); to pull
out. tear out ( ھ a peg or stake); -- a ( قضض
qaḍaḍ) to be rough, crude, hard (bed) IV
to be rough, crude, hard (bed); to make
rough, crude or hard ( ھ the bed) │ اقض
مضجعه (maḍja‘ahū) or اقض عليه المضجع to
rob s.o.’s sleep VII to swoop down,
pounce down, dive down, descend; to
strike ( على s.th.; of lightning); to pounce,
fall, rush, hurl o.s. ( على upon), storm, rush
على) against), charge, attack, assail ( على
s.o.); to be broken, cracked, threaten to
collapse; to fall, tumble
قض qaḍḍ (coll.) pebbles; gravel │ جاء
القوم قضھم jā’a l-qaumu qaḍḍuhum
(qaḍḍahum) all the people came
قضة qiḍḍa pebbles; gravel 770
قضيض qaḍīḍ pebbles; gravel │ جاء القوم
قضيضھم (بقضيضھم ) (qaum) all the people
came
انقضاض inqiḍāḍ swooping down,
pouncing down, dive, downrush; onrush,
onslaught, storm, assault │ مدفع الانقضاض
midfa‘ al-inq. (pl. مدافع madāfi‘) selfpropelled
assault gun (mil.); طائرة الانقضاض
dive bomber
طائرة منقضة ṭā’ira munqaḍḍa dive
bomber
قضب qaḍaba i (qaḍb) to cut off ( ھ s.th.); to
lop, prone, trim ( ھ trees) II = I; VIII = I;
to abridge ( ھ s.th.), give a condensed
extract, make a digest ( ھ of s.th.); to
extemporize, improvise ( ھ s.th.), quote
extempore ( ھ verses, and the like), deliver
offhand ( ھ a speech)
قضب qaḍb edible herbs
قضيب qaḍīb pl. قضبان qaḍbān cut-off
branch, twig, switch; stick, rod, staff,
wand; bar (of a grate); male organ of
generation, penis, phallus; rail (railroad);
guide, guide rail, guideway (tehn.)
قضابة qaḍāba that which is lopped or
out off; lops, prunings, trimmings (of
trees)
مقضب miqḍab pruning hook; pruning
shears, pruning knife
اقتضاب iqtiḍāb abridgment; digest;
extract; conciseness, terseness, brevity;
improvisation
مقتضب muqtaḍab short, brief, concise,
terse; improvised, extemporaneous,
offhand, unprepared; المقتضب name of a
poetic meter; pl. مقتضبات short news items,
news in brief (journ.)
قضع qaḍ‘ gripes, colic
قضاع quḍā‘ gripes, colic
قضف qaḍufa u to be or become slender, slim,
thin, narrow
قضم qaḍma a and qaḍama i (qaḍm) to gnaw ( ھ
s.th., on s.th.); to nibble ( ھ s.th., at s.th.)
قضامة (pronounced qḍāme; syr.) roasted
and salted chick-peas; assorted nuts,
peanuts, pistachios, etc.; birdseed
الحيوانات القاضمة al-ḥayawānāt alqāḍima
the rodents
قضى qaḍā i ( قضاء qaḍā’) to settle ( ھ
s.th.); to finish, terminate, conclude, end,
close, wind up, complete, consummate,
accomplish, achieve ( ھ s.th.); to carry out,
execute, perform, effectuate ( ھ s.th.); to
fulfill ( ھ a request), comply ( ھ with); to
do, perform ( ھ one’s duty); to gratify ( ھ a
wish), provide ( ھ for a need), satisfy,
meet, answer, discharge ( ھ a demand, a
claim); to pay, settle ( ھ a debt); to spend,
pass ( ھ time); to die (= قضى اجله ); to fix,
appoint, determine, decree, decide, rule ( ب
s.th., بان that); (of God) to foreordain,
predestine; to judge, act as judge, decide
judicially ( بين between two litigants); to
pass or pronounce judgment ( ل in favor of
s.o.; على against s.o.); to sentence,
condemn ( ب على s.o. to), impose, inflict ( ب
على upon s.o. a penalty); to impose or
enjoin as a duty ( ب على upon s.o. s.th.); to
make necessary or requisite ( ب على for s.o.
s.th.), require s.o. ( على ) to do s.th. ( ,(ب
compel, force ( على s.o. ب to do s.th.); to
demand, require, necessitate ( ب s.th.), call
for s.th. ( ب); to root out, extirpate,
annihilate, exterminate ( على s.o., s.th.); to
kill, do in ( على s.o.), do away ( على with
s.o., with s.th.), put an end ( على to s.th.); to
thwart, foil, frustrate ( على s.th.) │ قضى اجله
(ajalahū) to pass away, die; قضى العجب من
(‘ajaba) to be full of amazement at, be
very astonished at; قضى نحبه (naḥbahū) to
fulfill one’s vow; to pass away, die; قضى
وطره (waṭarahū) to attain one’s aim or
end, see one’s wish fulfilled; قضى الأمر
٧٧١ quḍiya l-amru the matter is decided
and done with, the die is cast; قضي امره
quḍiya amruhū and قضي عليه quḍiya
‘alaihi it’s all over with him, he’s a goner
II to carry out, execute, perform,
effectuate ( ھ s.th.) III to summon before a
judge, bring before a court of justice,
arraign ( ه s.o.); to prosecute, sue ( ه s.o.),
take legal action, bring suit ( ه against s.o.);
to demand ( ب ه from s.o. payment of
s.th.), call in ( ب ه from s.o. s.th.) V to be
finished, completed; to peas, go by,
elapse, expire, run out (time) VI to
litigate, carry on a lawsuit; to demand ( ھ
s.th.; من ھ or ه from s.o. payment of s.th.;
from s.o. s.th.), call in ( ھ s.th., من or ه
from s.o.), claim ( ھ على for s.th.
remuneration), lay claim ( ھ to s.th.); to
get, receive ( ھ ه from s.o. s.th., also ھ من
s.th. from, esp. money owed, emolument)
VII to be completed, be finished, be done,
be terminated, be concluded, come to an
end, cease, stop; to pass, go by, elapse,
expire, run out (time); to have expired,
have elapsed, be over, be peat (time) VIII
to demand, claim, exact, require ( ھ ه from
s.o. s.th.); to make necessary, make
requisite, necessitate, require ( ھ s.th.) X to
demand, claim, exact, require ( ھ ه from
s.o. s.th.)
قضى qaḍan judgment, sentence,
(judicial) decision, (court) ruling
قضاء qaḍā’ settling, finishing, ending,
closing, termination, conclusion, windup,
completion, accomplishment; carrying
out, execution, performance, effectuation;
fulfillment, satisfaction, gratification (of a
wish, of a desire); provision (for a need);
compliance (with a request); payment,
settlement, discharge (of a debt); passing,
spending (of a period of time); divine
decree, destiny, fate; judgment, sentence,
(judicial) decision, (court) ruling,
ordinance; administration of the law,
judiciary, jurisprudence, justice; law;
jurisdiction; office of judge, judge, ship,
judicature; judging, rendering of
judgment; sentencing, condemnation ( على
of s.o.); extermination, annihilation,
extirpation ( على of s.o., of s.th.), killing (
على of s.o.), thwarting, foiling frustration
على) of s.th.); -- (pl. اقضية aqḍiya)
district, province (Syr., Ir., Leb., Saudi
Ar., Yemen) │ قضاء لله death; القضاء الشرعي
(šar‘ī) jurisdiction based on the Sharia;
canonical law, Sharia law; دار القضاء court
of justice, tribunal; محكمة القضاء الإداري
maḥkmat al-q. al-idārī administrative
court; القضاء والقدر (wa-l-qadar) fate and
divine decree; بالقضاء والقدر (or قضاء وقدرا
qaḍā’an wa-qadaran) by fate and divine
decree; قضي القضاء (quḍiya) the divine
decree was fulfilled, i.e., death came with
God’s will
قضائي qaḍā’ī judicial, judicatory;
forensic, legal, judiciary, pertaining to
courts of justice │ حارس قضائي pl. حراس
قضائيون (ḥurrās) legally appointed trustee
or administrator, receiver in bankruptcy,
liquidator, sequestrator
قضوية الصلح qaḍawīyat aṣ-ṣulḥ
jurisdiction of a justice of the peace
قضية qaḍīya pl. قضايا qaḍāyā lawsuit;
litigation, judicial contest; action at law,
suit; (legal) case, cause, legal affair;
matter, affair; question, problem, issue;
theorem, proposition (math.)
مقاضاة muqāḍāh trial, hearing
انقضاء inqiḍā’ passing, elapsing,
termination, expiry, expiration, end (of a
period of time); extinction (of an
obligation)
اقتضاء iqtiḍā’ necessity, need, exigency,
requirement │ عند الاقتضاء in case of need,
if need be, when necessary
قاض qāḍin decisive, conclusive; deadly,
lethal; (pl. قضاة quḍāh) judge, magistrate,
justice, cadi; pl. قواض qawāḍin 772
requirements, exigencies │ سم قاض (samm)
deadly poison; ضربة قاضية (ḍarba) decisive
blow ( على against); knockout (boxing);
mortal or crushing blow, deathblow ( على
to); رأى من قواضى الذمة ان (q. d-dimma) to
regard it u one’s duty to ...; قاضي البحث q.
l-baḥt (Tun.) examining magistrate; قاضي
التحقيق (Eg.) examining magistrate; قاضي
الإحالة q. l-iḥāla (Eg.) magistrate sitting at
defendant’s arraignment, trial judge; قاضي
الصلح q. ṣ-ṣulḥ justice of the peace
مقضي maqḍīy settled, finished, done,
completed, accomplished, etc. │ الأمر
المقضي accomplished fact, fait accompli
متقاض mutaqāḍin pl. متقاضون
mutaqāḍūn litigant; المتقاضيان almutaqāḍiyān
the two litigants
متقاضى mutaqāḍan subject to legal
prosecution
مقتضى muqtaḍan required, necessary,
requisite; (pl. مقتضيات muqtaḍayāt)
requirement, exigency, necessity, need │
بمقتضى bi-muqtaḍā (prep.) according to, in
accordance with, in conformity with,
pursuant to, under; عند مقتضيات الأحوال
should the circumstances require it
قط 1 qaṭṭu (chiefly with the put tense in
negative sentences) ever, (neg.:) never
قط 2 qaṭṭa u (qaṭṭ) to carve ( ھ s.th.); to cut,
trim, clip, pare ( ھ s.th.); to mend the point
ھ) of a pen), nib, sharpen ( ھ a pen) II to
carve, turn ( ھ wood) VIII to sharpen, nib (
ھ a pen)
قط qaṭṭ short and curly (hair)
قطاط qaṭṭāṭ turner
قط 3 qiṭṭ pl. قطط qiṭaṭ, قطاط qiṭāṭ, قططة qiṭaṭa
male cat, tomcat │ قط الزباد q. az-zabād
civet cat
قطة qiṭṭa female cat
قطيطة quṭaiṭa kitten
قطب qaṭaba i (qaṭb) to gather, collect ( ھ s.th.);
-- (qaṭb, قطوب quṭūb) to contract the
eyebrows (also قطب حاجبيه q. ḥājibaihi),
knit the brows, frown, scowl, glower │
قطب جبينه (jabīnahū) to frown II to scowl,
glower; to knit the brows, frown; (eg.) to
sew together ( ھ s.th.) V to become
gloomy (countenance) X O to polarize ( ھ
s.th.; phys.)
قطب quṭb pl. اقطاب aqṭāb axis, axle; pole
(astron., geogr., el.); pivot; leader;
authority, leading personality, celebrity
(chiefly used in the pl.) │ قطب الرحى q. arraḥā
pivot (of s.th.; fig.); القطب الجنوبي
(janūbī) the South Pole; القطب الشمالي
(šamālī) the North Pole; قطب سالب negative
pole; cathode, قطب موجب (mūjab) positive
pole, anode
قطبي quṭbī polar │ O الشفق القطبي (šafaq)
polar light
قطبة quṭba (eg.) stitch (in sowing)
قطوب quṭūb frowning, scowling,
glowering
O استقطاب istiqṭāb polarization (phys.)
قاطبة qāṭibatan all together, all without
exception, one and all
قطر qaṭara u (qaṭr, قطران qaṭarān) to fall or
sow in drops, drip, dribble, trickle II (qaṭr)
to let fall or sow in drops, drip, drop,
dribble, infuse in drops or driblets ( ھ
s.th.); to filter, filtrate ( ھ s.th.); to refine (
ھ s.th.); to distill ( ھ s.th.); to line up
camels ( ھ ) in single file and connect them
with halters, form a train of camels; to
couple ( ھ vehicles); to tow, tug ( ھ a ship)
V to fall or sow in drops, drip, dribble,
trickle; to soak, percolate ( الى into), trickle
الى) in) VI to come in successive groups,
to crowd, throng, flock ( الى or على to s.o.,
to a place) X to drip, drop, dribble ( ھ
s.th.); to distill, extract by distillation ( ھ
s.th.) 773
قطر qaṭr dripping, dribbling, dribble,
trickling, trickle; (call.; n. un. ة) pl. قطار
qiṭār drops, driblets; rain; -- sirup
قطر qaṭr pl. قطورات quṭūrāt (eg.)
(railroad) train
قطرجي (eg.) qaṭargī pl. -īya shunter,
switchman (railroad)
قطر quṭr pl. اقطار aqṭār region, quarter;
district, section; tract of land; zone;
country, land; diameter (of a circle);
diagonal; caliber, bore (of a tube) │ القطر
المصري (miṣrī) Egypt; نصف قطر الدائرة niṣf
q. ad-d. radius (of the circle); اربعة اقطار
الدنيا arba‘at a. ad-dunyā the four quarters
of the world; الروعة التي تأخذني من جميع
اقطاري (rau‘a) the rapture which holds me
completely enthralled, which pervades my
heart through and through
قطري quṭrī regional; diametral,
diametrical
قطر qaṭar2 Qatar (sheikdom in eastern
Arabia)
قطر quṭr, quṭur agalloch, aloeswood
قطرة qaṭra (n. un. of قطر qaṭr) pl.
qaṭarāt drop (also as a medicine)
قطيرة quṭaira pl. -āt droplet, driblet
قطار qiṭār pl. -āt, قطر quṭur, قطرات
quṭurāt train of camels; (railroad) train;
railroad; single file (of soldiers; Eg., mil.)
│ قطار البضاعة freight train, goods train;
قطار حديدي (ḥadīdī) railroad train; ( خصوصي
or خصوص) قطار خاص (kāṣṣ, kuṣūṣī) special
train; قطار الركاب q. ar-rukkāb passenger
train; قطار سباق (sabbāq) fast train, express
train; قطار سريع express train; قطار وقاف
(waqqāf) local train
قطارة qaṭṭāra dropping tube, pipette,
dropper
قطران qaṭrān (qiṭrān, qaṭirān) tar
مقطر miqṭar pl. مقاطر maqāṭir2 censer
مقطرة miqṭara pl. مقاطر maqāṭir2 censer;
stocks (device for punishment)
تقطير taqṭīr filtering, filtration; refining;
distilling, distillation
استقطار istiqṭār distilling, distillation
قاطرة qāṭira pl. -āt locomotive; rail car,
diesel
مقطورات maqṭūrāt trailers, truck trailers
مقطرات muqaṭṭarāt spirituous liquors,
spirits
قطرميز qaṭramīz (large) glass bottle or jar
قطرن qaṭrana to tar, smear or coat with tar ( ھ
s.th.)
قطران qaṭrān (qiṭrān, qaṭirān) tar
قطع qaṭa‘a a (qaṭ‘) to cut ( ھ s.th.); to
cut off ( ھ s.th.); to chop off, lop off ( ھ
s.th.); to amputate ( ھ s.th.); to cut through,
cut in two, divide ( ھ s.th.); to tear apart,
disrupt, sunder, disjoin, separate ( ھ s.th.);
to fell ( ھ a tree); to break off, sever ( ھ
s.th., e.g., relations); to break off one’s
friendship, break ( ه with s.o.); to cut, snub
ه) s.o.); to interrupt ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to cut
short, interrupt, silence ( ه s.o.); to turn off,
switch off, disconnect ( ھ electric current);
to prevent, hinder ( عن ه s.o. from); to
forbid ( ه to s.o. s.th.), prohibit ( عن ه s.o.
from doing s.th.); to deprive ( عن ه s.o. of);
(Chr.) to excommunicate ( ه s.o.); to have a
profound effect, have a considerable
impact, be impressive (spiritually); to
make a profound impression ( في on),
impress greatly, affect deeply ( في s.o.); to
ford ( ھ a river), cross ( ھ a river, an
ocean), traverse ( ھ a country), pass
through or across s.th. ( ھ ); to cover ( ھ a
distance); to survive ( ھ s.th., e.g., a
danger), surmount, overcome ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., a difficulty), get over s.th. ( ھ ); to
spend, pass, while away ( في ھ time with);
to use up, consume ( ھ food); to decide ( ھ
or ب s.th.); to say with 774 certainty,
assert, declare positively ( ب s.th.), affirm
confidently, aver ( بأن that); to prove ( بأن
that); pass. quṭi’a to break, break apart, be
or get broken, be or become interrupted;
to snap (rope, string of a musical
instrument) │ قطع الأمل (الرجاء ) (amal,
rajā’) to give up hope, to despair; قطع الثمن
(taman) to fix the price, agree on the
price; قطع تذكرة (بطاقة ) (tadkiratan) to buy a
ticket; قطع عليه حديثه (ḥadītahū) to interrupt
s.o., cut s.o. short, cut in on s.o.’s talk; قطع
دورا (dauran) to pass through a phase or
period, go through a stage; قطع برأي (bira’yin)
to express a firm opinion; to
decide in favor of an opinion; قطع برأيه (bira’yihī)
to be guided in one’s decisions by
s.o., proceed in accordance with s.o.’s
opinion or decision; قطع الرحم (raḥim) to
sever the bonds of kinship, break with
one’s relatives; to violate the rules of
consanguinity; قطع اشواطا (ašwāṭan) to
make progress; قطع شوطا كبيرا (بعيدا) في التقدم
الرقي )) (šauṭan, taqaddum, ruqīy) and قطع
في ميدان الرقي اشواطا (maidāni r-r.) to make
great progress, make great headway; قطع
عليه الطريق to cut off s.o.’s way, intercept
s.o.; to engage in highway robbery; to
waylay s.o.) commit highway robbery on
s.o.; لا يقطع عقله (‘aqlahū) it won’t get into
his head, he can’t understand or believe it;
قطع عھدا (‘ahdan) to make a contract; to
make a promise, vow, or pledge ( ل to
s.o.); قطع على نفسه عھدا ب (‘ahdan) and قطع
الوعد على نفسه ب (wa‘da) to vow s.th.,
pledge o.s. or bind o.s. to do s.th.; قطع
الكمبيالة to discount the bill of exchange;
قطع لسنه (lisānahū) to silence s.o., seal
s.o.’s lips, gag s.o.; قطع الوقت (waqt) to
while away the time, kill time II to cut
into pieces, cut up, dismember ( ھ s.th.); to
carve ( ھ meat); to tear apart, rend, rip
apart, gash. slash, lacerate ( ھ s.th.); to cut
seriously, gash deeply ( ھ one’s hand); to
interrupt; to scan ( ھ a verse) │ يقطع البصر
(qalba) heart-rending III to dissociate,
separate o.s. ( ه from), part company, break
off one’s friendship, break ( ه with s.o.); to
cut, snub ( ه s.o.); to be on bad terms ( ه
with s.o.); to boycott ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
interrupt ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to cut s.o. ( (ه
short, out in on s.o.’s ( ه) talk, also قاطع
الحديث IV to make or let s.o. ( ه) cut or cut
off ( ھ s.th.); to make or let s.o. ( ه) cross or
ford ( ھ a river); to bestow as a fief ( ھ ه on
s.o. s.th.); to grant, assign, allot ( ھ ه to s.o.
s.th.); to separate o.s., disassociate o.s. ( ه
from s.o.), part company ( ه with s.o.); to
break off one’s friendship ( عن with s.o.);
to break ( عن with s.o.) V to be cut off, be
severed, be disrupted, be interrupted, be
disconnected; to snap; to be cut up, be
chopped up, be hacked to pieces. be
dismembered; to be intermittent. flow
discontinuously (electric current); to be
disjointed, be jerky (words, style); to
knock o.s. out (e.g., with eagerness) │
تقطعت به الحبال (ḥibālu) to be at the end of
one’s resources, be utterly helpless; تقطع به
الأسباب (asbābu) to be at one’s wit’s end,
be at the end of one’s tether; ھدف تتقطع دونه
الأعناق (hadafun, dūnahū) lit.: a goal on the
way to which throats are slit, i.e., one
which remains unattainable VI to separate,
part company, go apart; to get separated
from each other; to break off mutual
relations, snub each other; to intersect
(lines, roads, etc.; L s.th.), cut across,
cross (of a line or road, مع another) VII to
be cut off, be or get separated ( عن or من
from); to be chopped off, be lopped off, be
cut through, be sundered, be severed, be
tom apart, be disrupted, be broken, be
broken off; to be interrupted, be
disconnected, be cut off, be shut off (also,
e.g., electric current), be blocked, be
stopped; to 775 break. break apart, tear,
snap (intr., e.g., a rope, a string); to cease,
end, come to an end, run out, expire; to
stop, come to a halt, come to a standstill,
be suspended, be discontinued; to stop.
cease ( عن s.th.; doing s.th.); to leave off (
عن s.th.), desist, abstain. refrain ( عن from);
to suspend, discontinue, stay ( عن s.th.); to
withdraw, stay away, hold aloof ( عن
from); to devote o.s., dedicate o.s., give
one’s attention. apply o.s. ( ل or الى to); to
concentrate ( ل or الى on); to occupy o.s.
exclusively ( ل or الى with), give all one’s
time ( ل or الى to) VIII to take a part, a little
من) of s.th.); to take, borrow, cull, glean (
من ھ s.th. from, e.g., a story from a book);
to tear out, take out, remove ( ھ e.g., a
page, من from a book or notebook); to tear
off, rip off, detach ( ھ e.g., a coupon); to
appropriate, acquire ( ھ s.th.); to possess
o.s., take possession ( ھ of), seize ( ھ on) X
to request as a fief ( ھ ه of S.o. s.th.); (eg.)
to deduct ( ھ an amount)
قطع qal’ cutting off; chopping off,
detruncation; amputation; cutting,
scission, section; disruption, sunderance,
disjunction, disconnection, separation;
felling (of a tree); severance, rupture,
breakoff (e.g., of relations); stoppage,
blockage, embargo, ban, blackout,
suspension; interruption, discontinuation;
disconnection, turning off, switching off
(of electric current); prevention, hindrance
عن) from); deprivation; excommunication
(Chr.); fording (of a river); crossing (of an
ocean); traversion (of a country); covering
(of a distance); spending, passing (of a
span of time); consumption; deduction,
rebate, discount; (pl. اقطاع aqṭā‘) format,
size (of a book); (pl. قطوع aqṭā‘) section
(geom.); قطعا qaṭ‘an decidedly, definitely,
positively, for certain; with neg.:
absolutely not, not at all, by no means, not
in the least │ قطع الحسابات settlement of
accounts; قطع الطريق highway robbery,
brigandage; قطع الطريق على forcible
prevention of s.th., radical stop to s.th.;
قطع الماھية q. al-māhīya salary cut, wage
deduction; سعر (معدل) القطع si‘r (or
mu‘addal) al-q. discount rate, bank rate;
قط الربع q. ar-rub‘ (ar-rubu‘) quarto
format; قطع كتب الجيب q. kutub al-jaib
pocket size (book); قطع مخروط q.
makrūtin,􀀀 قطع مخروطي (makrūṭī) conic
section (geom.); قطع زائد hyperbola
(geom.); قطع مكافئ (mukāfi’) parabola
(geom.); قطع ناقص ellipse (geom.); قطعا
للوقت gaṭ‘an li-l-waqt as a pastime, just to
kill time; بقطع النظر عن (bi-q. in-naẓari)
irrespective of, regardless of, without
regard to; aside from, apart from; ھمزة
القطع disjunctive hamza (gram.)
قطعي qaṭ‘ī decided, definite, positive;
final, definitive; قطعيا qaṭ‘īyan decidedly,
definitely, emphatically, categorically
قطعية qaṭ‘īya certainty, definiteness,
positiveness
قطعة qiṭ‘a pl. قطع qiṭa‘ piece, fragment,
lump, chunk; part, portion; section,
division; segment (geom.); coin; naval
unit; unit (mil.) │ قطعة الدائرة or القطعة القطع
الدائرية segment of a circle (geom.); O قطعة
التركيب part (of a machine, of an
apparatus); O قطع الازدواج coupling
element (el.); قطعة مسرحية (masraḥīya)
(stage) play; قطعة غنائية (ginā’īya) vocal
piece, vocal composition; قطعة التغيير or
قطعة غيار spare part; قطعة فنية (fannīya)
work of art; القطعة الكروية (kurawīya)
spherical segment (geom.); قطعة تمثيلية
(tamtīlīya) (stage) play; قطعة موسيقية piece
of music, musical composition; قطعة مالية
(malīya) coin; العمل بالقطع (‘amal)
piecework, job work, taskwork
قطعة quṭ‘a pl. quṭu‘āt, قطع quṭa‘ a piece
cut off, a cut; stump; plot of land, patch of
land, lot
قطعة qaṭa‘a pl. -āt, قطع qaṭa‘ stump 776
قطاع qiṭā‘, quṭā‘ pl. -āt section; sector
(geom.) │ قطاع عرضي (‘arḍī) cross
section; قطاعات من الأنسجة (ansija) tissue
sections (biol.); القطاع الدائري (dā’irī) sector
of a circle (geom.); القطاع الكروي (kurawī)
spherical sector (geom.)
قطاع qaṭṭā‘ (stone-, wood-) cutter
بالقطاعي bi-l-qaṭtā‘ī by retail, retail
(adj.)
قطيع qaṭī‘ pl. قطاع qiṭā‘, قطعان quṭ‘ān,
اقطاع aqṭā‘ troop or group (of animals),
drove, flock, herd
قطيعة qaṭī‘a rupture of relations, break,
breach, rift, alienation, estrangement,
separation; enmity among relatives (short
for قطيعة الرحم q. ar-raḥim); (pl. قطائع
qaṭā’i‘2) fief, fee, feudal estate, land
granted by feudal tenure
اقطع aqṭa‘2 more convincing, more
conclusive (evidence); (f. قطعاء qaṭ‘ā’2)
amputee; one-armed; dumb, mute
مقطع maqṭa’ pl. مقاطع maqāṭi‘2 crossing
point, crossing, traverse, passage; ford;
(point of) intersection; cross section;
section, division; syllable; musical phrase;
quarry; group of animals,
drove │ مقطع الرأي m. ar-ra’y decision,
judgment
مقطع miqṭa‘ pl. مقاطع maqāṭi‘2 cutting
instrument │ مقطع السيجار cigar cutter; مقطع
الورق m. al-waraq paper knife; paper cutter
تقطيع taqṭī‘ fragmentation,
dismemberment, cutting up, division,
partitioning; interruption, disruption,
discontinuation; gripes, colic; (pl. تقاطيع
taqāṭī‘) stature, figure; shape, form; pl.
parts, portions,
sections, members │ تقاطيع الوجه t. alwajh
features, lineaments of the face
مقاطعة muqāṭa‘a separation; break (with
s.o.); indifference, unfeelingness,
unlovingness; boycott; interruption; (pl.
-āt) area, region, section, district, province
اقطاع iqṭā‘ and اقطاعة iqṭā‘a pl. -āt fief,
fee, feudal estate, land granted by feudal
tenure │ ذو الإقطاع liege lord, feudal lord
اقطاعي iqṭā‘ī liege, feudatory, feudal;
(pl. -ūn) liege lord, feudal lord
اقطاعية iqṭā‘īya feudalism; الإقطاعية the
feudal system
تقطع taqaṭṭu‘ pl. -āt interruptedness,
interruption
تقاطع taqāṭu’ severance of mutual
relations; crossing; intersection, junction
انقطاع inqiṭā’ separation, disjunction,
severance; break, breach, rift, rupture,
break-off; interruption, disruption,
discontinuance; cessation, stop,
termination, expiration, extinction;
stoppage, shutdown, blockage,
suspension; end, close, conclusion;
absence, withdrawal, aloofness ( عن from)
│ انقطاع التيار inq. at-tayyār power
shutdown (el.); بدون انقطاع or من غير انقطاع
incessantly, constantly, continually,
without interruption
انقطاعية inqiṭā’īya separatism
استقطاع istiqṭā’ pl. -āt cut, deduction
(e.g., from salary)
قاطع qāṭi’ cutting; sharp; convincing,
cogent, irrefutable, conclusive, decisive
(e.g., evidence); decided, definite,
positive, unmistakable, unequivocal; final,
definitive; sour (milk); secant (geom.); (pl.
قواطع qawāṭi’2) partition, screen │ قاطع
الطريق pl. قطاع الطرق quṭṭā’ aṭ-ṭuruq (or قطع
الطرق quṭṯa’ aṭ-ṭ.) highway robber, holdup
man, waylayer, brigand; بصفة قاطعة (bi-
ṣifatin) unmistakably; سن قاطعة (sinn)
incisor; طير قواطع ṭairun qawāṭi’u
migratory birds; قاطع التذاكر ticket seller,
conductor (streetcar, bus, etc.)
O قاطعة qāṭi’a interrupter, circuit
breaker (el.) 777
مقطوع maqṭū’ cut off, severed, chopped
off, etc.; مقطوع به decided, finished,
settled, done with (matter, affair); (pl.
مقاطيع maqāṭī’2) short poem │ مقطوع النظير
matchless, peerless, unrivaled, unequaled
مقطوعة maqṭū’a pl. -āt, مقاطيع maqāṭī’2
piece (of music) │ مقطوعة موسيقية piece of
music, musical composition
مقطوعية maqṭū’īya share, portion,
allotment: consumption │ بالمقطوعية (eg.)
in the lump, for a lump sum
مقطع muqaṭṭa’ torn, shredded
مقطع muqṭi’ liege lord; -- muqṭa’ liege
man, feudatory. feudal tenant, vassal
متقطع mutaqaṭṯi’ cut off, torn, ruptured,
disrupted, interrupted; discontinuous,
flowing intermittently (electric current); in
stages (movement); staccato (voice);
incoherent, disjointed (words) │ تيار متقطع
(tayyār) alternating current
منقطع munqaṭi’ cut off; severed,
disjoined, separate(d), detached; chopped
off, detruncated; cut, cut in two, sundered,
torn. ruptured, disrupted; broken; broken
off; interrupted, discontinued, stopped,
blocked; disconnected, turned off,
switched off (electric current); halting,
discontinuous, intermittent, fitful;
outlying, remote, out-of-the-way (region);
devoted, dedicated ( ل or الى to), set aside
exclusively, solely destined ( ل or الى for)
│ منقطع النظير and منقطع القرين unmatched,
matchless, peerless, unrivaled, unequaled,
incomparable, singular, unique; غير منقطع
incessant, unceasing, continual,
uninterrupted
مستقطع mustaqṭa’ cut, deduction (from
salary)
قطف qaṭafa i (qaṯf, قطوف quṭūf) to pick ( ھ
flowers, fruit); to gather, harvest ( ھ fruit);
to pluck off, pull off, tear off ( ھ s.th., e.g.,
leaves); (eg.) to skim ( ھ a liquid from the
surface): -- (qaṭf) to scratch, scratch up ( ه
s.o.) II = I VIII to pick ( ھ flowers, fruit);
to gather, harvest ( ھ fruit); to pluck off ( ھ
s.th.); to select, choose, pick out ( ھ من
s.th. from among)
قطف qaṭf (act or instance of) picking,
etc.; (pl. قطوف quṭūf) scratch
قطف qiṯāf picked fruit
قطاف qiṭāf picking, gathering, harvest
(of fruit); picking season, vintage, harvest
time
داني القطوف dānī l-quṭūf within reach, at
hand; easy to apply, easy to use, handy
قطوف qaṭūf pl. قطف quṭuf short-stepped,
slow
قطيفة qaṭīfa velvet; plush
قطائف qaṭā’if قطايف , 2 qaṭāyif2 (pl.) small,
triangular doughnuts fried in melted butter
and served with honey
مقطف miqṭaf pl. مقاطف maqāṭ􀀀if 2
implement for picking fruit, fruit picker;
vine knife
مقطف magṭaf pl. مقاطف maqāṭif 2 basket
اقتطاف iqtiṭāf picking, gathering, etc.;
selection, choice, pick
مقتطف muqtaṭaf pl. -āt selected or select
piece; selection
قطقوطة qaṭqūṭa young girl
قطل qaṭala u i (qaṭf) to cut off ( ھ s.th.) II = I
قطيلة qaṭīla towel; floor rag
قطم qaṭama i (qaṭm) to cut off ( ھ s.th.): to
break off ( ھ s.th.)
قطمة qaṭma piece; bite, morsel
المقطم al-muqaṭṭam a range of hills east
of Cairo 778
قطمير qiṭmīr pellicle enveloping a date pit │ لا
يملك قطميرا (yamliku) he doesn’t own a
thing, he hasn’t a red cent to his name
قطن 1 qaṭana u ( قطون quṭūn) to live, dwell,
reside ( في or ب or ھ in a place); to inhabit
في) or ب or ھ a place) II to make live,
settle ( ب ھ s.o. in)
قطن qaṭan small of the back
قطن quṭn, quṭun pl. اقطان aqṭān cotton │
قطن خام raw cotton, cotton, wool, unginned
cotton; قطن سكارتو (It. scarto) (eg.) cotton
waste; قطن طبي (ṭibbī) absorbent cotton;
قطن ملتھب (multahib) guncotton; O حطب
القطن ḥaṭab al-q. excelsior; محلج القطن
miḥlaj al.q. cotton gin
قطني quṭnī cotton (adj.)
قطنية quṭnīya, qiṭnīya pl. قطاني qaṭānīy
pulse, legumes (peas, beans, lentils)
قطانية quṭānīya, qiṭānīya Indian corn,
maize (tun.)
قطان qaṭtān cotton manufacturer, cotton
merchant
يقطين yaqṭīn (coll.; n. un. ة) a variety of
squash
مقطنة maqṭana cotton plantation
قاطن qāṭin pl. قطان quṭṭān resident,
domiciled; inhabitant, dweller
قيطن 2 qīṭān pl. قياطين qayāṭīn2 cord, braid, lace
قطا qaṭan (coll.; n. un. قطاة qaṭāh) sand grouse
(Pterocles)
قعد qa‘ada u ( قعد qu‘ūd) to sit down,
take a seat; to sit, be sitting; to remain
seated; to remain, stay, abide; to lie in
wait ( ل for s.o.), waylay ( ل s.o.); to desist,
abstain, refrain ( عن from), renounce waive
عن) s.th.) │ قعد به to make s.o. sit down,
make s.o. sit, seat s.o., induce s.o. to stay;
to hamper, handicap, hamstring, disable,
paralyze s.o.; قعدت به ركبتاه (rukbatāhu) his
knees buckled under him; قعد به عن to hold
back, restrain, discourage, or prevent s.o.
from; قعد عن الذھاب (dahāb) he decided not
to go; قام وقعد to be in a state of great
anxiety, be seriously upset, be very
agitated; to be very alarmed ( ل by) IV to
make ( ه s.o.) sit down; to make ( ه s.o.) sit;
to cause or induce ( ه s.o.) to stay; to seat ( ه
s.o.); to hold back, restrain, discourage,
prevent ( عن ه s.o. from); to decrease,
diminish, reduce ( من s.th.); pass uq‘ida to
be lame, be crippled │ اقامه واقعده
(aqāmahū) to
upset s.o. seriously, throw s.o. in a state
of violent emotion; اقعد من ھمته (himmatihī)
to dampen s.o.’s zeal V not to desire ( عن
s.th.). not to be out for s.th. ( عن ); to desist,
abstain, refrain ( عن from) VI = V; to
remain aloof, refrain, forbear, withdraw (
عن from); to be pensioned off, retire VIII
to take or use as a seat ( ھ s.th.); to sit
down ( ھ on s.th.); to be, remain ( ھ in a
state or condition)
قعد qa‘ad slackers, shirkers of military
service in times of war; also, designation
of the Khawarij
قعدة qa‘da sitting; backside, seat,
buttocks, posteriors; space occupied while
sitting, seating space │ ذو القعد name of the
eleventh month of the Muslim year
قعدة qi‘da manner of sitting, seat, pose,
posture; space occupied while sitting,
seating space
قعدة qu‘ada constantly or frequently
sitting, sedentary; glued to the seat, not
budging, seated firmly; lazy, inert,
indolent
قعدي qu‘dī constantly or frequently
sitting, sedentary; glued to the seat, not
budging, firmly seated; lazy, inert,
indolent
قعود qa‘ūd pl. اقعدة al-Qur'an‘ida قعد
qu‘ud, قعدان qi‘dān, قعائد qa‘ā’id2 young
camel 779
قعود qu‘ūd sitting; desistance,
abstention, refraining ( عن from);
renunciation, abandonment, waiver ( عن
of)
قعيد qa‘īd companion; one with whom
one sits together; keeper, guardian,
supervisor, superintendent; crippled,
disabled, infirm │ قعيد المنزل q. al-manzil
confined to one’s house or to one’s
quarters
قعيدة qa‘īda pl. قعائد qa‘ā’id2 woman
companion; wife, spouse
مقعد maq‘ad pl. مقعد maq‘ad2 s.th. to sit
on, space to sit in; seat (in general, in a
theater, in parliament, etc.); chair; bench;
sofa, settee; box, driver’s seat (of a
carriage or coach) │ مقعد طويل chaise
longue; مقعد مريح (murīḥ) easy chair,
armchair
مقعدة maq‘ada pl. مقاعد maqā‘d2
backside, seat, buttocks, posteriors
تقاعد taqā‘ud restraint, reticence,
aloofness, reserve; retirement │ معاش التقاعد
ma‘āš at-t. retiring allowance,
superannuation. pension; احيل الى التقاعد
(uḥīla) to be pensioned off, be
superannuated, be retired
قاعد qā‘id pl. قعود qu‘ūd, قعاد qu‘ād,
sitting, seated; inactive, idle, lazy, also قاعد
العمل (‘amal); قاعدون qā‘idūn slacken,
shirkers of military service in times of
war; -- قاعد qā‘id pl. قواعد qawā‘id2 woman
who, because of her age, has ceased to
bear children
قاعدة qā‘ida pl. قواعد qawā‘id2
foundation, groundwork; basis;
fundament; base (geom.; mil.); support,
base, socle, foot, pedestal; O chassis,
undercarriage; precept, rule, principle,
maxim; formula; method, manner, mode;
model, pattern │ قاعدة الأسطول q. al-usṭūl or
قاعدة بحرية (baḥrīya) naval base; قاعدة البلاد
capital of the country; قاعدة جوية (jawwīya)
airbase; قاعدة حربية (ḥarbīya) base of
operation; قاعدة الملك q. al-mulk seat of
government; مساحة القاعدة misāḥat al-q.
base, basal surface
مقعد muq‘ad brought to a standstill,
stopped, arrested; lame, crippled, disabled,
infirm; an invalid
متقاعد mutaqā‘id retired; pensioner
قعر qa‘ara u ( قعارة qa‘āra) to be deep,
hollowed out II to make deep or deeper,
deepen ( ھ s.th.); to hollow out, make
hollow, excavate ( ھ s.th.); to cry, shout,
scream │ قعر في كلامه (kalāmihī) to speak
gutturally IV to make deep or deeper,
deepen ( ھ a well) V to be depressed, sunk,
low, deep, hollowed out, dished, concave;
to descend to the bottom
قعر qa‘r pl. قعور qu‘ūr bottom; depth;
keel (of a ship); pit, hole, hollow, cavity,
depression │ من القعر صاعدا (ṣā‘idan) from
the ground up
قعرة qa‘ra pit, hole, hollow, cavity,
depression
قعور qa‘ūr deep
قعير qa‘īr deep
مقعر muqa‘‘ar depressed, sunk, low,
deep; hollow, dished, concave; curved;
obscure (language)
قعس qa‘isa a (qa‘s) to have a
protruding chest and hollow back, be
pigeon-breasted VI to remain aloof, keep
away, stay away, desist, refrain ( عن from);
to hesitate, waver, be reluctant ( عن to do
s.th.); to fail, neglect ( عن to do s.th.); to be
uninterested ( عن in) XIV اقعنسس iq‘ansasa
= I
اقعس aq‘asa having a protruding chest
and hollow back, pigeon-breasted │ عز
اقعس (‘izz) firmly established power
تقاعس taqā‘us negligence
متقاعس mutaqā‘is hesitant, wavering,
reluctant; negligent, careless, sloppy,
listless, idle 780
قعقع qa‘qa‘a ( قعقعة qa‘qa‘a) to clatter; to rattle;
to clank
قعقع qa‘qa‘, qu‘qu‘ magpie
قعقعة qa‘qa‘a clatter; rattle; clank,
clang; noise, din; pl. قعاقع qa‘āaqi‘ highsounding
words
قف qaffa u ( قفوف qufūf) to be dry, withered,
shriveled; to dry up, wither, shrivel; to
contract, shrink; to bristle, stand on and
(hair)
قفة quffa pl. قفف qufaf large basket;
(Mesopotamian) round boat, gufa (ir.)
قفر quffa, qaffa feverish shiver, ague fit
قفر qafara u (qafr): قفر اثره (atarahū) to follow
s.o.’s tracks, track s.o. IV to be or become
empty, bleak, desolate, deserted,
depopulated, unihabited, devastated,
waste; to be destitute, be devoid ( من of) to
ravage, lay waste, devastate, desolate,
depopulate ( ھ s.th.); to abandon, leave in
a state of desolation ( ھ houses, a city); to
gnaw off, pick ( ھ a bone) VIII to follow
s.o.’s ( ه) tracks, track ( ه s.o.)
قفر qalr pl. قفار qifār desert, wasteland,
desolate region; empty, bleak, forsaken,
forlorn, deserted, lifeless, uninhabited,
depopulated, devastated, desolate, waste;
destitute, devoid ( من of) │ (ارض قفر (قفار
(arḍ) wasteland; خبز قفر (kubz) plain bread,
dry bread
قفرة qafra pl. qafarāt desert, wasteland,
desolate region
خبز قفار kubzun qafārun plain bread, dry
bread
قفير qafīr pl. قفران qufrān beehive
بادية قفراء bādiya qafrā’2 arid desert
اقفار iqfār emptiness bleakness,
desolateness, desolation; ravage,
devastation, depopulation
مقفر muqfir empty, bleak, forsaken,
forlorn, deserted, lifeless, uninhabited,
depopulated, devastated, desolate, waste;
destitute, devoid ( من of)
قفز qafaza i (qafz, قفزان qafazān) to jump, leap,
spring, hurdle, bound; to jump up, leap in
the air; to jump off, take off V to put on or
wear gloves
قفز qafz jumping (also athlet.) │ القفز
على الحبل (ḥabl) skipping the rope; القفز
بالزانة pole vaulting; قفز طويل broad jump;
قفز عال (‘ālin) high jump
قفزة qafza pl. qafazāt jump, leap, spring,
bound
قفاز quffāz pl. -āt, قفافيز qafāfīz2 glove; a
pair of gloves
قفيز qafīz pl. اقفزة aqfiza cafiz, a dry
measure, ca. 496-640 l, = 16 whibas
(Tun.)
مقفز maqfiz springboard
قفش qafaša i u (qafš) to gather, collect ( ھ
s.th.); (eg.) to catch, seize, grasp, grab; to
find out, discover ( ھ s.th.)
قفش qafš prattle, chatter
قفشات qafazāt (pl.) jokes
قفص qafaṣ pl. اقفاص aqfāṣ cage; birdcage; pen,
coop, wired enclosure; basket (made of
palm fronds); thorax, chest; (prisoner’s)
dock (= قفص الاتھام q. al-ittihām)
تقفيصة taqfīṣa poultry coop
قفطان qufṭān pl. قفاطين qafāṭīn caftam, a longsleeved
outer garment, open in front and
fastened by a ḥizām
القفقاس al-qafqās the Caucasus
قفع qafa‘a a (qafa‘) to contract; to shrink; to
shrivel, become wrinkled II to shrivel ( ھ
the fingers; of the cold) V = I
قفع qaf‘ testudo 781
قفقف qafqafa ( قفقفة qafqafa) and II taqafqafa to
shiver with cold
قفل qafala u i ( قفول qufūl) to come home, come
back, return; -- i (qafl) to shut, close ( ھ
s.th.); to latch, lock, shut up, bolt ( ھ s.th.);
to accumulate, amass, hoard ( ھ s.th.) II
and IV to padlock ( ھ s.th.); to shut, close (
ھ s.th.); to switch off, shut off, turn off ( ھ
s.th.); to cut off, stop ( ھ the supply of),
block, bar, close ( ھ s.th.); to latch, lock,
shut up, bolt ( ھ s.th.)
قفل qufl pl. اقفال aqfāl, قفول qufūl
padlock; lock, latch; bolt; O lock (of a
canal)
قفال qaffāl locksmith
اقفال iqfāl shutting, closing, closure;
shutting up; locking, bolting; stoppage,
blocking, blockage, barring, obstruction
قافل qāfil pl. قافلة qāfila, قفال quffāl
home-coming, returning; homecomer,
repatriate
قافلة qāfila pl. قوافل qawāfil2 caravan;
column; convoy │ قافلة (تجارية) بحرية
(tijārīya, baḥrīya) or قافلة السفن q. as-sufun
naval convoy
قفا (قفو ) qafā u (qafw) to follow ( اثره atarahū
s.o.’s tracks) II to send ( ب or ه ه s.o. after
s.o. else); to rhyme, put into rhyme VIII
اقتفى اثره (atarahū) to follow s.o.’s tracks,
track s.o.; to follow up, pursue s.o. (mil.);
to follow in s.o.’s tracks, follow s.o.’s
example, imitate s.o.
قفا qafan m. and f., pl. اقفية aqfiya, اقف
aqfin, اقفاء aqfā’, قفي qufīy, qifīy nape;
occiput, back of the head; back; reverse;
wrong side (of a fabric)
قفاء qafā’ nape; occiput, back of the
head
اقتفاء iqtifā’ following (of s.o.’s tracks),
tracking; imitation
قافية qāfiya pl. قواف qawāfin rhyme;
(eg.) play on words, pun, double,
entendre; nape
قيقب look up alphabetically
قاقلة، قاقلي and قاقم look up alphabetically
قل qalla i (qill, qull, قلة qilla) to be or become
little, small, few (in number or quantity),
trifling, insignificant, inconsiderable,
scant, scanty, sparse, spare, meager; to be
rare, scarce; to be of rare occurrence,
happen seldom; to decrease, diminish,
wane, grow less; to be or become less,
littler, smaller, fewer (in number or
quantity), more trifling, less significant,
less considerable, scanter, scantier, sparser
عن) than); to be second, be inferior ( عن to
s.o.) -- (qall) to pick up, raise, lift ( عن ھ، ه
s.o., s.th. from the ground); to carry ( ھ
s.th.) │ الا ما قل وندر (illā, wa-nadara) but
for a few exceptions, with a few
exceptions only; قل صبره (ṣabruhū) to be
impatient lose one’s patience II to make
little or leas, diminish, lessen, decrease,
reduce, do seldom or less frequently (.
or .,.. s.th.) IV = II; to do or give little ( من
in or of); to pick up, raise, lift ( عن ھ، ه
s.o., s.th. from the ground); to be able to
carry ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to carry, transport,
convey ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.) VI to think little ( ھ
of), scorn, disdain, despise ( ھ s.th.) X to
find ( ھ s.th.) little, small, inconsiderable,
insignificant, trifling; to esteem lightly,
undervalue, despise ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
make light ( ھ، ه of), set little store ( ھ، ه
by), care little ( ھ، ه for); to pick up, raise,
lift ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to carry, transport,
convey ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to board ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., a ship, a carriage, or the like); to rise;
to be independent; to possess alone ( ب
s.th.) │ استقل بحمل (bi-ḥimlin) to assume a
burden; استقل بصنعه (bi-ṣan‘ihī) he alone
made it, he was the only one who made it;
استقل بنفسه ٧٨٢ (bi-nafsihī) to be entirely
self-reliant, be left to one’s own devices;
to be independent, manage without others,
get along by oneself; ( بواجب) استقل بمھمة
(bi-muhimmatin, bi-wājibin) to assume a
task (or duty)
قلما qallamā (conj.) seldom, rarely;
scarcely, barely, hardly
قل qill, qull littleness, smallness,
fewness; insignificance,
inconsiderableness, triviality, paucity,
paltriness, scarceness, sparseness,
scantiness, insufficiency; a little, a small
number, a small quantity, a modicum; --
qill tremor
قلة qalla recovery, recuperation;
restoration of prosperity
قلة qulla highest point; top, summit;
apex; vertex; (cannon) ball; (pl. قلل qulal)
jug, pitcher
قلة qilla pl. قلل qilal littleness, fewness;
smallness, inconsiderableness,
insignificance, triviality; paucity,
paltriness, scantiness, sparseness;
scarceness, rareness, rarity; minority; lack,
want, deficiency, insufficiency, scarcity │
قلة الإحساس q. al-iḥsās insensitivity,
obtuseness; قلة الحياء q. al-ḥayā’
shamelessness, impudence, insolence,
impertinence; قلة الصبر q. aṣ-ṣabr
impatience; قلة الوجود scantiness, scarcity;
rareness, rarity; جمع القلة jam‘ al-q. (gram.)
plural of paucity (for persons or things
whose number is between three and ten)
بقليته bi-qillīyatihī completely, wholly,
entirely │ رحلوا بقليتھم (raḥalū) they setout
all together or with bag and baggage
قليل qalīl pl. اقلاء aqillā’, قلائل qalā’il2,
قلال qilāl little; few; insignificant,
inconsiderable, trifling; small (in number
or quantity), scant, scanty, spare, sparse,
meager, insufficient; scarce, rare; a small
number, a small quantity, a modicum, a
little ( من of); قليلا qalīlan a little,
somewhat; seldom, rarely │ قليلا ما seldom,
rarely; قليلا قليلا by and by, slowly,
gradually; الكل الا قليلا al-kull illā q. almost
everything, nearly all; بعد قليل a little later,
some time later on, shortly afterward;
shortly, before long; عن قليل or عما قليل
(‘ammā) soon, before long, shortly; ليس منه
لا بقليل ولا بكثير to have absolutely nothing
to do with s.th.; قليل الأدب q. al-adab
uncivil, impolite, rude, uncouth; قليل الحياء
q. al-ḥayā’ shameless, brazen, impudent,
insolent, impertinent; قليل الارتفاع low; قليل
الصبر q. aṣ-ṣabr impatient; قليل الوجود
scanty, scarce; rare
اقل aqalla less; fewer; smaller; rarer;
الأقل the least, the minimum │ على الأقل or
بالأقل at the very least; at least; على اقل تقدير
(at the lowest estimate) = على الأقل؛ لا اقل من
ان (aqalla) the least one can do is to ...; I
(you, etc.) could at least ...; اقل من القليل
quite insignificant, all but negligible; واقل
من ھذا وذاك ان let alone that …, not to
mention that …, to say nothing of ...
اقلية aqallīya smaller number, numerical
inferiority; (pl. -āt) minority
تقليل taqlīl decrease, diminution,
reduction
اقلال iqlāl decrease, diminution,
reduction
استقلال istiqlāl independence
استقلالي istiqlālī of or pertaining to
independence, independence (used
attributively); proponent of independence
مقل muqill propertyless, unpropertied,
without means, poor, destitute
مستقل mustaqill independent;
autonomous; separate, distinct, particular
قلاووز , قلاووظ (Turk. kılavuz) qalāwūẓ ship’s
pilot; screw
قلاية qallāyz pl. -āt, قلالي qalālīy
(monastic) cell; residence of the Coptic
Patriarch (Chr.) 783
قلب qalaba i (qalb) to turn around, turn about,
turn up(ward), upturn ( ھ s.th.); to turn,
turn over ( ھ s.th.); to turn face up or face
down ( ھ s.th.); to turn inside out or
outside in ( ھ s.th.); to turn upside down (
ھ s.th.); to tip, tilt over, topple over ( ھ
s.th.); to invert, reverse ( ھ s.th.); to
overturn, upset, topple ( ھ s.th.); to capsize
ھ) s.th.); to roll over ( ھ s.th.); to subvert,
overthrow ( ھ a government); to change,
alter, turn, transform, convert, transmute (
ھ s.th., ھ ھ s.th. to or into s.th.); to
transpose ( ھ s.th.); to exchange
ھ ھ) s.th. for s.th.) │ قلبه رأسا (ra’san)
to turn s.th. upside down; قلب له ظھر المجن
(ẓahra l-mijan) to show s.o. the back of
the shield, i.e., to give s.o. the cold
shoulder, become hostile to s.o. II to turn,
turn around, turn about, turn up(ward),
upturn, turn over ( ھ s.th.); to turn face up
or face down ( ھ s.th.); to turn inside out
or outside in ( ھ s.th.); to turn upside down
ھ) s.th.); to tip, tilt over, topple over ( ھ
s.th.); to invert, reverse ( ھ s.th.); to
overturn, upset, overthrow, topple ( ھ
s.th.); to capsize ( ھ s.th.); to roll over ( ھ
s.th.); to turn, turn over ( ھ pages); to
rummage, ransack, rake ( ھ s.th.); to roll (
ھ s.th.); to stir ( ھ s.th.); to examine, study,
scrutinize, investigate ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
change, alter, turn, transform, convert,
transmute ( ھ s.th., ھ ھ s.th. to or into
s.th.) │ قلبه بين يديه (yadaihi) to turn s.th.
around in one’s hands, fidget with s.th.;
قلبه بعقله (bi-’aqlihī) to turn s.th. over in
one’s mind, reflect on s.th., ponder s.th.,
brood over s.th.; قلبه ظھرا لبطن (ẓahran libaṭnin)
to turn s.th. completely upside
down, turn s.th. topsy-turvy, turn s.th.
over and over; قلب كفيه (kaffaihi) to repent,
be grieved; to be embarrassed; قلب فيه البصر
(baṣara) or قلب فيه النظر (naẓara) to
scrutinize, eye, regard s.th. V to be turned
around, be turned over, be reversed, be
inverted; to be overturned, get knocked
over (e.g., a glass); to toss and turn, toss
about; to writhe, twist, squirm, wriggle; to
be changed, be altered, change; to
fluctuate (prices); to be changeable,
variable, inconstant, fickle ( في in s.th.); to
move (about), live, be at home ( في in); to
dispose ( في of), have at one’s disposal ( في
s.th.) │ تقلب في وظائف عديدة (waẓā’ifa
‘adīdatin) he held numerous offices; تقلب
في النعمة (النعيم ) (ni‘ma), تقلب في اعطاف العيش
الناعم (a. il-‘aiš) to lead a life of ease and
comfort, live in prosperity; تقلب على رمضاء
البؤس (ramḍā’ l-bu’s) to live in utmost
misery VII to be turned, be turned around,
be turned about, be turned up(ward), be
upturned, be turned over; to be reversed,
be inverted; to be turned inside out or
outside in; to be turned upside down, be
toppled, get knocked over; to be
overturned, be upset, be overthrown; to be
rolled, over; to overturn, somersault; to
capsize; to be changed, be altered, be
transformed, be converted, be transmuted;
to change, turn ( ھ or الى into s.th.),
become ( ھ or الى s.th.); to turn ( على
against; الى to); to return; (with foil.
imperi.) to proceed suddenly to do s.th.,
shift, instantly to s.th., change over to s.th.
│ انقلب ظھرا لبطن (ẓahra li-baṭnin) to be
turned topsy-turvy; to be completely
devastated; انقلب الى الھجوم to take the
offensive
قلب qalb reversal, inversion; overturn,
upheaval; conversion, transformation,
transmutation; transposition (of letters),
metathesis (gram.); perversion, change,
alteration; overthrow (of a government)
قلب qalb pl. قلوب qulūb heart; middle,
center; core, gist, essence; marrow,
medulla, pith; the best or choicest part;
mind, soul, spirit │ قلب الأسد q. al-asad
Regulus (star α in the constellation Leo;
784 astron.); قلب الھجوم center forward
(soccer); سويداء القلوب suwaidā’ al-q. the
innermost of the heart, the bottom of the
heart; ضعيف القلب fainthearted,
pusillanimous, recreant, cowardly; قاسي
القلب qāsī l-q. hardhearted, callous, pitiless,
merciless, cruel; قساوة القلب qasāwat al-q.
hardheartedness, callousness, pitilessness,
cruelty; انقباض القلب dejectedness,
despondency, dispiritedness, depression;
عن ظھر القلب (ẓahri l-q.) by heart; من صميم
القلب from the bottom of the heart, most
sincerely; من كل قلبه with all his heart; قلبا
وقالبا qalban wa-qālaban with heart and
soul; inwardly and outwardly; (قلوبات (السكر
qulūbāt (as-sukkar) small candies,
lozenges
قلبي qalbī of or pertaining to the heart,
heart- (in compounds), cardiac, cardiacal;
cordial, hearty, warm, sincere; قلبيا
qalbīyan cordially, heartily, warmly,
sincerely
قلب qulb, qalb, qilb palm pith, palm
core (edible tuber growing at the upper
end of the palm trunk); qulb bracelet,
bangle
قلبة qalba (eg.) lapel; (pl. -āt) a measure
of capacity (Tun.; = 20 l)
قلب qullab tending to change; agile,
adaptable, resourceful; versatile, manysided,
of varied skills or talents
قالب qālab, qālib pl. قوالب qawālib2
form; mold; cake pan; model; matrix; last,
boot tree, shoe tree │ قالب جبن q. jubn a
chunk or loaf of cheese; قالب سكر q. sukar
sugar loaf; قالب صابون q. ṣābūn a cake or
bar of soap; قلبا وقالبا (qalban) with heart
and soul; inwardly and outwardly
قليب qalīb m. and f., pl. اقلبة aqliba, قلب
qulub, قلبان qulbān well
قلوب qalūb tending to change; agile,
adaptable, resourceful; versatile, manysided
قلاب qallāb changeable, variable,
unsteady, inconstant, fickle, wavering,
vacillating; reversible, tiltable; dumper;
tip wagon, skip │ عربة قلابة (‘araba)
tipcart; قلاب خلاط (kallāṭ) rotary mixer
قلابة qallāba agitator, stirring machine
مقلب maqlab pl. مقالب maqālib2 (eg.)
refuse dump, dump pile, dump; intrigue,
scheme. plot; April fool’s joke
مقلب miqlab pl. مقالب maqālib2 hoe
تقليب taqlīb: عند تقليب النظر ‘inda t. innaẓar
on closer inspection or examination,
when examined more closely
تقلب taqallub pl. -āt alteration,
transformation, change; variation;
fluctuation (of prices); changeableness,
variableness, unsteadiness, inconstancy,
fickleness; pl. vicissitudes, ups and downs
│ تقلب جوي (jawwī) change of weather;
سريع التقلب very changeable, very fickle,
capricious
انقلاب inqilāb upheaval; revolution,
overthrow, bouleversement; alteration,
transformation, change; solstice │ دائرة
الانقلاب tropic (geogr.)
مقلوب maqlūb turned over, turned
upside down, turned about, inverted,
inverse, reverse(d), etc.; infolded (bem,
seam); reciprocal (math.) │ بالمقلوب topsyturvy;
upside down; wrong side out; the
other way round, reversely, conversely,
vice versa
متقلب mutaqallib, also متقلب الأطوار
الأحوال ) ) wavering, vacillating, changeable,
variable, inconstant, unsteady, fickle,
capricious
منقلب munqalab (place of overthrow,
i.e.) the hereafter, the end one meets in
death, the way of all flesh, final destiny;
tropic │ منقلب (šatawī) Tropic of
Capricorn; منقلب صيفي (ṣaifī) Tropic of
Cancer 785
قلبق qalbaq a tall, usually cylindrical, fur cap
قلح 1 qalaḥ yellowness of the teeth
قلاح qulāḥ yellowness of the teeth
قولحة 2 qaulaḥa pl. قوالح qawāliḥ2 (eg.) cob (of
corn, and the like)
قلد 1 II to adorn with a necklace ( ھا a woman);
to gird ( ه ھ s.o. with); to invest ( ه ھ s.o.
with an office), appoint ( ھ ه s.o. to an
office), award ( ھ ه to s.o. a decoration, an
order), confer ( ھ ه upon s.o. a rank); to
grant ( ھ ه to s.o. a favor); to entrust ( ھ ه
s.o. with the rule or government of s.th.),
give ( ه s.o.) authority or power ( ھ over
s.th.); to follow blindly another’s ( (ه
opinion; to copy, ape, imitate ( ه s.o.); to
forge, counterfeit ( ھ s.th.) V to put on or
wear a necklace, adorn o.s. with a
necklace; to gird o.s. ( ھ with), put on ( ھ
s.th.); to take upon o.s., assume ( ھ s.th.);
to take over ( ھ s.th., esp. power, control,
government)
قلادة qilāda pl. قلائد qalā’id2 necklace;
pl. قلائد exquisite poems
مقلد miqlad pl. مقالد maqālid2 key
مقلاد miqlād pl. مقاليد maqālīd2 key │
مقاليد الأمور key positions, power; مقاليد الحكم
m. al-ḥukm the reins of government or
power; تسلم مقاليد الحكم (tasallama) to take
over (the reins of) government, seize
power; القى اليه مقاليد الأمور (alqā) to entrust
s.o. with the management, put s.o. in
charge
تقليد taqlīd pl. تقاليد taqālīd2 imitation;
copying; blind, unquestioning adoption
(of concepts or ideas); uncritical faith
(e.g., in a source’s authoritativeness);
adoption of the legal decision of a
madhab (lsl. Law); pl. tradition;
convention, custom, usage
تقليدي taqlīdī traditional, customary,
conventional; based on uncritical faith
(e.g., in a source’s authoritativeness)
مقلد muqalld imitated, imitation,
forged, counterfeit(ed), fake, sham,
spurious, false; tradition-bound
اقليد 2 iqlīd pl. اقاليد aqālīd2 key
بحر القلزم baḥr al-qulzum the Red Sea
قلس 1 qalasa i (qals) to belch, burp, eruct II to
bow ( ل to s.o.); (eg.) to make fun ( على of),
poke fun ( على at), ridicule ( على s.o., s.th.)
قلس 2 II to put a cap ( قنلسوة qalansuwa, q.v., ه on
s.o.’s head)
قلس 3 qals pl. قلوس qulūs hawser, cable, rope
قلش 1 II to molt
تقليش taqlīš molting, molt
قالوش 2 (Fr. galoche) galōš pl. -āt galosh,
overshoe
قلشين qalšīn pl. قلاشين qalāšīn2 puttee
قلص qalaṣa i ( قلص qulūṣ) to contract; to shrink
(laundered garment); to decrease,
diminish; to dwindle, fade, wane, decline;
to become shorter, recede (shadow) │ قلص
ظله (ẓilluhū) his prestige declined; it
decreased, dwindled, faded II to contract,
draw together ( ھ s.th.); to tuck up, roll up
ھ) s.th.) V = I; تقلص ظله = قلص ظله
اقلص aqlaṣa2 shorter
تقلص taqallaṣa contraction, shrinking,
shrinkage
قليط qillīṭ scrotal hernia
قليط qllīṭ afflicted with scrotal hernia
قلع qala‘a a (qal‘) to pluck out, tear out,
pull out, weed out, uproot ( ھ s.th.); to root
out, exterminate, extirpate ( ھ s.th.); to
take off ( ھ clothes) │ قلعه مه جذوره to pull
out s.th. with the root, II to pluck out, tear
out, pull out, weed out, uproot (. s.th.); to
root out, exterminate, 786 extirpate (
ھ s.th.) IV to set sail, prepare to sail, get
under sail; to sail, put to sea, depart (ship);
to take off (airplane); to desist, abstain,
refrain ( عن from); leave off, abandon, give
up, renounce, relinquish ( عن s.th.) VIII to
pluck out, tear out, pull out, weed out,
uproot ( عن s.th.); to root out, exterminate,
extirpate ( ھ s.th.)
قلع qil’ pl. قلوع qul’, قلاع qilā’ sail (of a
ship)
قلعة qal’a pl. قلاع qilā’, قلوع qulū’
fortress, stronghold, fort; citadel
قلاع qulā’ thrush, canker of the mouth,
ulcerative stomatitis, stomacace (med.)
قلاعي qulā’ī: الحمى القلاعية (ḥummā)
footand-and-mouth disease
مقلع maqla’ pl. مقالع maqāli’2 stone
quarry
مقلاع miqlā’2 pl. مقاليع maqālī’2
slingshot, sling; catapult
اقلاع iqlā’ sailing, departure (of a ship);
take-off (of an airplane)
قلعط qal’aṭa to soil, sully, smirch ( ھ s.th.)
قلعوط qul’ūṭ a heretic
قلف 1 qalafa i (qalf) to hark ( ھ a tree), strip the
bark ( ھ from a tree); -- u (qalf); قلف قلفته
(qulfatahū) to circumcise s.o.
قلف qilf bark, rind (of a tree)
قلفة qulfa pl. قلف qulaf foreskin, prepuce
قلافة qulāfa bark, rind (of a tree)
قلف aqlaf2 uncircumcised
قلف 2 II to calk ( ھ a ship)
قلافة qilāfa calking
قلفة 3 qalfa pl. -āt (tun.) foreman; workman,
manual laborer
قلفط qalfaṭa to calk ( ھ a ship); (eg.) to do
sloppy work, scamp, bungle
قلفون qalafūn and قلفونية qalafūnīya rosin,
colophony
قلق qaliqa a (qalaq) to totter, be unsteady; to
be or become uneasy, disquieted,
apprehensive, anxious, excited, agitated,
upset, perturbed, troubled, disturbed; to be
restless, be sleepless, pass, a sleepless
night, find no sleep IV to trouble, worry,
alarm, disturb, upset, disconcert, disquiet,
discompose, discomfit, discomfort, make
uneasy or anxious ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
make restless, fill with uneasiness or
anxiety, perturb, agitate, excite ( ه s.o.); to
rob s.o. ( ه) of his rest
قلق qalaq unrest, uneasiness, disquiet,
alarm; agitation, excitement, perturbation;
stir, sensation; anxiety, apprehensiveness,
apprehension, fear, worry, concern;
restlessness; sleeplessness; impatience
قلق qaliq uneasy, disquieted;
apprehensive, worried, concerned,
anxious; agitated, excited, perturbed,
upset; disturbed, troubled; restless;
sleepless; impatient
قلوق qalūq (eg.) restless
اقلاق iqlāq disquieting, troubling,
perturbation; disturbance
مقلق muqliq intrigant, schemer,
troublemaker
قلقاس qulqās (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt a variety of
taro or elephant’s ear (Colocasia
antiquorum; bot.)
قلقل qalqala to move, commove, shake,
convulse, unsettle ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
disturb, trouble, harass ( ھ، ه s.o.; s.th.); to
disquiet, alarm, excite, agitate ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to stir up, incite to rebellion ( ه s.o.);
to pronounce accurately (the ق) II
taqalqala to be or get in state of
commotion, be shaken, be convulsed, be
unsettled, be disturbed, be troubled, 787
be disquieted, be alarmed, be excited, be
agitated; to be stirred up, be incited to
rebellion, be incensed, be rebellious; to
move, budge ( من from one’s place), stir; to
be shaky, precarious, insecure (situation)
قلقلة qalqala pl. قلاقل qalāqil2 unrest,
excitement, agitation, commotion; shock,
convulsion, concussion; disturbance
قلقيلة (eg.) qulqēla pl. -āt clod, lump of
earth
مقلقل muqalqal in a state of commotion,
agitated, shaken, unsettled, etc.; unstable,
inconstant, unsteady
قلم 1 qalama i (qalm) to cut, clip, pure ( ھ nails,
etc.), prune, trim, lop ( ھ trees, etc.) II do.
│ قلم اظفار خصمه (aẓāfira kaṣmihī) to
neutralize, disarm one’s opponent
قلم qalam pl. اقلام aqlām reed pen; pen;
writing, script, calligraphic style, ductus;
handwriting; style; office, bureau, agency,
department; window, counter; item, entry
(com.); (eg.) stripe, streak, line; (eg.)
slapin the face │ بقلمه bi-qalamihī written
by him; قلم الحبر q. al-ḥibr fountain pen; قلم
حبر جاف (jāff) and قلم حبر ناشف ball-point
pen; قلم التحرير editor’s office, editing
room; قلم الحركة q. al-ḥaraka traffic bureau;
قلم الحسابات q. al-ḥisābāt accounting
department; قلم الإدارة q. al-idāra
administration office, head office; قلم
الرصاص q. ar-raṣāṣ pencil; قلم السياحة travel
agency; قلم الاستعمالات information bureau;
قلم المطبوعات press and information office;
قلم القيودات bureau of vital statistics, (G.B.)
(general) register office; قلم الكتاب q. alkuttāb
clerical office; O قلم الكوبية q. alkūbīya
indelible pencil, copying pencil; قلم
المرور (Eg.) Traffic Control Board
قلامة qulāma pl. -āt clippings, cuttings,
parings, shavings; nail cuttings
مقلمة miqlama pl. -āt pen case
تقليم taqlīm clipping, trimming, paring;
pruning, lopping (of trees) │ تقليم الأظافر
manicure
مقلم muqallam clipped, trimmed,
pruned; (eg.) striped, streaked │ مقلم الظفر
m. aẓ-ẓufr powerless, helpless, weak
اقلم 2 aqlama to acclimate, acclimatize, adapt,
adjust II ta’aqlama to acclimatize (o.s. )
اقليم iqlīm pl. اقاليم aqālīm2 area, region;
province; administrative district (Eg. =
مديرية ؛ الأقاليم the country, countryside,
provinces (as opposed to the city)
اقليمي iqlīmī climatic; regional, local;
territorial │ المياه الإقليمية (miyāh) territorial
waters, coastal waters
قلندار qalandār wandering dervish, calendar
قلنس II taqalnasa to wear a cap
قلنسوة qalansuwa and قلنسية qulansiya pl.
قلانيس qalānīs2 tall headgear, tiara, cidaris;
hood, cowl, capuche; cap
قلو) and قلي) قلا qalā ū (qalw) and قلى
qalā i (qaly) to fry, bake, roast ( ھ s.th.); --
قلا qalā u ( قلا qilan, قلاء qalā’), قلى qalā i
and قلي qaliya a ( قلى qilan, قلاء qalā’, مقلية
maqliya) to hate, loathe, detest ( ه s.o.)
قلو qilw, قلى qilan, qily alkali, base, lye
(chem.)
قلوي qilwī alkaline, basic; القلويات alqilwīyāt
the bases (chem.)
قلاية qallāya frying vessel, cooking
vessel; see also below
مقلى miqlan and مقلاة miqlāh pl. مقال
maqalin frying pan
تقلية taqliya (eg.) sauce made of garlic,
coriander and melted butter and served as
a condiment
قلوز qalwaza to wind (the turban)
قلاووز see under قلوظ ٧٨٨
قلوظ qalwaza to join with screws, screw
together
قلاووظ (also قلاووز ) qalāwūẓ ship’s pilot;
screw
قلاية 1 qallāya (monk’s) cell; residence of the
Coptic Patriarch
قلية 2 qillīya (monk’s) cell
قم qamma u (qamm) to sweep ( ھ s.th.)
قمة qimma pl. قمم qimam top, summit,
peak, acme, apex │ قمة الرأس q. ar-ra’s
crown of the head; O قمة الموجه q. al-mauja
wave peak (el.); ھو حسن القمة (ḥasan al-q.)
he is well-built; من قمة الرأس الى اخمص القدم
(akmaṣi l-qadam) or من القمة الى الأخمص
from head to toe
قمامة qumāma sweepings, rubbish,
refuse, garbage │ صندوق القمامة ṣundūq alq.
garbage bin
قمائم qamā’im2 sweepings, rubbish
مقمة miqamma pl. مقام maqamm2 broom
قمؤ qamu’a u ( قماءة qamā’a) to be little, lowly,
despised, despicable; to feel inferior, feel
worthless
قميء qamī’ lowly, little, small;
insignificant, of little value
قماءة qamā’a lowliness, littleness,
smallness; insignificance, puniness,
inferiority, despicability
قمح II to give a portion only, pay an
installment ( ه to s.o.) IV to put forth ears,
ear, ripen (grain) │ اقمح بانفه (bi-anfih`i) to
be proud, bear one’s head high
قمح qamḥ wheat
قمحي qamḥī wheat-colored, wheaten
قمحة qamḥa pl. -āt wheat kernel; grain
(in Eg. = .04875 g = ¼ (قيراط
شھرا قماح šahrā qumāḥ (qimāḥ) the two
coldest months of winter
قماح qammāḥ grain merchant, corn
chandler
قمر 1 qamara i (qamr) to gamble; -- i u to defeat
in gambling ( ه s.o.); passs. Qumira to lose
in gambling; -- qamira a (qamr) to be or
become snow-blind II to toast ( ھ bread)
III to gamble ( ه with s.o.); to .take, risk,
hazard ( ب s.th.); to bet, speculate ( على on)
│ قامر على الجواد الخاسر (jawād) to bet on the
wrong horse IV to be moonlit (night) VI
to gamble with one another
قمر qamar snow blindness; -- (pl. اقمار
aqmār) moon; satellite (astron.); القمران alqamarān
sun and moon قمر الدين q. ad-dīn
a kind of jelly made from apricots finely
ground and dried in the sun; قمر كاذب
paraselene, mock moon (astron.); حجر القمر
ḥajar al-q. selenite (min.)
قمرة qamara (n. un.) pl. -āt crescent (as
an emblem on a uniform); (eg.)
moonlight; (eg.) skylight; see also below
قمري qamarī of or pertaining to the
moon, moon-shaped, moonlike, lunar │
الأشھر القمرية (ašhur) the lunar months;
الحروف القمرية the moon letters (gram.)
قمري qumrī (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. قماري
qamārīy a variety of turtledove
ليلة قمرة laila qamira moonlit night
قمرية qamarīya pl. -āt (eg.) skylight,
small window
قمراء qamrā’2 moonlight
قمير qamīr pl. اقمار aqmār fellow
gambler, gambling partner, gambler
اقمر aqmar قمراء , 2 qamrā’2 moonlit
(night); moon-white, bright, whitish
مقمر maqmar and مقمرة maqmara pl.
مقامر maqāmir2 gambling house, gambling
hell
قمار qimār gambling; bet, wager │ آلة
لعب القمار ālat la’b al-q. lot machine
مقامرة muqāmara gambling 789
مقمر muqammir, مقمر كھربائي (kahrabā’ī)
toaster
مقمر muqammar (eg.) toast, toasted
bread
مقامر muqāamir gambler
مقمر muqmir moonlit (night)
قمرة 2 (It. camera) qamara, qamra pl. –
āt berth, bunk, cabin, stateroom
قمرق qumrug pl. قمارق qamāriq2
customs (tun.)
قمز qamaza u i (qamz) to take with the
fingertips ( ھ s.th.)
قمس qamasa u i (qams) to dip, immerse, soak,
steep ( في ه s.th. in)
قاموس qāmūs pl. قواميس qawāmīs2 ocean;
dictionary, lexicon
قومس qaumas pl. قوامس qawāmis2 depths
of the sea; pl. mishaps, misfortunes,
adversities
قمش 1 qamaša u i (qamš) to pick up, gather up,
collect ( ھ rubbish) II do.
قماش qumāš rubbish, garbage, refuse,
offal, trash, junk; (pl. اقمشة aqmiša) fabric,
material, cloth │ قماش البيت q. al-bait
household effects, furniture; قماش الناس the
scum of the earth, riff-raff
قماش qammāš draper, cloth merchant
قمشة 2 qamša (eg.) strap, thong; leather whip,
cowhide
قمص 2 qamaṣa u i (qamṣ, قماص qumāṣ, qimāṣ)
to gallop; to spring, jump, leap, bound; to
kick II do.
قمص qamṣ gallop
قمص 2 II to clothe with a shirt ( ه s.o.) V to put
on or wear a shirt; to be clothed, be vested
ھ) with), dress, attire o.s., wrap o.s. ( ھ in),
cloak o.s. ( ھ in the mantle of; fig.); to
transmigrate, pass into another body
(spirit), materialize ( ھ in another body)
قميص qamīṣ pl. قمص qumuṣ, اقمصة
aqmiṣa, قمصان qumṣān shirt; dress, gown;
covering, cover, case, wrap, envelope,
jacket; (Chr.) alb, surplice, rochet;
incarnation │ قميص افرنجي (ifranjī) day
shirt, upper shirt; قميص النوم q. an-naum
night-gown
تقميص taqmīṣ and تقمص taqammuṣ
transmigration of souls, metempsychosis
قمص 3 qummuṣ pl. قمامصة qamāmiṣa archpriest,
hegumen (Copt.-Chr.)
قمط qamaṭa u i (qamṭ) to swaddle ( ه a baby); to
fetter, shackle ( ه s.o.); to dress, bandage (
ھ a wound) II do.
قمط qimṭ pl. اقماط aqmāṭ rope, fetter
قمطة qamṭa a kind of kerchief (eg.)
قماط qimāṭ pl. -āt, قمط qumuṭ, اقمطة
aqmiṭa swaddle, diaper
قمطر qamaṭr, qimṭar pl. قماطر qamāṭir2
receptacle for storing books; satchel
قمع qama’a a (qam’) to tame, curb, bridle,
restrain, check, suppress, repress, subdue (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to hinder, prevent ( عن ه s.o.
from) II (eg.) to cut off the upper end ( ھ
of an okra) IV = I
قمع qam’ repression, suppression,
curbing, prevention; taming, subdual,
quelling, subjection
قمع qam’, qim’, qima’ pl. اقماع aqmā’
funnel; -- (pl. قموع qumū’) stem (of a
fruit); pericarp │ قمع الخياط q. al-kayyāt
thimble; قمع السيكارة cigar butt
قمقم qamqama and II تقمقم taqamqama to
complain, grumble, mutter
قمقم qumqum and قمقمة qumquma pl. قماقم
qamāqim2 a bulgy, long-necked bottle 790
قمل qamila a (qamal) to be lice-infested, teem
with lice V do.
قمل qaml (coll.; n. un. ة) louse
قمل qamil lousy, lice-infested
مقمل muqammal lice-infested
قمن 1 V to intend, purpose, propose ( ھ to do
s.th.)
قمن gamin worthy, deserving ( ب of
s.th.)
قمين qamīn worthy ( ب of), adequate ( ب
to), in keeping with ( ب); fit(ting),
appropriate, suitable ( ب for), capable ( ب
of)
مقمن maqman adequate ( ل to),
appropriate, suited, suitable, fit ( ل for)
قمين 2 qamīn and قمينة qamīna pl. -āt kiln,
furnace
قن 1 qunn pl. قنان qinān chicken coop, chicken
house
قن qinn pl. اقنان aqnān, اقنة aqinna slave,
serf
قنة qinna galbanum (bot.)
قنة qunna pl. -āt, قنن qunan, قنان qinān,
قنون qunūn mountaintop, summit, peak
قنونة qunāna slavery, serfdom
قنينة qinnīna pl. قنان qanānin bottle,
glass bottle; flask, flacon, vial
قن 2 II to make laws, legislate; to determine, fix
ھ) s.th.)
قانون qānūn pl. قوانين qawānīn2 canon;
established principle, basic rule, axiom,
norm, regulation, rule, ordinance,
prescript, precept, statute; law; code; tax,
impost; (Tun.) tax on olives and dates; a
stringed musical instrument resembling
the zither, with a shallow, trapezoidal
sound box, set horizontally before the
performer │ القانون الأساسي (asāsī) basic
constitutional law; statutes; قانون التأسيس
statutes, constitution; القانون الجنائي (jinā’ī)
criminal law, penal law; قانون الأحوال
الشخصية (šakṣīya) personal statute; القانون
الدستوري (dustūrī) constitutional law; القانون
الدولي (duwalī) international law; قانون
المرافعات q. al-murāfa’āt code of procedure
(jur.; Eg.); قانون اصول المحاكمات الحقوقية do.
(syr.); قانون السلك الإداري q. as-silk al-idārī
administrative law; قانون كيماوي (kīmāwī)
chemical formula; القانون المدني (madanī)
civil law
قانوني qānūnī canonical; legal, statutory;
lawful, legitimate, licit, accordant with
law or regulations, valid, regular; legist,
jurisprudent, jurist │ صيدلي قانوني (ṣaidalī)
certified and licensed pharmacist; غير
قانوني illegal
قانونية qānūnīya legality, lawfulness
تقنين taqnīn legislation, lawmaking;
codification (jur.); regulation by law;
rationing
مقنن muqannin legislative, lawmaking;
lawgiver, lawmaker, legislator
مقنن muqannan determined, fixed
قانئ qāni’ blood-red, deep-red
قنال qanāl canal │ قنال السويس the Suez Canal
قنب qanb pl. قنوب qunūb calyx
قنب qunnab, qinnab hemp (Cannabis
indica; bot.) │ خيط القنب kaiṭ al-q. hemp
rope, string, cord, twine, packthread
قنبي qinnabī hempen, hemp (adj.)
مقنب miqnab pl. مقانب maqānib2 troop of
horsemen
قنبار 1 qunbār (ir.) bast rug, bast runner
قنبر 2 qunbur (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. قنابر qanābir2
lark (zool.)
قنبرة 3 qunbura pl. قنابر qanābir2 bomb
قنبور 4 qunbūr hump, hunch │ ابو قنبور abū
qunbūr hunchback 791
قنباز qunbāz pl. قنابيز qanābīz2 (syr.) a long,
sleeved garment worn by men, open in
front and fastened with a belt
قنبل 1 qanbal and قنبلة qanbala pl. قنابل qanābil2
troop of horsemen; troop, group, band
قنبل 2 qanbala to bomb ( ھ s.th.)
قنبلة qunbula pl. قنابل qanābil2 bomb,
bomb shell; grenade, shell │ قنبلة حارقة
incendiary bomb; قنبلة ذرية (darrīya)
atomic bomb, A bomb; قنبلة غازية (gāzīya)
gas bomb, gas shell; قنبلة مائية (mā’īya)
depth charge; قنبلة محرقة (muḥriqa)
incendiary bomb; قنبلة منفجرة (munfajira)
high-explosive bomb; قنبلة ھيدروجينية
(haidrōjīnīya) hydrogen bomb, H bomb;
قنبلة اليد q. al-yad or قنبلة يدوية (yadawīya)
hand grenade
طائرة مقنبلة ṭā’ira muqanbila bomber;
مقنبلات bombers
قنبيط qunnabīṭ cauliflower
قنت qanata u ( قنوت qunūt) to be obedient,
submissive, humble
قنوت qunūt obedience to God, humility
before God, devoutness, piety
قنجة qanja pl. -āt, قناج qināj Nile boat
قند qand pl. قنود qunūd hard crystalline mass
formed by evaporating or boiling cane
sugar, candy
مقنود maqnūd and مقند muqannad
sweetened with qand
قندز qunduz and قندس qundus beaver
قندق qandaq pl. قنادق qanādiq2 gunstock, rifle
butt
قندلفت qandalaft pl. -īya sexton, sacristan (Chr.)
قندول qandūl aspalatus (bot.)
قنديل qindīl pl. قناديل qanādīl2 lamp; candlestick;
candelabrum
قنزعة qunza’a, qanza’a, qinzi’a pl. قنازع
qanāzi’2 tuft of hair; cock’s comb, crest of
a rooster
قنص qanaṣa i (qanṣ) and VIII to hunt, shoot,
bag ( ھ s.th.); to hunt up ( ھ s.th.), get hold
ھ) of s.th.); to make use, take advantage,
avail o.s. ( الظروف of the circumstances,
الفرصة al-furṣa of the opportunity, and the
like)
قنص qanṣ hunting, shooting, hunt
قنص qanaṣ quarry, bag, game
قنيص qanīṣ game, quarry, bag, catch;
hunter
قناص qannāṣ pl. قناصة qanāṣa hunter
قانص qāniṣ pl. قناص qunnāṣ hunter
قانصة qāniṣa pl. قوانص qawāniṣ2 gizzard
O قانصة qāniṣa pl. -āt tank destroyer
(Syr.; mil.)
مقنوص maqnūṣ quarry, bag, catch
قنصل qunṣul pl. قناصل qanāṣil2 consul │ نائب
القنصل and وكيل القنصل vice-consul; قنصل عام
(‘āmm) consul general
قنصلي qunṣulī consular
قنصلية qunṣulīya pl. -āt consulate │
قنصلية عامة (‘āmma) consulate general
قنصلاتو qunṣulātō consulate
قنط qaniṭa a (qanaṭ), qanaṭa u i ( قنوط qunūṭ)
and qanuṭa u ( قناطة qanāṭa) to despair,
despond, become disheartened, be without
hope, lose all courage II to drive to
despair, dishearten, discourage ( ه s.o.) IV
do.
قنط qanaṯ and قنوط qunūṭ despair,
despondency, desperateness, hopelessness
قنط qaniṭ and قنوط qanūṭ despairing,
desperate, disheartened, discouraged
قانط qāniṭ despairing, desperate,
despondent, disheartened, discouraged
792
قنطر 1 qantara to arch, span, vault ( ھ s.th.)
قنطرة qantara pl. قناطر qanāṭir2 arched
bridge, stone bridge; vault, arch; archway,
arcade; arches, viaduct, aqueduct (esp.
pl.); dam, weir │ قنطرة موازنة regulator,
regulating device (at a canal, esp. in the
Egyptian irrigation system); القناطر الخيرية
(kairīya) the Barrages, at the entrance of
the Nile delta, about 15 miles north of
Cairo
مقنطر muqanṭar vaulted, arched,
arcaded
قنطر qanṭara to possess tremendous riches
قنطار qinṭār pl. قناطير qanāṭīr2 kantar, a
varying weight of رطل 100 raṭl (in Eg. =
44.93 kg, in Tunisia = 53.9 kg, in Syria =
256.4 kg) │ قناطير مقنطرة (muqanṭara)
accumulated riches; tremendous sums
قنطاريون qinṭārīyūn centaury (Erythrea
centauricum; bot.)
قنطرمة qanṭarma pl. -āt snaffle, bridoon
قنع qani’a a (qana’, قنعان qun’ān, قناعة qanā’a)
to content o.s., be content, be satisfied ( ب
with); to be convinced II to mask ( ھ the
face); to veil ( ھ the face, to a woman); to
satisfy, content ( ه s.o.), give satisfaction ( ه
to); to convince ( ب ه s.o. of); to persuade (
ه s.o.) IV to content, satisfy ( ه s.o.), give
satisfaction ( ه to); to convince ( ه s.o.); to
induce, persuade ( ب ه s.o. to do s.th.),
prevail ( ب ه upon s.o. to do s.th.) V to
mask or conceal one’s face; to veil one’s
face, be veiled, wear a veil VIII to content
o.s., be content ( ب with); to be convinced (
ب of)
قنع qin‘ pl. اقناع aqnā‘ arms, weapons,
armor
قنع qana‘ contentment, content,
contentedness; frugality, moderation,
temperance, abstemiousness
قناعة qanā‘a satisfaction; contentment,
content, contentedness; frugality,
temperance, moderation
قنع qani‘ satisfied, content, contented;
temperate, moderate, abstemious
قناع qinā‘ pl. قنع qunu‘ arms, weapons,
armor; -- (pl. اقنعة aqni‘a, also قناعات
qinā‘āt) veil, head veil; mask; pericardium
│ قناع واق (wāqin) gas mask
قنوع qanū‘ pl. قنع qunu‘ satisfied,
content ( ب with); frugal, modest,
temperate
مقنع maqna‘ sufficiency │ في ذلك مقنع له
that is enough for him, he may content
himself with that
اقناع iqnā‘ satisfying, satisfaction,
contenting (of s.o.); persuasion;
convincing, convincement, conviction
تقنع taqannu‘ mummery, masquerade
اقتناع iqtinā‘ satisfaction, contentment,
content, contentedness; conviction (=
convincedness)
قانع qāni‘ satisfied, content ( ب with)
مقنع muqanna‘ veiled; masked
مقتنع muqtani‘ satisfied, content ( ب
with); convinced
قنفذ qunfud pl. قنافذ qanāfid2 hedgehog │ قنفذ
البحر q. al-baḥr or قنفذ بحري (baḥrī) sea
urchin (Echinus; zool.); porcupine fish
(Diodon; zool.)
قنقر qanqar kangaroo
قنال look up alphabetically
قنم 1 qanima a (qanam) to be or become rancid,
rank
قنومة qannūma sacred fish (Mormyrus
oxyrhynchus)
اقنوم 2 uqnūm pl. اقانيم aqānīm2 hypostasis,
person of the Trinity (Chr.); basic
element, substance, subsistent principle
793
قنو ) and قني) قنا qanā u ( قنو qanw,
qunūw, قنوة qunwa, قنوان qunwān) to
acquire, appropriate, make one’s own ( ھ
s.th.); to possess, own, have ( ھ s.th.); --
قنى qanā i (qany, قنيان qunyān) to acquire,
gain ( ھ s.th.); -- قني qaniya a ( قنا qanan) to
be hooked, aquiline (nose) II to dig (a
canal) VIII to acquire ( ھ s.th.); to get,
procure, purchase ( ھ s.th.)
قنو qunw, qinw pl. اقناء aqnā’, قنوان
qunwān, qinwān, قنيان qunyān, qinyān
bunch of dates
قنوة qunwa, qinwa appropriation,
acquisition; property in livestock, wealth,
fortune, possessions, property
قنية qunya, qinya acquisition, property
قناة qan`ah pl. قنى qanan, qunīy, قناء
qinā’, قنوات qanawāt, قنيات qanayāt spear,
(bamboo) lance; shaft; tube, duct, pipe; --
(pl. اقنية aqniya, قنوات qanawāt) canal;
stream, waterway │ قناة دمعية (dam‘īya)
lachrymal canal; قناة العلم q. al-’alam
flagpole; لانت قناته lānat qanātuhū to
soften, relent; to yield, give in
قناية qanāya pl. -āt small stream, rivulet,
runnel, canal
O قنية qunayya cannula
اقنى aqnā bent, curved, crooked, hooked
اقتناء iqtinā’ purchase, acquisition
قان qānin pl. قانية qāniya possessor,
owner; see also alphabetically
مقتنى muqtanan pl. مقتنيات muqtanayāt
thing acquired, acquisition
قھر qahara a (qahr) to subject, subjugate,
conquer, vanquish, defeat ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.);
to subdue, overpower, overwhelm,
overcome ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to force,
compel, coerce ( على ه s.o. to)
قھر qahr vanquishing, subdual,
subjection, subjugation; compulsion,
coercion, force; (eg.) annoyance, trouble,
sorrow, grief; قھرا qahran forcibly, by
force; perforce, of necessity
قھرة quhra compulsion, coercion,
constraint, force
قھري qahrī compelling, compulsory,
mandatory, coercive; forcible, forced │
ابتسامة قھرية forced smile; سبب قھري (sabab)
compelling reason
قاھر qāhir forcible, cogent,
overpowering, irresistible; vanquisher,
conqueror, victor; القاھر the planet Mars
مصر القاھرة miṣr al-qāhira or القاھرة alqāhira
Cairo
قاھري qāhirī Cairene; (pl. -ūn) a
Cairene
قھار qahhār conquering, vanquishing;
القھار the Subduer, the Almighty (God)
قھرمان qahramān pl. قھارمة qahārima steward,
butler, household manager
قھرمانة qahramāna (woman)
housekeeper
قھقر qahqara to move backward, go back, fall
back, retreat, withdraw; to fall behind, lag
behind; to recede, retrogress, retrograde,
decline, degenerate, deteriorate II
taqahqara do.
قھقرة qahqara backward movement,
recedence, recession, retrogression, fallback,
retreat; decline, retrogradation,
degeneration
قھقرى qahqarā backward movement,
recedence, recession, retrogression,
fallback, retreat; decline, retrogradation,
degeneration │ عاد القھقرى to fall back,
retreat, withdraw
تقھقر taqahqur regress, recession,
recedence, retrogression, lag, fallback,
retreat
قھقه qahqaha to laugh boisterously, guffaw
قھقھة qahqaha loud burst of laughter,
guffaw, horselaugh 794
قھوة qahwa coffee; (pl. qahawāt and □
قھاوي qahāwī) cafe, coffeehouse │ قھوة سادة
coffee without sugar
قھواتي qahwātī, qahawātī pl. -īya (syr.)
coffeehouse owner
قھوجي qahwajī coffeehouse owner;
coffee cook
مقھى maqhan and مقھاة maqhāh pl. مقاه
maqāhin cafe, coffeehouse
مقھاية maqhāya (yem.) cafe, coffeehouse
قھي qahiya a: قھي من الطعام (ṭa‘ām) and IV اقھى
من الطعام to have little appetite
قاه qāhin supplied with provisions
قوب) قاب) qāba u (qaub) to dig; to dig up,
burrow, excavate, hollow out ( ھ the
ground) II do. V to break open, burst open
(egg)
قاب qāb small distance; short span
(between the middle and the end of a bow)
│ على قاب قوسين (q. qausain) quite near,
very close; imminent; على قاب لمحة (q.
lamḥa) in a moment
قوب qūb pl. اقواب aqwāb young bird,
chick
قوباء qūbā’, quwabā’2 and قوبة qūba,
quwaba pl. قوب quwab tetter (med.)
قوت) قات) qāta u (qaut, qūt, قياتة qiyāta)
to feed, nourish, subsist, sustain, support ( ه
s.o.), provide for the support ( ه of) II and
IV do. V to be fed, be supported; to feed,
livo ( ب on s.th.); to eat ( ب s.th.) VIII do.;
to take in or absorb as nourishment ( ھ
s.th.)
قات qāt kat (Catha edulis Forskàl; bot.);
the leaves of this shrub which act as an
excitant when chewed │ قات الرعيان q. arru‘
yān a variety of lettuce (Lactuca
inermis Forsk.; bot.)
قوت qūt pl. اقوات aqwāt nutriment,
aliment, nourishment, food, viands │ مواد
القوت mawādd al-q. foodstuffs
تقوت taqawwut nutrition, alimentation
المقيت al-muqīt the Feeder, the
Nourisher (God)
قاح (قوح ) qāḥa u (qauḥ) to fester, suppurate,
swell (wound); to sweep ( ھ the house) II
to sweep ( ھ the house) III to quarrel, pick
a quarrel V to fester, suppurate, swell
قاحة qāḥa pl. قوح qūḥ courtyard
قاد (قود ) qāda u (quad, قياد qiyād, قيادة qiyada,
مقادة maqāda) to lead, lead by a halter ( ھ
s.th.); to conduct, guide, engineer, steer ( ھ
s.th.); to drive, steer ( ھ e.g., an
automobile), pilot ( ھ an airplane); to
pander, pimp IV to cause ( ه s.o.) to
retaliate VII to be led, be guided; to
follow, obey ( ل s.o.), yield, submit ( ل to
s.o.) VIII to lead; to be led X to retaliate
قود qaud leadership; pandering,
pimping
قود qawad retaliation
قواد qawwād pander, pimp, procurer
قؤود qa’ūd tractable, docile, amenable,
manageable; trained (horse)
اقود aqwad2 tractable, docile, amenable,
manageable
قياد qiyād leadership, guidance; leading
rope, halter │ سلس القياد salis al-q.
tractable, docile, amenable, manageable,
pliant; صعب القياد ṣa’b al-q. intractable,
unruly, ungovernable
قيادة qiyāda leadership, guidance;
driving, steering, steerage (of a vehicle);
command │ القيادة العليا (العامة ) (‘ulyā,
‘āmma) supreme command; عجلة القيادة
‘ajalat al-q. steering wheel (of an
automobile)
مقود miqwad pl. مقاود maqawid leading
rope, leading rein, halter; steering
mechanism; steering wheel 795
انقياد inqiyād obedience, compliances,
yielding, submission
قائد qā’id pl. قواد quwwād, قود quwwad,
قادة qāda, قادات qādāt leader; directors,
manager; head, chief; commander,
commandant; high-ranking officer, senior
officer; caïd, native governmental officer
heading a caïdate in Tunisia; steersman,
helmsman │ قائد الجيش q. al-jaiš
commander of an army, general; قائد العام
(‘āmm) supreme commander; القائد الأعلى
(a’lā) commander-in-chief of the Eg.
navy; قائد عام الأساطيل الجوية (‘āmm,
jawwīya) lieutenant general of the Air
Force (Eg. قائد الأساطيل الجوية ;( 1939
(jawwīya) major general of the Air Force
(Eg. قائد اسطول الجوي ;( 1939 q. usṭūl jawwī
colonel of the Air Force (Eg. قائد ;( 1939
لواء جوي lieutenant colonel of the Air
Force (Eg. قائد فرقة جوية ;( 1939 q. firqa
jawwīya major of the Air Force (Eg.
قائد جناح ;( 1939 q. janāḥ wing commander
(Eg. قائد سرب ;( 1939 q. sirb captain of the
Air Force (Eg. قادة الفكر ;( 1939 q. al-fikr
leading thinkers
قور II to make a round hole ( ھ in s.th.); to
gouge, scoop out, hollow out ( ھ s.th.); to
cut out in a round form, cut round ( ھ s.th.)
V to coil (snake) VIII اقتار and اقتور
iqtawara = II
قار qār pitch; tar
قارة qāra pl. -āt, قور qūr, قيران qīrān hill;
see also qarra under; قر
مقورة miqwara gouge
تقوير taqwīr gouging, hollowing out
تقويرة taqwīra neckline (of a garment)
مقور muqawwar cut out in a round
form; gouged, hollowed out, scooped out;
chiseled out; low-cut, low-necked,
décolleté (dress)
قورمة qawurma (eg.) mutton or beef cut in
small pieces and braised with squash
(qar’) or onions and tomatoes
قوس qawisa a (qawas) to be bent,
curved, crooked II = I; to bend, curve,
crook ( ھ s.th.); to shoot V = I; to bend
قوس qaus m. and f., pl. of اقواس aqwās,
قسي qusīy, qisīy bow, longbow; arc
(geom.); arch, vault (arch.; of a bridge);
violin bows, fiddlestick; semicircular
table; قوسان parentheses (punctuation
marks); القوس Sagittas, the Archer (sign of
the zodiac) │ بين قوسين (qausain) in
parentheses; قوس قزح q. quzaḥa rainbow;
قوس الندف q. an-nadf teasing bow (for
combing or carding cotton); قوس النصر q.
an-naṣr triumphal arch; لم يبق في قوس صبري
منزع lam yabqa fī q. ṣabrī minz‘ my
patience is at an end (lit.: there is no arrow
left for the bow of my patience)
قواس qawwās bowmaker; bowman,
archer; kavass, consular guard
قويسة quwaisa sage (bot.)
مقوس muqawwas bent, crooked, curved,
arched
قوش qūš pl. اقواش aqwāš crupper (of the saddle
or harness); straps, girth
قاووش qāwūš pl. قواويش qawāwīš2 prison
cell
□ قواص qawāṣ see قواس qawwās
قاض (قوض ) qāḍa u (qauḍ) to demolish, tear
down, wreck, raze ( ھ a building), strike (
ھ a tent) II do.; to break off ( ھ s.th.); to
smash ( ھ s.th.) V to be demolished,
undergo demolition; to collapse, fall in,
cave in; to break up, scatter, disperse
(crowd); to desist ( عن from), give in, give
way ( عن to)
تقويض taqwīḍ wrecking, demolition;
destruction, annihilation
مقاوضة muqāwaḍa barter, exchange,
interchange
قوط 1 qauṭ pl. اقواط aqwāṭ flock of sheep 796
القوط 2 al-qūṭ the Goths
قوطي qūṭī Gothic
قوطة 3 qauṭa small basket for fruit; date basket
قوطة 4 qūṭa (eg.) tomatoes
قاع (قوع ) qā‘ pl. قيعان qī‘ān, اقوع aqwu‘, اقواع
aqwā‘ plain, lowland; bottom, lowest part;
wave trough (phys.); floor (of a mine);
gulf, abyss │ قاع النھر q. an-nahr river bed;
بلاد القاع the Netherlands
قاعة qā‘a pl. -āt paved courtyard;
entrance hall, vestibule, corridor; hall;
sizable room │ قاعة المحاضرات q. almuḥāḍarāt
lecture hall, auditorium (of a
university); قاعة التدريس lecture room,
classroom; قاعة الطعام q. aṭ-ṭa‘ām dining
room; messhall; قاعة العرش q. al-‘arš
throne room; قاعة المطالعة q. al-muṭāla‘a
reading room, study hall; قاعة الأفراح
banquet hall, ballroom
قاق (قوق 1 ) qāqa u (qauq) to cackle, cluck (hen)
II do.
قاق qāq pl. قيقان qīqān (syr.) raven │ قاق
الماء cormorant (zool.)
ام قويق umm quwaiq (eg.) owl (zool.)
قاوق 2 and قاووق pl. قواويق look up alphabetically
القوقاز al-qauqāz and القوقاس al-qauqās the
Caucasus
القوقازيون al-qauqāzīyūn the Caucasians
قوقع qauqa‘ seashell
قوقعة qauqa‘a pl. قواقع qawāqi‘2 snail
قول) قال) 1 qāla u ( قول qaul) to speak, say, tell ( ھ
s.th., ل to s.o.; في، عن ھ s.th. about or of),
utter, voice ( ھ s.th.); to speak ( عن of), deal
عن) with), treat ( عن of); to state, maintain,
assert, propound, teach, profess, advocate,
defend ( ب s.th.); to support, hold ( ب a
view), stand up ( ب for), be the proponent (
ب of a doctrine or dogma); to allege ( ب
s.th.); with على : to speak against s.o.,
speak ill of s.o., tell lies about s.o. │ قال
برأسه (bi-ra’sihī) to motion with the head,
signal, beckon; قيل في المثل qīla fī l-matal
the proverb says; ولا يقال ان (inna) one
cannot say that ..., let no one say that …;
او قل au qul or, or rather, or say even …;
وقل مثل ھذه في (wa-qul mitla) or وقل مثله في
or وكذلك قل في the same must be said about
…, the same can be said of ..., the same
applies to ... III to confer, parley, treat,
negotiate ( ه with s.o.); to dispute, wrangle,
argue; to haggle, bargain ( ه with s.o.,
about the price); to make a contract; to
conclude a bargain, make a deal ( ه with
s.o.) V to fabricate lies, spread rumors (
على about s.o.); to pretend, allege, purport
ھ) s.th.) │ تقول الأقاويل (aqāwīla) to talk
foolishly X O to render (voice by radio)
قال وقيل qāl wa-qīl and قيل وقال qīl waqāl
long palaver; idle talk, prattle, gossip
قالة qāla speech, talk │ سوء القالة sū’ alq.
malicious gossip, backbiting,
defamation
قول qaul pl. اقوال aqwāl, اقاويل aqāwīl2
word, speech, saying, utterance, remark;
statement, declaration; report, account;
doctrine, teaching; pl. اقوال also: testimony
(in court); اقاويل sayings, locutions;
proverbs │ قولا وعملا qaulan wa-‘amalan
or بالقول والفعل (fi‘l) by word and deed; اقوال
الشھود testimonies, depositions, evidence;
اعطى قوله a‘ṭā qaulahū to make one’s bid
(at an auction)
قولة qaula (n. vic.) utterance, remark,
word; pronouncement, dictum
قولة quwala garrulous, voluble,
loquacious, talkative, communicative
قوال qawwāl garrulous, voluble,
loquacious, talkative, communicative;
itinerant singer and musician 797
مقول miqwal pl. مقاول maqāwil2
phonograph, gramophone, talking
machine
مقال maqāl speech; proposition,
contention, teaching, doctrine; article;
treatise; piece of writing
مقالة maqāla pl. -āt article; essay;
treatise; piece of writing │ مقالة افتتاحية
(iftitāḥīya) editorial, leading article
مقاولة muqāwala talk, conversation,
parley, conference; dispute; contract;
settlement, arrangement, agreement;
bargain, deal, transaction, undertaking │
بالمقاولة by the job, by the contract, by
piece (work)
تقول taqawwul pl. -āt talk, rumor,
gossip
قائل qā’il pl. قول quwwal saying, telling;
teller, narrator; advocate, proponent ( ب of
s.th.)
مقول maqūl pl. -āt that which is said,
utterance, saying; word(s), speech │
المقولات العشر (‘ašr) the ten categories
(philos.)
مقاول muqāwil contractor; building
contractor
قول 2 (Turk. kol) qōl wing of an army, army
corps; قول اغاسي (Turk. kol ağası) a
military rank intermediate between those
of captain and major, adjutant major
(Egs.)
قولحة qaulaḥa pl. قوالح qawāliḥ2 (eg.) cob (of
corn, and the like)
قولنج qaulanj colic
قولون qolōn colon (anat.)
قام (قوم ) qāma u ( قومة qauma, قيام qiyām)
to get up; to stand up, stand erect; to rise
(also fig.: voices, noise, wind); قام عليه to
rise or turn against s.o., revolt or rebel
against s.o., attack s.o.; قام له to rise in
honor of s.o.; to rise from the dead, be
resurrected; to ascend; to set out, start out;
to depart, leave (train); to betake o.s., go (
الى to); to stand; to remain standing; to be,
exist, be existent; to be located, be
situated, lie; to consist ( ب in); to rest, be
based, be founded ( على on, also ب), be
built ( على on); to have for its (main) theme
على) a problem; of a book, and the like); to
begin ( يفعل to do s.th.), start ( يفعل doing
s.th.); to make s.th. ( ب) one’s business,
concern o.s. ( ب with), undertake, take
upon o.s., perform, do, carry out, execute,
accomplish, practice, exercise ( ب s.th.); to
stand up ( ب for), support, advocate,
endorse ( ب s.th.); to be in charge ( على of),
manage, run, tend, guard, keep up,
preserve ( على s.th.); to take care ( على of),
attend ( على to), watch ( على over), look
after s.th. ( على ); to cost, be worth ( ب so
and so much) │ قام البرھان على (burhān)
proof had been furnished for; قام بأعباء الحكم
(bi-a’bā’i l-ḥukm) to assume the burdens
of government, take over power; قام باوده
(bi-awadihī) to provide for s.o.’s needs,
stand by s.o. in time of need; قام بدور (bidaurin)
to play a part; قام بشأنه (bi-ša’nihī)
to take care of s.o., look after s.o., take
s.o. under one’s wing; قام بالمصاريف to
defray the costs, pay the expenses; قام
بالواجب عليه to do one’s duty; قام بوعده (biwa‘
dihī) to keep one’s word; قامت الحرب
على ساق (ḥarb) the war was or became
violent, flared up; war broke out; قام الحق
(ḥaqq) truth became or was manifest; قامت
الصلاة (ṣalāh) the time of prayer has come;
قام على قدم وساق (qadamin wa-sāqin) to
become fully effective, be in full progress,
be in full swing; قاموا قومة رجل واحد
(qaumata rajulin) they rose to a man; لم تقم
له قائمة بعد lam taqum lahū qā’imatun
ba‘du he was no longer able to put up any
resistance, he was as good as finished; لا
تقوم للأعداء قائمة there is no 798 resistance
against the enemies; قامت قيامته
(qiyāmatuhū) to get excited, get angry,
become furious; all hell broke loose in it;
قامت قيامته ل (من ) to be upset, be shocked,
be violently agitated by s.th.; قام في وجھه
(wajhihī) to resist, oppose, defy s.o.; قام
مقامه (maqāmahū) to replace s.o.,
substitute for s.o., deputize for s.o., take
s.o.’s place; to serve as or instead of s.th.,
take the place of s.th., replace s.th.; قام منه
مقامه to take the place of s.o. with s.o.; قام
وقعد (wa-qa‘ada) to be in a state of great
anxiety, be seriously upset, be very
agitated; to be very alarmed ( ل by s.th.); لا
قام ولا قعد not to be lasting and durable II to
set upright, lift up, raise ( ھ s.th.); to
create, shape, form, arrange, set up ( ھ
s.th.); to straighten, make or put straight (
ھ s.th.); to arrange well, do properly ( ھ
s.th.); to put in order, fix, set going ( ھ
s.th.); to right, put to rights, rectify,
correct, reform, amend ( ھ s.th.); O to
rectify (el.); to estimate, assess, appraise,
value, rate ( ب ھ s.th. at) │ لا يقوم بثمن lā
yuqawwamu bi-tamanin inestimable,
invaluable, priceless III to resist, oppose ( ه
s.o.); to fight, combat ( ھ s.th.); to raise
objections, take issue, contend, argue ( في ه
with s.o. because of s.th.); to withstand ( ه
s.o.), hold out, hold one’s own ( ه against),
be on a par ( ه with s.o.), equal, match ( ه
s.o.), measure up ( ه to s.o.) │ لا يقاوم lā
yuqāwamu irresistible IV to straighten,
straighten out, make right or correct, put
in order ( ھ s.th.); to make ( ه s.o.) rise; to
resurrect, raise from the dead ( ه s.o.); to
lift up, elevate ( ھ s.th.); to set up, raise,
erect ( ھ s.th.); to start, originate, found,
call into being ( ھ s.th.); to fix, determine (
ھ s.th.); to appoint, nominate, install ( ه ه
s.o. as); اقامه على to put s.o. in charge of
s.th., commission s.o. with the
management of s.th.; to agitate, rouse,
excite ( ھ s.th.); to make brisk, enliven,
animate ( ھ the market); to hold ( ھ a
meeting, a ceremony, etc.), celebrate ( ھ a
festival), put on, stage, organize ( ھ a
celebration, a pageant, etc.), give ( ھ a
reception); to occupy o.s. constantly ( على
with); to abide, stay, remain, dwell, reside,
live ( على in); to dwell ( على on), persist ( على
in), keep, stick ( على to) │ اقام اوده
(awadahū) to provide for s.o.’s needs,
stand by s.o. in time of need; to support
s.o., furnish s.o. with the means of
subsistence; اقام البرھان الجلي على (burhāna
l-jalīya) to furnish the unmistakable proof
for ..., dearly prove s.th.; اقام الحجة (ḥujjata)
to protest, lodge a protest; اقام حسابا ل
(ḥisāban) to render account to s.o.; to give
one’s mind to s.o. or s.th., make s.o. or
s.th. one’s concern; اقام الدليل على ان to
prove that ...; اقام الشعائر الدينية (dīnīya) to
perform the liturgical rites; اقام الصلاة
(ṣalāta) to perform the ritual prayer; اقام
العدل (‘adla) to administer justice, handle
the law; اقام القداس على (quddāsa) to read the
Mass for s.o.; اقام قضية ( دعوى) على
(qaḍīyatan, da‘wā) to take legal action
against s.o., sue s.o.; اقام له وزنا (waznan) to
set great store by s.th., attach importance
to s.th., make much of s.th.; لا يقام له وزن
(yuqāmu, wazn) to be negligible, be of no
consequence; اقام مباراة (mubārātan) to
stage a contest; اقامه مقامه (maqāmahū) to
make s.o. take the place of s.o. else, make
s.o. replace s.o. else. substitute s.o. for s.o.
else; اقام نفسه مقام الحامي (nafsahū maqama l-
ḥāmī) to pose as the protector; اقامه واقعده
(wa-aq‘adahū) to upset s.o. seriously,
throw s.o. in a state of violent emotion; اقام
الدنيا واقعدھا (dunya wa-aq‘adahā) to move
heaven and earth; to make a stir, create a
sensation; لا يقيم له قيامة (qiyāmatan) he
forestalls any resistance on his part X to
rise, get up, stand up; to straighten up,
draw o.s. up; to stand upright, stand erect;
to be or become 799 straight; to be right,
correct, sound, proper, in order; to keep,
stick ( في to s.th.) │ استقام له الكلام (kalāmu)
he said the right thing about ..., he talked
sense about ...
قوم qaum pl. اقوام aqwām fellow
tribesmen, kinsfolk, kin, kindred; tribe,
race, people, nation; people │ عالم الأقوام
ethnographer, ethnologist; سيقول قوم ان
(inna) people will say ...
قومة qauma rising; uprising, revolt
قومي qaumī national; ethnic, racial;
قوميات national traits; (pl. -īya) “goumier”,
member of the native cavalry troops
recruited from the local tribes in French
North Africa
قومية qaumīya nationalism; nationality
قامة qāma stature, figure, build, frame
(of a person); fathom (measure of length =
6 feet); stand, support, tripod
قيم qayyim valuable, precious; straight,
right; caretaker, curator, custodian,
superintendent; القيمة al-qayyima the true
faith │ كتب قيمة (kutub) valuable books
قيمة qīma pl. قيم qiyam value, worth; size
of an amount, amount, quantity; price │ ذو
قيمة valuable; لا قيمة له (qīmata worthless
قيمي qīmī relating to the value, by the
standard of value, according to the value;
nonfungible (Isl. Law) │ مال قيمي
nonfungible things, nonfungibles (Isl.
Law)
قوام qawām upright posture, erect
bearing; straightness; stature, physique,
build, frame; figure, body (of a person);
rightness, properness, proper condition,
normal state; strength, vigor, stamina;
firmness, consistency; support, stay, prop;
livelihood, living
قوام qiwām support, stay, prop; basis,
foundation; stock, supply; sustenance,
subsistence, livelihood │ قوام اھله q. ahlihī
the provider, or supporter, of his family
قوام qawwām manager, director,
superintendent, caretaker, keeper,
custodian, guardian ( على of s.th.)
قوامة qiwāma guardianship
قويم qawīm pl. قيام qiyām straight,
upright, erect; correct, right, proper,
sound, authentic; true (religion); firm,
solid
قيام qiyām rising, getting up; standing;
existence; outbreak (e.g., of a revolt);
setting out, leaving, departure (also, esp.,
of trains); performance. execution,
carrying out, consummation, discharge,
accomplishment, undertaking ( ب of s.th.);
support, stay, prop; sustenance,
subsistence, livelihood │ الى قيام الساعة till
doomsday, forever and ever, in perpetuity,
for all time to come; قيام اھله q. ahlihī the
provider, or supporter, of his family; القيام
بالعمل (‘amal) performance; working,
functioning
قيامة qiyāma resurrection; tumult,
turmoil, upheaval, revolution, overthrow;
guardianship │ عيد القيامة ‘īd al-q. Easter;
يوم القيامة yaum al-q. the day of
resurrection, the day of final judgment;
قامت قيامته (qiyāmatuhū) to get excited, get
angry, become furious; all hell broke
loose in it; ( عن) قامت قيامته ل to be upset, be
shocked, be violently agitated by s.th.
القيوم al-qayyūm the Everlasting, the
Eternal (God)
اقوم aqwam2 straighter; more correct,
sounder; more adequate, more appropriate
مقوم miqwam plowtail, plow handle
مقام maqām pl. -āt site, location,
position; place, spot, point, locality;
situation; station; standing, position, 800
rank, dignity; tomb of a saint, sacred
place; key, tonality, mode (mus.) │ في ھذا
المقام on this occasion; مقام ابراھيم small
building near the Kaaba, in Mecca
(housing a stone with Aِbraham’s footprints);
مقام الحديث topic of the
conversation; (المقامات السياسية (الرسمية
(siyāsīya, rasmīya) the political (official)
agencies; مقام الكسر m. al-kasr denominator
of a fraction; صاحب المقام الرفيع title
conferred upon the holder of the order of
“Collier Fouad I”, established by Fuad I in
كان عندي في مقام والدي ; 1936 (m. wālidī) he
assumed the responsibility of fatherhood
for me; cf. also muqām and under ق م
مقامة maqāma pl. -āt sitting, session,
meeting; a genre of Arabic rhythmic prose
تقويم taqwīm pl. تقاويم taqāwīm2 raising,
setting up, erection; appraisal, assessment,
estimation, fating, valuation; correction;
rectification, amendment, reform,
reformation, reorganization, reshaping,
modification, adaption; a rectification,
detection (el., radio); land survey,
surveying; determination of geographical
longitude and latitude; geography;
stocktaking; almanac; calendar;
chronology │ التقويم الجويجوري the
Gregorian calendar; تقويم زمني (zamanī)
chronology; علم تقويم البلدان ‘ilm t. al-buldān
geography
مقاومة muqāwama resistance;
opposition; fight, struggle, battle (with
foll. genit.: against); O resistance (el.) │ O
مقاومة جوية (jawwīya) antiaircraft defense;
مقاومة سلبية (salbīya) passive resistance; دون
مقاومة without resistance, unresistingly
اقامة iqāma raising, lifting up; elevation;
setting up; erection; establishment (of an
institute); execution; performance;
holding, convocation (e.g., of a meeting),
celebration (e.g., of a festival), putting on,
staging (e.g., of a pageant, of a
celebration); resurrection (of the dead);
stay, sojourn; second call to the salat in a
mosque, indicating the imminent
beginning of the prayer; (Magr.)
residentship, office of resident │ اقامة
الشعائر الدينية (dīnīya) performance of the
religious ceremonies, celebration of the
divine service; اقامة العدل i. al-‘adl
administration of justice; محل الإقامة maḥall
al-i. (place of) residence, domicile;
address
استقامة istiqāma straightness; sincerity,
uprightness, rectitude, integrity, probity,
honesty; rightness, soundness, correctness
قائم qā’im pl. قوم quwwam, قيم quyyam,
قوام quwwām, قيام quyyām rising, getting
up; standing; upright, erect; stand-up;
existing, existent; visible, conspicuous;
firm, steadfast, staunch, unflinching,
unshakable; revolting, rebelling ( على
against); vertical, perpendicular ( على to) │
قائم بالأعمال، قائم بأعمال المفوضية (bi-a. almufawwāḍīya)
charge d’affaires (dipl.);
قائم الذات، قائم بذاته، قائم برأسه (bi-ra’sihī) and
بنفسه (bi-nafsihi) self-existent,
independent; في قائم حياته (q. ḥayātihi)
during his lifetime; قائم الزاوية q. az-zāwiya
rectangular, right-angled; الزاوية القائمة right
angle
قائممقام qā’im-maqām, qā’imaqām
administrative officer at the head of a
qaḍā’, approx.: district president (Ir., Syr.,
Leb.); lieutenant colonel (mil.; Tun.,
formerly also Eg.); commander (naval
rank; Eg.)
قائممقامية qā’im-maqāmīya,
qā’imaqāmīya administrative district
headed by a qā’im-maqam, in Iraq =
qaḍā’
قائمة qā’ima pl. قوائم qawā’im leg, foot,
paw (of a quadruped); leg, foot (of
furniture); pale, stake, post, prop,
stanchion, pillar; pommel (of a sword’s
hilt); stand, base, support; (fig.) main
support, pillar; (pl. also -āt) list, roster,
801 register, index, table, schedule;
catalogue; invoice, bill │ قائمة الطعام q. aṭ-
ṭa‘ām menu, bill of fare; see also قوم I
مقوم muqawwim estimator, appraiser,
assessor; -- (pl. -āt) formative element,
constituent factor; O rectifier, detector
(el., radio); pl. مقومات elements,
constituents, components, formative
agents, basic factors, fundamentals │
مقومات الحياة m. al-ḥayāh means of
subsistence; earthly possessions; مقومات
الجمال m. al-jamāl cosmetics; العمران m.
al-‘umrān cultural factors
مقوم muqawwam highly creditable,
valuable, valued, treasured, prized; pl.
مقومات valuable possessions, valuables;
assets, values
مقاوم muqāwim resisting, resistent,
reluctant, averse, unwilling; opponent,
adversary, antagonist
مقيم muqim raising, lifting up, setting
up, erecting, etc. j remaining, staying,
abiding, lingering; permanent, lasting,
enduring; persistent; living, residing,
resident, domiciled; re8ident (dipl.) │ مقيم
بواجباته (bi-wājibātihī) dutiful,
conscientious, loyal; مقيم عام (āmm)
Resident General (Tun.)
مقيمي muqīmī residential
مقيمية muqīmīya residentship, residency
مقام muqām raised, set up, erected, etc.;
pending (legal action); stay, sojourn;
abode, habitat, whereabouts; place of
residence; duration of stay; see also under
قمّ
مستقيم mustaqīm upright, erect; straight;
dead straight, straight as a die; directed
straight ahead; correct, right, sound,
proper, in order; even, regular,
symmetrical, proportionate, harmonious;
honest, straightforward, upright,
righteous, honorable; (pl. -āt) a straight,
straight line (math.); reotum (anat.)
قومسير (Fr. commissaire) qomisēr
commissioner
قومندان (Fr. commandant) qomandān
commander, commandant
قونة qūna pl. قون quwan icon; image of a saint
قونية qōniya2 Konya (city in Anatolia)
قوه II to shriek, scream, yell, cry, shout
قوي qawiya a ( قوة qūwa) to he or become
strong, vigorous, forceful, mighty; to
become stronger, increase in power, gain
ascendancy; to be able to do s.th. ( على in
or about s.th.), have influence ( على over
s.th.); to he able to cope ( على with s.th.),
be able to manage or tackle ( على s.th.); to
be superior ( على to s.o.); -- ( قي qiyy, قواية
qawāya) to he depopulated, deserted,
forsaken, desolate (place); -- ( قوى qawan)
to starve, be starved; to be denied, he
withheld (rain) II to make strong or
vigorous, strengthen, fortify, consolidate,
invigorate, brace ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.); to
encourage, hearten, embolden ( ه s.o.); to
intensify ( ھ s.th.) III to vie or compete in
strength ( ه with s.o.); to equal, match ( ه
s.o.) IV to be poor; to be empty, deserted,
forsaken, desolate (place) V to be or
become strong; to intensify, become
stronger; to take heart, take courage VIII
to claim for o.s. ( ھ s.th.) X = V
قواء qawā’, qiwā’ and قي qiyy desert,
wasteland, desolate country
قواء qawā’ and قوى qawan hunger,
starvation
قوة qūwa pl. -āt, قوى quwan strength;
vigor; potency; power, force; intensity;
violence, vehemence; courage, pluck;
faculty, ability, capability, aptitude;
efficacy, efficiency, potential; O (electric)
energy, power, capacity, output; armed
force, troop; قوات qūwāt armed forces;
troops│ بالقوة forcibly, by force; 802
inherently, virtually (philos.); بقوة وجلاء biqūwatin
wa-jalā’in (to speak) loud and
distinctly; منسرق القوة munsariq al-q.
weakened, debilitated, effete, exhausted,
spent; قوة احتياطية (iḥtiyāṭīyaī) reserves
(mil.); قوة الإذاعة q. al-idā‘a transmitting
power (radio); قوة الإرادة q. al-irāda will
power; قوة الاستمرار inertia; قوة حافظة
memory; قوة الحدود frontier guard, border
guard; قوة خفيفة light, mobile task force
(mil.); O قوة دافعة كھربائية (kahrabā’īya)
electromotive force, e.m.f.; قوة دفاعية
(difā‘īya) total defense potential; O قوة
سطحية (saṭḥīya) surface task force (navy);
قوة الشراء purchasing power; قوة الصوت q.
aṣ-ṣaut volume, intensity (radio) قوة عاقلة
intellectual power, faculty of perception;
قوة عراك combat force; قوة على العمل (‘amal)
working power; output capacity; قوة القانون
legal force; قوة قاھرة force majeure; قوة
مركزية (markazīya) central power; O قوة
مركزية جاذبة centripetal force; O قوة مركزية
طاردة centrifugal force; قوة مضادة للطائرات
(muḍādda) antiaircraft defense; قوة معنوية
(ma‘nawīya) moral strength, morale,
spirit; قوة q. an-nabt germinative faculty;
قوة نظامية (niẓāmīya) regular army; قوات برية
وبحرية وجوية (barrīya wa-baḥrīya wajawwīya)
ground, sea, and air forces; العاب
القوى athletics, specif., track and field
قوي qawīy pl. اقوياء aqwiyā’2 strong;
vigorous; potent; mighty, powerful,
forceful; intense, violent, vehement i firm,
solid, robust, hardy, sturdy │ قوى العارضة
eloquent, quick, witted
اقوى aqwā stronger
تقوية taqwiya strengthening;
fortification, consolidation;
intensification; encouragement
□ تقاوي taqāwī (eg.) seed (for sowing)
اقواء iqwā’ depopulation; imperfect
rhyme (change of the vowel following the
rhyme letter)
مقو muqawwin strengthening, fortifying,
invigorating; corroborant; (pl. مقويات
muqawwiyāt) a restorative, tonic, cordial,
corroborant; O amplifier (radio)
مقوى muqawwan strengthened,
reinforced, stiffened, stiff│ ورق مقوى
(waraq) cardboard, pasteboard
قى qiyy see قوى
قىء) قاء) qā’a i ( قيء qay’) to vomit II to cause (
ه s.o.) to vomit (of an emetic) V = I
قياء quyā’ vomit, that which is vomited
مقيئ muqayyi’ pl. مقيئات muqayyi’āt a
vomitive, an emetic│ الجوز المقيئ (jauz)
nux vomica
قيتار qītār pl. قياتير qayātīr قيثار , 2 qītār and قيثارة
qītāra pl. قياثير qayātīr2, a guitar; lyre
قاح) قيح) qāḥa i (qaiḥ) to suppurate, fester, be
purulent II and V do.
قيح qaiḥ pl. قيوح quyūḥ pus, matter
تقيح taqayyuḥ suppuration, maturation,
purulence
متقيح mutaqayyiḥ suppurative, festering,
purulent
قيد 1 II to bind, tie, fetter, shackle ( ب ه s.o. with;
also fig.: to bind or tie s.o. to); to limit,
restrict, confine, qualify ( ھ s.th.); to
impose restrictions ( ھ، ه on s.o., on s.th.),
set bounds ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.), curb,
check ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to fix, determine,
lay down, specify, stipulate ( ھ s.th.); to
write, write down, note down ( ھ s.th.),
make a note, take notes ( ھ of) ; to enter,
book ( ھ s.th.) ; to register, record ( ھ s.th.,
also fig., of the eyes); to enroll ( ه s.o., in a
list or register); to charge ( على ھ s.th. to
s.o.,s account), debit ( على ھ with s.th.
s.o.); to place s.th. ( ھ ) to s.o.’s credit ( ,(ل
credit ( ل ھ with s.th. s.o.) V pass. Of II; to
bind o.s., be bound ( ب to, by, e.g., by an
obligation); 803 to be limited, restricted;
to enroll, have one’s name registered
قيد qaid pl. قيود quyūd (also اقياد aqyād)
fetter, shackle, chain; bond, tie; strap,
thong; recording, record, booking,
entering, entry, registering, registration,
registry; enrollment (e.g., at
matriculation); fixation, determination,
specification, stipulation; document;
limitation, confinement, restriction,
qualification, reservation; condition,
proviso; amount, measure, degree;
distance│ قيد الاسنان gum(s); قيد الانساب
genealogical tree; family tree; من غير قيد او
روابط without any reservation, without
qualification; بلا قيد ولا شرط (šarṯ) without
any reservation, without qualification;
with no strings attached; unconditional; قلم
القيودات qalam al-quyūdāt bureau of vital
statistics, (G.B.) (general) register office;
بقيد الحياة bi-q. il-ḥayāh or على قيد الحياة (still)
alive, living; قيد شعرة qaida ša‘ratin, by a
hairbreadth, within 80 hair’s breadth; ... لا
قيد انملة la ... qaida unmulatin not one inch,
not one iota; على قيد ساعات معدودة (q.
sā‘atin) within a few hours; على قيد عشرة
كيلومترات at a distance of 1o km; عن قيد
البصر (q. il-baṣar) within sight
قيد qaida (prep.) under subject to, the
object of, in the process of, in the stage
of│ المشروع قيد الدرس (dars) the project is
being studied, is under consideration;
المسألة قيد البحث (mas’ala, baḥt) the affair is
subject to investigation, is being
investigated
قيدى qaidī booking-, registration, (in
compounds), e.g., رسوم قيدية booking fees,
registration fees
تقييد taqyīd pl. –āt, تقاييد taqāyīd2
fattering, shackling, tying, binding;
reservation, qualification; limitation,
restriction, confinement, curtailment;
entry, registry, registration, booking│ تقييد
النسل t. an-nas1 birth control; رسم التقييد
rasm al-t. registration fee
تقيد taqayyud pl. -āt a being bound,
obligation, tie, bond; restriction,
limitation, confinement
مقيد muqayyad fettered, shackled, bound,
tied, tied down; limited, restricted,
confined; booked, registered│ غير مقيد
unlimited, unrestricted; ملك مقيد (mulk)
constitutional monarchy
قياد 2 and قيادة see قود
قير II to tar, pitch ( ھ s.th.)
قار qār end قير qīr tar; pitch
قيراط qīrāṯ pl. قراريط qarārīt2 inch; a dry
measure (Eg. = 1/33 قدح = ٠.٠٦٤ l); a
square measure (Eg. = 1/24 فدان = ١٧٥.٠٣٥
m2); karat, a weight (Eg. = 1/ درھم = 16
٠.١٩٥ g)
قيروان qairawān pl. -āt caravan
القيروان al-qairawān Kairouan (city in
NE Tunisia)
قيس) قاس) qāsa i (qais, قياس qiyās) to measure,
gauge, measure out ( ھ s.th.), take the
measurements ( ھ of); to try on ( ھ a
garment); to weigh, judge ( ھ s.th., ب، على
by analogy with s.th. else), drew
analogous conclusions ( على from s.th., ھ
for s.th. else); to compare, correlate, bring
into relation ( على or ب ھ s.th. with, also الى
ھ ), proportion ( على or y ھ s.th. to, also الى
وقس عليه │( ھ wa-qis ‘alaihī end so forth II
to measure ( ھ s.th.) III to compare ( بين
الشيئين between two things, ھ s.th., الى or ب
with or to) VIII to measure ( ھ s.th.); to
imitate, follow ( ب s.o.), take after s.o. ( (ب
قياس qiyās pl. -āt, اقيسة aqyisa measure,
measurement, dimension; scale; exemplar,
example; reference, relation; record
(athlet.); comparison; analogy; deduction
by analogy│ قياسا على ذلك by analogy (with
it), analogously (to it); correspondingly;
بالقياس الى in comparison with, (as)
compared to; in proportion to, in relation
804 with; with reference to, with respect
to, with regard to; على القياس by analogy;
regular; after the model, accordant with
the model; بغير قياس illogical; أخذ قياسه to
take s.o.’s measure (tailor); متناسب القياس
mutanāsib al-q. fitting together, well
matched; equal in proportion,
commensurate, commensurable; قياس عالمى
(‘ālamī) world record; قياس فاسد wrong
inference, false conclusion, fallacy,
sophism, paralogism; شريط القياس tape
measure, tapeline
قياسى qiyāsī accordant with analogy,
analogous; consistent with the model,
pattern, rule, or norm; comparable, by
comparison; logical│ رقم قياسى (raqm)
record (athlet.)
قياس qayyās land surveyor, geodesist
مقياس miqyās pl. مقاييس maqāyīs2
measure, measurement; amount, quantity,
magnitude; measuring instrument, gauge,
water gauge, tide gauge; scale (e.g., of a
map); standard; standard of judging,
criterion; unit of measure; المقياس
Nilometer│ تحت المقياس substandard; O
مقياس التيار m. at-tayyār ammeter; O مقياس
الجھد m. al-jahd voltmeter; O مقياس الحرارة
m. al-ḥarāra thermometer; O مقياس الزلزال
m. az-zalāzil seismograph, seismometer;
O مقياس الزوايا m. az-zawāyā protactor; O
مقياس الكھربائية m. al-kahrabā’īya
electrometer; O مقياس المطر m. al-maṯar
rain gauge, pluviometer, ombrometer,
ombrograph; O مقياس المغنطيسية m. almagnaṯīya
magnetometer; مقياس التنفس m.
at-tanaffus spirometer; مقاييس الاطوال
measures of length, linear measures; مقاييس
المسطحات m. al-musaṯṯaḥāt square
measures; O مقاييس السطوح do.; مقاييس الحجم
m. al-ḥajm cubic measures; مقاييس الكيل m.
al-kail measures of capacity, dry
measures, liquid measures
مقاس maqās pl. –āt measuring,
mensuration; gauging; measurement,
dimension, size; pl. مقاسات dimensions
مقايسة muqāyasa measuring,
mensuration, gauging; comparison;
appraisal, valuation, estimation by
analogy; (preliminary) estimate (of coots);
relation, rate, rates, proportion; detailed
listing, specification; itemized list (of
services, quantities, prices)
قيسرى qaisarī pl. قياسر qayāsir قياسرة , 2 qayāsira
big, large, huge, enormous
قيسرية qaisarīya2 Caesarea (ancient
seaport in Palestine)
قياسرية qayāsirīya pl. قياسر qaysir2 large
block of public buildings with stores,
workshops, etc., roofed market place,
bazaar; qaisarīya2 Caesarea (ancient
seaport in Palestine)
قايش pl. قوايش look up alphabetically
قيشانى qīšānī faience; porcelain, china
قيصانة qaiṣāna sunfish, moonfish
قيصر qaiṣar pl. قياصر qayāṣir قياصرة , 2 qayāṣira
Caesar; emperor, kaiser; tsar
قيصرى qaiṣarī Caesarean; imperial;
tsarist│ العملية القيصرية (‘amalīya)
Caesarean section (med.)
قيصرية qaiṣarīya kaiserdom, Caesarism,
imperialism, empire; imperial dignity;
tsarism; Caesarean section (med.); large
lock of public buildings with stores,
workshops, etc., roofed marked place,
bazaar; Caesarea (ancient seaport in
Palestine)
قاض (قيض ) qaḍā i (qaiḍ) to break, crack, split,
cleave, burst open ( ھ s.th); to get broken,
crack, burst; to exchange ( من ھ s.th. for) II
to foreordain, destine ( ل ھ s.th. to s.o.; of
God); to lead, send ( ه s.o., ل to s.o; of
God) III to exchange, give in exchange ( ب
ھ ه to s.o. s.th. for) V and VII to burst,
crack, get broken, break; to collapse, fall
in, cave in, tumble down 805
قيض qaiḍ eggshell; barter, exchange;
article of exchange, barter object,
equivalent
قياض qiyāḍ barter, exchange
مقايضة muqāyaḍa barter, exchange;
barter trade, bartering; trading, barter (Isl.
Law); compensation, barter transaction,
barter deal
قيطان see قطن
قيطوس qīṯūs Cetus (astron.)
قيظ qaiẓ heat of summer; high summer, midsummer,
dog days; lack of rain, drought,
aridity│ قيظ النھار q. an-nahār daytime heat
مقيظ maqīẓ summer residence
قائظ qā’iẓ scorchingly hot, midsummery,
canicular
قيف II to follow ( ھ s.o.’s tracks); to study,
examine, investigate ( ھ s.th.); to criticize (
ھ s.th.)
قيافة qiyāfa tracking, pursuit (of a track);
make-up, guise, costume
قيقب qaiqab maple (bot.)
قال (قيل 1 ) qāla i (qail, قائلة qā’ila, قيلولة qailūla,
قيل qīl) to take a midday nap; to hold siesta
II do. IV to abolish, repeal, annul ( ھ s.th.);
to cancel, abrogate, rescind, revoke ( ھ
s.th., esp. a sale); to depose, dismiss,
discharge ( ھ s.o.; also with من المنصب min
al-manṣib from his office); to free,
release, exempt ( ه s.o., من from an
obligation)│ اقال لله عثرتك (‘atrataka) may
God regard your offence as undone; اقاله
من عثرته (‘atratihī) to steady one who has
stumbled X to demand the cancellation,
seek the abrogation ( ھ of a sale); to ask ( ه
s.o.) for exemption, release, or annulment;
to request to be released from office,
tender one’s resignation, resign ( من or عن
from an office); to resign one’s
commission, quit the service; to ask s.o.’s
ه) ) pardon, apologize ( ه to s.o.)
قيل qail pl. اقيال aqyāl princeling; chief,
chieftain
قيلولة qailūla siesta; midday nap
مقيل maqīl resting place, halting place
اقالة iqāla cancellation, abrogation,
rescission, revocation (esp. of a sale);
abolishment, abolition, repeal, annulment;
deposition, dismissal, discharge from an
office
استقالة istiqāla resignation, withdrawal
(from office); retirement
قائلة qā’la midday nap; noon, midday
مستقيل mustaqīl resigned from office,
retired, discharged
قيلة 2 qīla, قيلة مائية (mā’īya) hydrocele (med.)
قيام، قيمة، قيم and قيوم see قوم
قين qain pl. قيون quyūn blacksmith
قينة qaina pl. -āt, قيان qiyān songstress,
singer; lady’s maid
مقينة muqayyina lady’s maid
ك
ك ka (with foll. genit.) as, like; all but, as good
as; as, in my (your, etc.) capacity of │
كالأول ka-l-awwali as before, as at the
beginning, as from the outset; كھذا ka-hādā
such, e.g., رجل كھذا rajulun kahādā such a
man, a man like this; ھم كالمجمعين على ذلك
(ka-l-mujmi‘īna) they are as good as
unanimous about it, they are 806
practically agreed on it; انا كمسلم anā
kamuslimin I (in my capacity) as a
Muslim
كأن ka-anna (conj. introducing a
nominal clause) as if, as though; it is
(was) as if │ كأني بھا ka-annī bihā (with
imperf.) it is like seeing her before me; I
am under the impression that she …, it
looks to me as if she ...
كذا ka-dā so, thus, that way; so and so,
such and such, so-and-so much, so-and-so
many │ كذا مكذا so and so, such and such,
so-and-so much, so-and-so many; وكذا
بمكان كذا bi-makāni k. at such and such a
place; عمره كذا سنوات ‘umruhū k. sanawāt
his age is so-and-so many years
كذلك ka-dālika so, like this, thus;
equally; likewise
كما ka-mā (conj. introducing a verbal
clause) as, just as, as also, as on the other
hand; (introducing a main clause) equally,
likewise, as well │ كما ان ka-mā anna
(introducing a nominal clause) as, just as
quite as, as also, as on the other hand; كما
ھو such as it is; as things are, such being
the matter; كما لو كان حاضرا if as if he were
present
مدينة الكاب madīnat al-kāb Cape Town
كئب ka’iba a ( كأب ka’b, كأبة ka’ba, كآبة ka’āba)
to be dejected, dispirited, downcast, sad (
على about, ل because of), be worried ( ل by,
because of) IV to sadden, aggrieve,
distress, worry ( ه s.o.); to depress,
dishearten, discourage ( ه s.o.) VIII to be
dejected, dispirited, downcast, sad ( على
about, ل because of), be worried ( ل by,
because of); to be gloomy
كأب ka’b, كأبة ka’ba, كآبة ka’āba and
اكتئاب ikti’āb sorrow, grief, distress,
sadness, dejection, depression, gloom,
melancholy
كئب ka’ib and كئيب ka’īb sad, dispirited,
dejected, downcast, depressed,
melancholy; gloomy, morose; grave
مكتئب mukta’ib sad, dispirited, dejected,
downcast, depressed, melancholy;
gloomy, morose; grave; dark-colored,
blackish, dismal
كابل 1 (Fr. cable) kabil cable
كابل 2 kābul2 Kabul (capital of Afghanistan)
ابلي kābūlī Kabuli, of Kabul; (eg.)
mahogany wood
كابين (Fr. cabine) kābīn pl. كبائن kabā’in كباين , 2
kabāyin2 cabin
كاتدرائية kātidrā’īya cathedral
كاثوليكي kātūlīkī Catholic; a Catholic; see also
كثلك
كاخية kākiya pl. كواخ kawākin butler, steward
كاد 1 kād anacardium (bot.) │ كاد ھندي (hindī)
cashew tree (Anacardium occidentale;
bot.)
كأد 2 ka’ada a to be sad, distressed, worried
كأداء ka’dā’2 sadness, sorrow, distress,
grief; fear; dark night │ عقبة كأداء (‘aqaba)
insurmountable obstacle
كؤود ka’ūd: عقبة كؤود (‘aqaba)
insurmountable obstacle
كادر (Fr. cadre) kādir cadre (of a
military unit, of a governmental agency,
of a corporation, etc.), skeleton
organization, skeleton unit, skeleton crew
(of a naval unit)
كادميوم kadmiyom cadmium
كار kār pl. -āt work, job, occupation,
business; calling, vocation, profession,
trade │ ابن كار ibn k. (eg.) artisan,
craftsman; ارباب الكارات artisans, craftsmen;
عداوة الكار ‘adāwat al-k. professional
jealousy, trade rivalry 807
كارتون kartōn cardboard, pasteboard; (pl. -āt)
carton
كاردينال kardīnāl pl. كرادلة karādila cardinal
كارى = كرى karrī curry
كاريكاتورية karīkātūrīya caricature, cartoon
كاز = غاز gāz gas
كازينو kāzīnō pl. كازينوھات kāzīnōhāt casino
كأس ka’s f., pl. كؤوس ku’ūs, كئاس ki’ās, كأسات
ka’sāt cup; drinking glass, tumbler;
goblet; chalice, calix; calyx (bot.)
كساتا kāsātā cassata (Italian ice cream)
كاغط kāgiṭ (mor.) paper
كاف kāf name of the letter ك
كافور kāfūr camphor, camphor tree; (eg.) blue
gum (Eucalyptus globulus Lab.; bot.)
كاكنج kākinj, kākanj alkekengi, ground cherry
(Physalis alkekengi; bot.)
كالو (It. callo) kallō pl. كالوھات corn (on the
toes)
كالون gālōn gallon; -- (eg.) kālūn and كيلون
kailūn pl. كوالين kawālīn2 lock (of a door)
كواليني kawālīnī pl. -ya locksmith
كامبوديا kambōdiyā Cambodia
كامبيو (It. cambio) kombiyō rate of exchange
كامخ kāmak, kāmik pl. كوامخ kawāmik2 vinegar
sauce, pickle; (mixed) pickles
كاميرا kāmērā camera
كاميه kāmīh cameo (precious stone)
سوق الكانتو sūq al-kantō rag fair, secondhand
market
كانتين kantīn post exchange, canteen
كاھية kāhiya pl. كواه kawāhin chief officer of a
كھاية kihāya (Tun.); deputy, vice-, under-,
sub- (Tun.)
كاوتشق kautšuq rubber, caoutchouc
كب kabba u (kabb) to prostrate, throw prostrate
لوجھه) li-wajhihī or على وجھه ه s.o.); to
overturn, overthrow, topple, upset,
capsize, turn upside down, revert, invert (
ھ s.th.); to pour out, pour away ( ھ a
liquid) II to ball, roll or form into a ball,
conglomerate ( ھ s.th.) IV to throw down,
prostrate, bend down, bow down ( ه s.o.);
to throw o.s. down, prostrate o.s.; to bend,
bow, lean ( على over s.th.); to apply o.s.
eagerly, devote o.s., dedicate o.s. ( على to
s.th.) VII to fall prostrate ( على وجھه ); to
throw o.s. down, prostrate o.s.; to bend,
bow, lean ( على over); to apply o.s. eagerly,
devote o.s., dedicate o.s. ( على to); to nestle
على) against); to be reverted, be inverted,
be overturned, be upset, be toppled, get
knocked over; to be poured away │ انكب
على قدميه (qadamaihi) to throw o.s. at s.o.’s
feet, prostrate o.s. before s.o.
كب kabb prostration; overthrow,
overturn, reversal; bending, tilting,
inclination
كبة kubba pl. كبب kubab ball; clew,
hank; ball of thread, hank of yarn; (syr.,
ir.) a kind of meatballs made of bulgur,
onions, minced meat and piñons; (eg.)
bubo, plague boil
كباب kabāb fried or broiled meat;
cabobs, meat roasted in small pieces on a
skewer; a kind of meatballs made of finely
chopped meat (syr., eg.) │ كباب صيني (ṣīnī;
eg.) cubeb (Piper cubeba Tr.; bot.)
كبابة kabāba, kubāba cubeb (Piper
cubeba; bot.)
كبيبة (eg.) kubēba a kind of meatballs,
hamburgers │ كبيبة بطاطس (eg.) baked
potato dough stuffed with minced meat,
meat patties
□ كباية kubbāya pl. -āt drinking glass,
tumbler 808
مكب mikabb pl. -āt, مكاب makābb2 ball
of thread, hank of yarn; reel of thread,
bobbin, spool, reel
اكباب ikbāb devotion, dedication ( على to
s.th.); occupation ( على with), pursuit ( على
of)
انكباب inkibāb devotion, dedication ( على
to s.th.); occupation ( على with), pursuit (
على of)
مكب mukibb devoted, dedicated,
addicted, given over ( على to), intent ( على
on), wholeheartedly engaged ( على in)
منكب munkabb devoted, dedicated,
addicted, given over ( على to), intent ( على
on), wholeheartedly engaged ( على in)
كباريه (Fr. cabaret) kabārēh pl. -āt cabaret
كبت 1 kabata i (kabt) to put down, crush,
suppress, repress, stifle, subdue, restrain,
curb ( ھ s.th.) │ كبت غيظه في جوفه (gaiẓahū
fī jaufihī) to suppress one’s anger; كبت
انفاسه (anfāsahū) to get s.o. out of breath
كبت kabt suppression, repression
كبوت 2 kabbūt pl. كبابيت kabābīt2 hood, cowl;
hooded mantle; top of a carriage or
automobile
كبتولة kabtūla lump, chunk; ball; pellet
مكبتل mukabtal round
كبتن (Engl.) kabtan captain (military rank)
كبح kabaḥa a (kabḥ) to rein in ( ھ a horse); to
check, curb, control ( ھ s.th.); to hamper,
hinder, prevent, detain, restrain, hold back
عن ه) s.o. from) │ كبح جماحه (jimāḥahū) to
curb s.o.’s defiance, repress s.o. or s.th.
كبح kabḥ curbing, checking, subdual,
restraint, control; suppression, repression;
hindering, prevention
O مكبح mikbaḥ brake (of an automobile)
كبد kabada u i (kabd) to affect severely, afflict
gravely, wear out, wear down ( ه s.o.; of
pain, losses, etc.) II to cause ( ھ ه to s.o.
s.th., esp. losses), inflict ( ھ ه upon s.o.
s.th., esp. losses); to culminate, pass
through the meridian (star); to reach its
climax III to bear, suffer, endure, undergo,
sustain, stand ( ھ s.th.) V to bear, suffer,
endure, undergo, sustain, stand ( ھ losses,
hardships, etc.); to have to take upon o.s. (
ھ s.th.), be exposed ( ھ to); to bear, defray
ھ) costs); to take up the center, step into
the middle ( ھ of a place); to be in the
zenith, culminate
كبد kabid, kabd, kibd m. and f., pl. اكباد
akbād, كبود kubūd liver; interior, heart;
middle, center; -- kabid, kabad center of
the sky, zenith
كباد kubād liver ailment
كباد kabbād, kubbād name of several
citrus plants (Citrus medica Risso, Citrus
Bigaradia Duh., also Zollikoferia spinosa
B.; eg.); kabbād (syr.) citron (Citrus
medica)
كبر 1 kabara u (kabr) to exceed in age ( ب ه s.o.
by), be older ( ه than s.o., ب so-and-so
much); -- kabura u (kubr, kibar, كبارة
kabāra) to be or become great, big, large;
to grow, increase, augment, become
greater, bigger or larger; to become
famous, gain significance, become
important; to become too great, too big,
toe large ( عن for s.th.); to disdain ( عن
s.th.); to become toe oppressive, too
painful, too distressing, too burdensome;
to appear intolerable ( الى to s.o.); to
become too difficult, too hard ( الى for
s.o.), appear insurmountable ( الى to s.o.) II
to make great(er), big(ger), large(r),
enlarge, magnify, enhance, aggrandize ( ھ
s.th.); to extend, expand, widen, amplify (
ھ s.th.); to increase, augment ( ھ s.th.); to
intensify ( ھ s.th.); 809 to exaggerate, play
up ( ھ s.th.); to aggravate, make worse ( ھ
s.th.); to praise, laud, extol, exalt, glorify,
celebrate ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to exclaim
allāhu akbar III to treat haughtily, with
disdain, with contempt ( ه s.o.); to seek to
excel, try to surpass, strive to outdo ( ه
s.o.); to contend, vie, strive, contest ( ه with
s.o.); to oppose, resist, contradict ( ه s.o.);
to renege, renounce ( ھ s.th.), offend ( ھ
against), act contrary ( ھ to); to stickle,
insist stubbornly on one’s opinion IV to
consider great, deem significant, regard as
formidable ( ھ s.th.); to praise, laud, extol
ه) s.o.); to show respect ( ه to s.o.), he
deferential ( ه toward s.o.); to admire ( ھا
s.th.) V and VI to be proud or haughty,
give o.s. airs, swagger; to be overweening,
overbearing ( على toward s.o.) X to deem
great or important ( ھ s.th.); to be proud,
haughty, display arrogance ( على toward
s.o.)
كبر kibr bigness, largeness, magnitude;
greatness, eminence, grandeur;
significance, importance; standing,
prestige; nobility; pride, haughtiness,
presumption, arrogance
كبر kubr greatness, eminence, grandeur;
bigness, largeness, magnitude; size, bulk,
extent, expanse; power, might; glory,
fame, renown, standing, prestige; nobility;
main part, bulk
كبر kibar bigness, largeness,
magnitude; greatness, eminence,
grandeur; old age
كبرة kabra old age
كبير kabīr pl. كبار kibār, كبراء kubarā’2
great, big, large, sizable; bulky,
voluminous, spacious; extensive,
comprehensive; significant, considerable,
formidable, huge, vast, enormous;
powerful, influential, distinguished,
eminent; important; old │ كبير امراء البحار
k. umara’ al-b. Admiral of the Fleet (Eg.);
كبيرة الخدم k. al-kadam female head of the
houaehold staff; كبير الأساقفة k. al-asāqifa
archbishop; كبير السن k. as-sinn old; كبير
القضاة k. al-quḍāh chief justice, chief
magistrate; ابو كبير (abū) asafetida, devil’s
dung (pharm.); كل صغيرة وكبيرة every
single detail; كبار الضباط k. aḍ-ḍubbāṭ
senior officers; كبار الموظفين k. almuwaẓẓafīn
senior officials; كبار الھيئات k.
al-hai’āt the leading personalities of
public corporations
كبيرة kabīra pl. -āt, كبائر kabā’ir كبر , 2
kubur great sin, grave offense, Atrocious
crime
كبار kubār, kubbār very great, very big,
huge
كبرياء kibriyā’ grandeur, glory,
magnificence, majesty; pride, haughtiness,
presumption, arrogance
اكبر akbar2 pl. -ūn, اكابر akābir2, f. كبرى
kubrā, pl. كبريات kubrayāt greater, bigger,
larger; older; senior-ranking │ المفتي الأكبر
(muftī) grand mufti; سوريا الكبرى (sūriyā)
Greater Syria; أكابر القوم a. al-qaum the
leaders of the people; الأكابر والأعيان the
grandees and notables
تكبير takbīr enlargement, increase,
augmentation, magnification;
enhancement, aggrandizement;
intensification, amplification;
exaggeration; augmentative (gram.);
praise, laudation, extolment, exaltation,
glorification; the exclamation لله اكبر
allāhu akbar
مكابرة mukābara haughtiness,
superciliousness, overweening,
overbearingness; self-importance,
pomposity; stubbornness, obstinacy, selfwill
اكبار ikbār admiration; deference,
respect, regard, esteem
تكبر takabbur and تكابر takābur pride,
haughtiness, presumption, arrogance
مكبر mukabbir pl. -āt O amplifier (el.)
│ مكبر الصوت m. aṣ-ṣaut or مكبر صوت
(ṣautī) 810 loud-speaker (radio); نظارة
مكبرة (naẓẓāra) magnifying glass
مكبرة mukabbira pl. -āt magnifying
glass
مكبر mukabbar enlarged, magnified │
صورة مكبرة (ṣūra) enlargement, blowup
(phot.); بصورة مكبرة increasingly, on a
larger scale, to an increasing degree
مكابر mukābir presumptuous, arrogant,
supercilious, haughty, overweening;
quarrelsome, contentious, cantankerous;
self-willed, obstinate, stubborn; stickler
متكبر mutakabbir proud, imperious,
high-handed, haughty, supercilious,
overweening
كبر 2 kabar capers; caper shrub
كبرت kabrata to coat with sulfur ( ھ s.th.); to
sulfurize, sulfurate ( ھ s.th.); to vulcanize (
ھ s.th.)
كبريت kibrīt sulfur; matches │ عود كبريت
‘ūd k. matches, a match
كبريتة kibrīta match, matchstick
كبريتي kibrītī sulfureous, sulfurate,
sulfurous, sulfuric │ حمام كبريتي (ḥammām)
sulfur bath; ينبوع كبريتي (yanbū‘) sulfur
spring
كبريتات kibrītāt sulfate
كبري kubrī or كوبري (from Turk. köprü) pl.
كباري kabārī bridge; deck
كبس kabasa i (kabs) to exert pressure ( على on),
press ( على s.th. or on s.th.), squeeze ( على
s.th.); to attack, raid, take by surprise ( ھ a
place); to intercalate ( السنة بيوم as-sanata
bi-yaumin a day in a leap year);
to preserve (in vinegar, or the like),
pickle ( ھ s.th.); to marinate ( ھ s.th.); to
conserve ( ھ s.th.) II to press or squeeze
hard ( ھ s.th.); to massage ( ه s.o.)
كبس kabs pressure, squeeze, pressing;
raid, attack; preservation (esp. in vinegar),
pickling; intercalation (of a day; astron.)
كبس kabsa (n. vic.) raid, surprise attack
كباس kabbas piston; press; ramrod │ O
موسى كباس (mūsā) penknife
كبيس kabīs preserved (esp. in vinegar),
pickled; pickled food, preserves;
intercalary, intercalated, interpolated │ سنة
كبيسة (sana) leap year
كابوس kābūs pl. كوابيس kawābīs2 nightmare,
incubus; terrible vision, phantom,
bugbear
كبس mikbas pl. مكابس makābis2 or مكباس
mikbās pl. مكابيس makābīs2 press; piston
(of a pump); ramrod │ مكبس القطن m. alquṭn
cotton press; O مكبس الخطابات letter
press, copying press; O مكبس مائي (mā’ī)
hydraulic press
تكبيس takbīs massage
O آلة كابسة āla kābisa compressor
مكبوس makbūs raided, attacked;
pressed; preserved, pickled; مكبوسات
canned goods, conserves
كبسول kabsūl or كبسولة kabsūla capsule;
percussion cap, primer, detonator; snap
fastener
كبش kabaša u (kabš) to take a handful ( ھ of
s.th.); to grasp with the hand, clench ( ھ
s.th.)
كبش kabš pl. كباش kibāš, اكباش akbāš
ram, male sheep; bellwether; chieftain,
chief, head, leader; battering-ram; pile
driver; rammer; (pl. كبوش kubūš)buttress,
pier, stay, prop, support; mulberry │ كبش
التصادم k. at-taṣādum (pl. كبوش ) bumper
(railroad); كبوش قرنفل k. qaranful cloves
كبشة kabša a handful; grasp, grip
كبشة kabša ladle, scoop
كبشة kubša pl. كبش kubaš hook, clamp,
cramp, brace; clasp, brooch 811
كبكب kabkaba to topple, upset, capsize,
overturn, turn upside down, revert, invert (
ھ s.th.); to spill ( ھ s.th.)
كبيكج kabīkaj Asiatic crowfoot (Ranunculus
Asiaticus; bot.)
كبل 1 kabala i (kabl) to put in irons, shackle,
fetter ( ه s.o.); to keep waiting ( ه s.o., ھ for
s.th., esp. for the payment of a debt) II to
put in irons, shackle, fetter ( ه s.o.) III to
keep waiting ( ه s.o., ھ for s.th., esp. for the
payment of a debt), defer, put off ( الدين addaina
the payment of a debt)
كبل kabl, kibl pl. كبول kubūl leg iron,
chain, shackle, fetter
كبولي kabūlī and كابولي kābūlī pl. كوابيل
kawābīl2 bracket, corbel, console (arch.);
lean to roof, pent roof, shed roof (arch.)
كابل 2 and كابلي look up alphabetically
كابين pl. كباين look up alphabetically
كبو) كبا) kabā u (kabw, kubūw) to fall forward ( ل
وجھه li-wajhihī on one’s face); to stumble,
trip, slip; -- u to empty ( ھ a vessel), pour
out the contents ( ھ of a vessel); to become
dim (light); to become dull, fade, lose
luster (color); to rise, swirl up (dust) IV to
fail, fail to produce a spark (lighter) VII to
fail headlong; to stumble, trip, slip
كبوة kabwa (n. vic.) fall, tumble, drop;
stumble, trip, slip, false step; dust
كاب kābin dull, dim, pale, dead, flat;
slack, weak, decrepit; see كاب
alphabetically
كباية see كب
كبوت see كبت 2
كت katta i (katt) to hum softly
كت katt and كتيت katīt soft humming
كتالوج katālōg pl. -āt catalogue
كتب kataba u (katb, كتبة kitba, كتابة kitāba) to
write, pen, write down, put down in
writing, note down, inscribe, enter, record,
book, register ( ھ s.th.); to compose, draw
up, indite, draft ( ھ s.th.); to bequeath,
make over by will ( ل ھ s.th. to s.o.); to
prescribe ( على ھ s.th. to s.o.); to
foreordain, destine ( ل or على ھ s.th. to s.o.;
of God); pass. kutiba to be rated, be
foreordained, be destined ( ل to s.o.) │ كتب
على نفسه ان to be firmly resolved to ...,
make it one’s duty to ...; كتب عنه to write
from s.o.’s dictation; كتب كتابه (kitābahū) to
draw up the marriage contract for s.o.,
marry s.o. ( على to) II to make ( ه s.o.) write
ھ) s.th.); to form or deploy in squadrons (
ھ troops) III to keep up a correspondence,
exchange letters, correspond ( ه with s.o.)
IV to dictate ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.), make ( ه
s.o.) write ( ھ s.th.) VI to write to each
other, exchange letters, keep up a
correspondence VII to subscribe VIII to
write ( ھ s.th.); to copy ( ھ s.th.), make a
copy ( ھ of s.th.); to enter one’s name; to
subscribe ( ل for); to contribute, subscribe (
ل ب money to); to be entered, be recorded,
be registered X to ask ( ه s.o.) to write ( ھ
s.th.); to dictate ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.), make ( ه
s.o.) write ( ھ s.th.); to have a copy made (
ه by s.o.)
كتاب kitāb pl. كتب kutub piece of
writing, record, paper; letter, note,
message; document, deed; contract (esp.
marriage contract); book; الكتاب the Koran;
the Bible │ اھل الكتب ahl a1-k. the people
of the Book, the adherents of a revealed
religion, the kitabis, i.e., Christians and
Jews; كتاب الزواج k. az-zawāj marriage
contract; كتاب الطلاق k. aṭ-ṭalāq bill of
divorce; كتاب تعليمي (ta‘līmī) textbook; كتاب
الاعتماد credentials (dipl.); دار الكتب library
كتبي kutubī pl. -ya bookseller, bookdealer
812
كتابخانة kitābkāna and كتبخانة kutubkāna
library; bookstore
كتاب kuttāb pl. كتاتيب katātīb2 kuttab,
Koran school (lowest elementary school)
كتيب kutayyib booklet
كتابة kitāba (act or practice of) writing;
art of writing, penmanship; system of
writing, script; inscription; writing,
legend; placard, poster; piece of writing,
record, paper; secretariat; written amulet,
charm; pl. كتابات writings, essays; كتابة
kitābatan in writing │ بالكتابة written; بدون
كتابة bi-dūn k. unwritten, oral; blank; كتابة
التاريخ historiography, historical writing;
كتابة الدولة k. ad-daula (Magr.) secretariat
of stae; كتابة عامة (‘āmma) secretariat
general; اسم الكتابة ism al-k. pen name, nom
de plume; آلة الكتابة typewriter; لغة الكتابة
lugat al-k. literary language; ورق الكتابة
waraq al-k. writing paper
كتابي kitābī written, in writing; clerical;
literary; scriptural, relating to the revealed
Scriptures (Koran, Bible); kitabi, adherent
of a revealed religion; the written part (of
an examination) │ اسلوب كتابي (uslūb)
literary style; غلطة كتابية (galṭa) slip of the
pen, clerical error; اعمال كتابية clerical
work, office work, desk work; الكمال الكتابي
(kamāl) literary perfection; لغة كتابية (luga)
literary language; موظف كتابي (muwaẓẓaf)
clerk, clerical worker (of a government
office)
كتيبة katība pl. كتائب katā’ib2 squadron;
cavalry detachment; (Eg. 1939) battalion,
(Ir. after 1922) regiment, (later) battalion,
(Syr.) battalion of armored, cavalry, or
motorized, unite (mil.); (piece of) writing,
record, paper, document; written amulet
مكتب maktab pl. مكاتب makātib2 office;
bureau; business office; study; school,
elementary school; department, agency,
office; desk │ مكتب الأخبار and مكتب الأنباء
news agency, press agency, wire service;
مكتب البريد post office; مكتب البريد الرئيسي
(ra’īsī) main post office; مكتب البرق m. albarq
telegraph office; مكتب التحرير editorial
room; مكتب التليفونات telephone central
office; مكتب السفريات m. as-safarīyāt (syr.)
travel agency; مكتب الصحة m. aṣ-ṣiḥḥa
board of health; مكتب الاستعلامات
information office, information desk;
news agency, press agency, wire service
مكتبة maktaba pl. -āt, مكاتب makātib2
library; bookstore; desk
O مكتاب miktāb typewriter
مكاتبة mukātaba exchange of letters,
correspondence
اكتتاب iktitāb enrollment, registration,
entering (of one’s name); -- (pl. -āt)
subscription; contribution (of funds)
استكتاب istiktāb dictation
استكتابي istiktābī: آلة استكتابية dictaphone
كاتب kātib pl. -ūn, كتاب kuttāb, كتبة
kataba writer; scribe, scrivener; secretary;
clerk typist; office worker, clerical
employee; clerk, registrar, actuary, court
clerk; notary; writer, author │ كاتب الدولة k.
ad-daula (Mag.) (under)secretary of state;
كاتب السر k. s-sirr private secretary; كاتب
قصصي (qiṣaṣī) writer, novelist; كاتب المحكمة
k. al-mahkama court clerk; آلة كاتبة
typewriter
كاتبة kātiba pl. -āt woman secretary;
authoress, writer
مكتوب maktūb written, written down,
recorded; fated, foreordained, destined ( ل
or على to s.o.); s.th. written, writing; -- (pl.
مكاتيب makātīb2) a writing, message, note;
letter
مكاتب mukātib correspondent;
(newspaper) reporter
مكتتب muktatib subscriber 813
كتابخانة and كتبخانة see كتب
اكتع akta’ pl. كتع kut’ having crippled fingers;
one-armed
كتف katafa i (katf) to fetter, shackle ( ه s.o., esp.
by tying his hands); to tie up, bind ( ھ
s.th.) II to tie the hands behind the back;
to cross, fold ( ھ hands, arms behind the
back or in front of the chest) V and X to
cross or fold one’s arms VI to stand
shoulder to shoulder; to support one
another; to be united in solidarity, stand
together
كتف katif, katf, kitf pl. اكتاف aktāf, كتفة
kitafa shoulder; shoulder blade, scapula;
mountain slope; O end support of a
bridge; (pl. اكتاف aktāf) buttress, pier │ ما
ھكذا تؤكل الكتف (tu’kalu) that’s certainly not
the way to do it! that’s no way to handle
it!
كتاف kitāf pl. كتف kutuf shackle,
manacle, handcuff
كتف aktaf2, f. كتفاء katfā’2, pl. كتف kutf
broad-shouldered
كتكت 1 katkat floss, silk waste
كتكوت 2 katkūt pl. كتاكيت katākīt2 chicken, chick
كتل katala u (katl) and II to agglomerate,
conglomerate, gather into a compact mass,
press into a lump ( ھ s.th.) V to be heaped
up, piled up, agglomerated, clustered,
clotted, massed, pressed into a compact
mass or lump; to agglomerate, cluster,
clot, pile up, gather in a mass; to unite in a
bloc or group
كتلة kutla pl. كتل kutal lump, chunk,
clod, clot; bulk, mass; cube; block; bloc;
beam, joist, transom, lintel, girder │ كتل
بشرية (bašarīya) crowds, throngs, masses;
كتلة الجسد kutlat al-jasad bulk of the body,
frame; كتلة من الأعصاب (a‘ṣāb) a fearless,
husky fellow; الكتلة الوطنية (waṭanīya) the
National Bloc
مكتل miktal pi. مكاتل makatil2 large
basket
تكتل takattul formation of blocs (pol.) │
سياسة التكتل policy of blocs (pol.)
متكتل mutakattil clotted, lumpy,
agglomerate, clustered, massed;
concentrated, compact; burly, husky,
stocky, heavily built (body)
كتم katama u (katm, كتمان kitmān) to hide ( ھ
s.th., عن from s.o.); to conceal, secrete,
keep secret ( ھ s.th., عن from s.o.); to
suppress, repress, restrain, check, curb,
subdue ( ھ anger, passion); to hold ( ھone’s
breath); to lower, muffle ( ھ the
voice); to stifle, smother, quench ( ھ fire)
│ كتم انفاسه to take s.o.’s breath away, drive
s.o. out of his senses II to hide, conceal ( ھ
s.th.) III to hide, conceal, keep, withhold (
ھ ه from s.o. s.th.) V to keep silent, hold
one’s tongue, keep mum VIII = II X to ask
ه) s.o.) to keep ( ه a secret); to confide ( ھ ه
to s.o. s.th.)
كتم katm and كتمان kitmān secrecy,
concealment, secretion, silence; restraint,
control, suppression (esp. of an emotion)
كتيم katīm shut tight, hermetically
sealed, impenetrable, impermeable,
impervious
كتوم katūm reticent, reserved, secretive,
uncommunicative, taciturn, discreet
كتام kitām (eg.) constipation
تكتم takattum secrecy, secretiveness,
reticence, reserve, taciturnity, discretion
اكتتام iktitām concealment, secretion,
secrecy, silence
كاتم kātim: كاتم السر k. as-sirr (private)
secretary
مكتوم maktūm hidden, concealed, kept,
preserved (secret); (eg.) constipated 814
كتن 1 katina a (katan) to be dirty, soiled,
smutty, blackened by soot II to smut, soil (
ھ s.th.)
كتن katan dirt, smut, soot
كتان 2 kattān (kittān) flax; linen
كتاني kattānī made of linen, linen (adj.)
كتينة 3 (It. catena) katīna (watch) chain
كث katta i a ( كثث katat, كثاثة katāta, كثوثة
kutūta) to be thick or dense (esp. hair)
كثث katat thickness, density
كث katt and كثيث katīt thick, dense,
thick-grown, densely crowded
كثب katab nearness, proximity, vicinity │ على
كثب من and عن كثب من in the vicinity (or
neighborhood) of, near; من (عن) كثب from
nearby, at a short distance
كثيب katīb pl. اكثبة aktiba, كثب kutub,
كثبان kutbān sandhill, dune
كثر katara u (katr) to outnumber, exceed in
number ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.) – katura u ( كثرة
katra) to be much, many or numerous; to
be more ( عن than); to happen frequently,
occur often; to increase, augment,
multiply, grow II to increase, augment,
compound, multiply ( ھ s.th.) III to
outnumber, exceed in number ( ھ, ه s.o.,
s.th.); to vie in quantity or number ( ھ, ه
with) IV to do much ( من in or of s.th.); to
give much or frequently ( من ل to s.o. of
s.th.); to do constantly,
always or frequently ( من or في s.th.); to
increase, augment ( ھ s.th.) VI to band
together, form a gang, rally ( على against)
X = IV; to regard as too much, deem
excessive, find exorbitant ( ھ s.th.); to
regard as too high, as too troublesome ( ھ
s.th.); to think not worth the trouble ( ھ
s.th., على with regard to s.o.); to begrudge
ھ على) s.o. s.th.); to demand much, ask for
a lot │ استكثر بخيره (bi-kairihī) to thank s.o.
كثر kutr large quantity, abundance,
plenty; major portion, greater part
كثرة katra large quantity, great number,
multitude, abundance, copiousness,
numerousness, frequency, multiplicity,
plurality; majority, major portion ( من of)
│ بكثرة plentifully, abundantly, a lot; جمع
الكثرة jam‘ al-k. plural of multitude (gram.)
كثير katīr pl. كثار kitār much, many,
numerous, abundant, plentiful, copious;
frequent; a large portion, a great deal, a
great many, a lot; الكثير the most part, most
من) of); كثيرا katīran very, much, to a large
extent; often, frequently │ كثيرا ما katīran
mā often, frequently; بكثير (after a
comparative) far, by far; الكثير من، الكثيرون
من the majority of, most of; plenty of, a
great many, a lot of; كثير على too much for;
الشيء الكثير most of it; ھذا كثير that’s pretty
strong! that’s laying it on thick! في كثير من
الأوقات and في احيان كثيرة frequently, often
كثيراء katīrā’2 tragacanth (Astragalus
gummifer Lab.; bot.); gum obtained from
tragacanth
اكثر aktar2 more; oftener, more
frequently; more numerous; longer; most;
major portion, greater part, majority;
الأكثرون the majority, most of them │ اكثر
فاكثر more and more; على الأكثر at most;
latest; اكثر الأمر aktara l-amr at best; اكثر من
ذلك besides, moreover
اكثرية aktarīya majority
مكثار miktār very talkative, garrulous
تكثير taktīr increase, augmentation,
multiplication. propagation, ample
provision, abundant supply
اكثار iktār increase, augmentation,
multiplication, propagation, ample
provision, abundant supply; raising,
increase (esp. of the yield) 815
تكاثر takātur growth, increase;
multiplication, propagation, proliferation
مكثر muktir rich, well-to-do
متكاثر mutakātir numerous, extensive;
manifold, multifarious, multiple │ متكاثر
الرقاع m. ar-riqā‘ patched in numerous
places
كثف katufa u ( كثافة katāfa) to be thick or
dense; to thicken, be condensed, become
thicker or denser II to make thick or
dense, thicken, compress, solidify,
concentrate ( ھ s.th.); to inspissate,
condense ( ھ s.th.); O (el.) to increase the
capacity V and VI to grow denser, become
concentrated; to thicken, become viscous;
to be condensed
كثيف katīf pl. كثاف kitāf thick; dense;
compact; heavy, coarse, crude; viscous,
sirupy (e.g., sauce)
كثافة katāfa thickness; density;
heaviness; solidity, firmness;
compactness, fullness, intensity;
consistency, degree of density or
viscosity; O capacity (el.) │ كثافة السكان k.
as-sukkān density of population; O كثافة
الصوت k. aṣ-ṣaut sonority, sound intensity
تكثيف taktīf compression, concentration,
solidification; condensation
تكاثف takātuf concentration,
consolidation; condensation
مكثف mukattif pl. -āt capacitor,
condenser │ مكثف متغير (mutagayyir)
variable capacitor (radio)
مكثف mukattaf condensed
متكاثف mutahātif massing,
concentrating, gathering, piling up; dense
كثلك II takatlaka to become (a) Catholic
كثوليكي katūlīkī pl. كثلكة katlaka
Catholic; a Catholic
الكثلكة al-katlaka Catholicism
كثيراء katīrā’2 tragacanth (Astragalus gummifer
Lab.; bot.); gum obtained from tragacanth
كح kaḥḥa u to cough
كحة kuḥḥa cough
كحت kaḥata a and II (eg.) to scrape off, scratch
off ( ھ s.th.)
كحكح kaḥkaḥa to cough, cough slightly, hack
كحكحة kaḥkaḥa short, dry cough
كحل kaḥala u a (kaḥl) and II to rub, paint or
smear (with kohl) ( ھ the eyes) V and VIII
to color (the edges of) the eyelids with
kohl │ ما اكتحل غماضا (غمضا ) (gamīḍan,
gimāḍan, gumḍan) to find no sleep
كحل kuḥl pl. اكحال akḥāl antimony; kohl,
a preparation of pulverized antimony used
for darkening (the edges of) the eyelids;
any preparation for coloring the eyelids
كحل kaḥal black coloring (of the edges)
of the eyelids
كحل kaḥil darkened with kohl, dyed
black (eyelids)
كحلي kuḥlī dark blue, navy blue
كحلة kuḥla (eg.) pointing, filling or
grouting of the joints (of a wall; masonry)
اكحل akḥal2, f. كحلاء kaḥlā’2, pl. كحل
kuḥl black (eye); الأكحل the medial arm
vein
كحلاء kaḥlā’ (eg.) a variety of blueweed
(Echium cericeum V.; bot.)
كحيل kaḥīl pl. كحائل kaḥā’il2 black, dyed
black, darkened with kohl (eyelid); horse
of noblest breed
كحول kuḥūl alcohol, spirit
كحولي kuḥūlī alcoholic, spirituous
كحيلي kuḥailī and كحيلان kuḥailān horse
of noblest bread 816
كحال kiḥāl antimony powder, eye
powder
كحال kaḥḥāl eye doctor, oculist (old
designation)
مكحل mikḥal and مكحال mikḥāl kohl
stick, pencil for darkening the eyelids
مكحلة mikḥala pl. مكاحل makāḥil2 kohl
container, kohl jar; solar quadrant; (syr.)
rifle, gun
تكحيل takḥīl treatment of the eyes with
kohl
كاحل kāḥil pl. كواحل kawāḥil2 anklebone
كخية kikya and كاخية kākiya pl. كواخ kawākin
butler, steward
كد kadda u (kadd) to work hard, exert
o.s., toil, labor, slave; to fatigue, wear out,
overwork, exhaust, weary, tire ( ه s.o.) II to
chase away, drive away ( ه s.o.) VIII and X
to urge, drive, rush ( ه s.o.); to wear out,
overwork, exhaust, weary, tire ( ه s.o.)
كد kadd trouble, pains, labor, toil, hard
work
كدود kadūd industrious, hard-working,
diligent
مكدود makdūd worn out, exhausted,
overworked
كدح kadaḥa a (kadḥ) to exert o.s., work hard,
toil, labor, slave ( في in or with s.th.) VIII
to earn a living ( لعياله li-‘iyālihī for one’s
family)
كدح kadḥ exertion, toil, labor, drudgery
كدر 1 kadura u and kadira a (kadar, كدارة
kadāra, كدور kudūra, كدور kudūr, كدرة
kudra) to be turbid, roily, muddy, roiled
(liquid); -- kadira a (kadar, كدرة kudra) to
be muddy, cloudy, blackish, dingy, flat,
swarthy, grimy (color); (kadar, كدورة
kudūra) to be dreary, unhappy (life); to be
angry ( على with s.o.) II to render turbid, to
roil, muddy ( ھ s.th.), trouble, disturb,
spoil, ruffle ( ھ s.th., على for s.o., e.g.,
s.o.’s peace of mind); to grieve, worry,
trouble, vex, irritate, annoy, molest,
disturb, distress ( ھ s.o.) V to be turbid,
roily, muddy, roiled, troubled; to be angry,
be sore ( من at s.th.), feel offended, be
annoyed, be displeased ( من by s.th.), be
peeved ( من at, about) VII to become
turbid, muddy, dull, flat; to swoop down
(bird)
كدر kadar turbidity, muddiness,
cloudiness, opaqueness, roiledness; worry,
sorrow, grief, distress, vexation, irritation,
annoyance
كدرة kudra turbidity, muddiness,
cloudiness, roiledness, impurity; dingy
color, dinginess
كدرة kadara clod of dirt, filth
كدر kadir and كدير kadīr turbid, muddy,
roily, roiled; dull, flat, dingy, grimy
(color); worried, troubled, disturbed
اكدر akdar2, f. كدراء kadrā’2, pl. كدر kudr
dingy, swarthy, dark-colored
تكدير takdīr roiling, troubling, ruffling;
offending, offense, affront, indignity
متكدر mutakaddir angry, sore, peeved (
من at), annoyed. Irritated, offended ( من by)
كادر 2 look up alphabetically
كدس kadasa i (kads) and II to pile up, heap up,
accumulate, amass ( ھ s.th.); to cram
together, press together, compress ( ھ
s.th.) V to be heaped up, be piled up; to
pile up, accumulate (intr.); to press
together, get crammed up
كدس kuds pl. اكداس akdās heap, pile;
stack (of grain, hay, etc.)
كداس kuddās pl. كداديس kadādīs2 heap,
pile; stack (of grain, hay, etc.)
كداسة kudāsa heap, pile, stack
تكديس takdīs accumulation; stacking 817
كدش kadaša i (kadš) to gain, earn
كديش kadīš pl. كدش kudš cart horse, nag,
jade
كدم kadama a i (kadm) to bite (with the front
teeth); to bruise, contuse
كدم kadma pl. kadamāt bite; wound
caused by a bite; bruise, contusion
كدى kadā i (kady) to give little, skimp, stint II
to beg IV = I
كدية kudya begging, mendicity
كذا ka-dā see ك ka
كذب kadaba i (kidb, kadib, كذبة kadba, kidba)
to lie; to deceive, delude, mislead; to tell ( ه
or على s.o.) a lie, to lie ( ه or على to s.o.) II
to accuse of lying, call a liar ( ه s.o.),
disbelieve s.o., give the lie to s.o. ( ه); to
disprove, refute, disown, deny ( ب or ھs.
th.) │ ما كذب ان فعل he did not hesitate to
do so IV to cause ( ه s.o.) to lie; to call a
liar, prove a liar ( ه s.o.), give the lie ( ه to
s.o.)
كذب kidb, kadib and كذبة kadba, kidba
lie; deceit, falsehood, untruth │ كذبة ابريل
April fool’s joke
كذوب kadūb liar
كذاب kaddāb liar, swindler; lying,
untruthful; false, deceitful
اكذوبة ukdūba pl. اكاذيب akādīb2 lie
اكذب akdab2 a greater liar, more
mendacious, more untruthful, falser │
اكذب من مسيلمة (musailimata) a greater liar
than Musailima (proverbially of a liar)
تكذيب takdīb denial
كاذب kādib liar; lying, untruthful; false,
deceptive, fallacious, delusive, specious,
sham, make-believe │ امل كاذب (amal)
fallacious hope; بلاغ كاذب (balāg) slander,
defamation (jur.)
مكذوب makdūb false, untrue, fabricated,
trumped up
كذلك see ك ka
كرة 1 see كرو 2
كر 2 karra u (karr, كرور kurūr, تكرار takrār) to
turn around and attack ( على s.o., s.th.); to
return, come back, recur; to withdraw,
retreat, fall back; to attack ( على s.o.), bear
down ( على upon); -- a ( كرير karīr) to rattle
in the throat II to repeat, reiterate, do
again, do repeatedly ( ھ s.th.); to pose over
and over again ( ھ a question, على to s.o.),
ask ( على s.o.) repeatedly ( ھ a question); to
clarify, filter ( ھ s.th.); to rectify, purify ( ھ
s.th.); to refine ( ھ sugar, etc.) V to be
repeated, be reiterated, recur; to be
rectified, be purified, be refined
كر karr attack, charge │ الكر والفر (farr)
attack and retreat (in battle); بين كر وفر
alternately, intermittently, by fits and
starts, by jerks; على كر الدھور and على كر
الزمن (k. az-zamn) in the course of time
كرة karra attack; return, comeback,
recurrence; -- (pl. -āt) one time (= مرة ); a
hundred thousand; karratan once;
sometimes, at times; at a time │ كرة اخرى
karratan ukrā a second time, once more;
كرة بعد كرة repeatedly, time and again
كرار look up alphabetically
كرور kurūr return, comeback,
recurrence; succession, sequence, order
كرير karīr rattle in the throat
كرارية kurrārīya pl. -āt (eg.) spool,
bobbin, reel
مكر makarr pl. -āt reel
تكرير takrīr repetition, reiteration;
classification, rectification, purification,
refinement; refining │ معمل تكرير السكر
ma‘mal t. as-sukkar sugar refinery
تكرار takrār repetition, reiteration; تكرارا
takrāran repeatedly, frequently, quite
often │ مرارا وتكرارا (mirāran) repeatedly,
time and again 818
مكرر mukarrar repeated, reiterated;
following twice (number), bis (after a
number); a multiple; rectified, purified,
refined │ سكر مكرر (sukkar) refined sugar;
ص ٣٧ مكرر page 37b
متكرر mutakarrir recurring, recurrent,
reiterated, reiterative; repeated, frequent
كراج garāž pl. -āt garage (syr.)
كرار karār pl. -āt pantry, storeroom; cellar
كرافتة karāfatta neoktie, cravat
كراكوفيا karākōfiyā Cracow (city in S Poland)
كراميل (Fr. caramel) karamēl caramel candy
كرب 1 karaba u (karb) to oppress, distress,
grieve, worry, trouble, fill with concern ( ه
s.o.); to overburden ( ھ a beast of burden)
IV to hurry, hasten, rush VII and VIII to
be worried, grieved, troubled, distressed,
anxious, apprehensive, feel concern, be
afraid
كرب karb pl. كروب kurūb worry,
sorrow, care, grief; apprehension, concern,
anxiety, fear; distress, trouble; pain,
torment, torture, agony
كربة kurba pl. كرب kurab worry,
sorrow, care, grief; apprehension. concern,
anxiety, fear; distress, trouble; pain,
torment, torture, agony
مكروب makrūb sad, worried, grieved,
sorrowful, distressed; apprehensive,
anxious, alarmed, fearful, troubled,
scared, confused; see alphabetically
مكترب muktarib sad, worried, grieved,
sorrowful, distressed; apprehensive,
anxious, alarmed, fearful, troubled,
soared, confused
كرب 2 kreb crepe │ كرب ديشين k. dīšīn and كرب
شين k. šīn crepe de Chine
كروب 3 karūb and كروبي karūbī pl. -ūn, كاروبيم
kārūbīm cherub, archangel
كرباج kurbāj, kirbāj pl. كرابيج karābīj2 whip,
lash, riding whip, kurbash
كرباس kirbās pl. كرابيس karābīs2 a white cotton
fabric
كربال kirbāl pl. كرابيل karābīl2 teasing bow (for
combing or carding cotton); coarse sieve
كربلاء karbalā’2 Karbala (holy city of the
Shiites in central Iraq)
كربون (Fr. carbon) karbōn coal │ ورق كربون
waraq k. carbon paper
كرات 1 kurāt (eg.) = كراث
اكرت 2 akrat2 curly, kinky (hair)
كرتن 1 kartana to put under quarantine, to
quarantine ( على s.o.) II takartana to be put
under quarantine, be quarantined
كرتون 2 kartūn pl. كراتين karātin2 cardboard,
pasteboard; carton
كرث karata u i (kart) to oppress,
depress, distress, worry, trouble ( ه s.o.); to
concern, affect, move ( ه s.o.) IV do. VIII
to care ( ل for), heed, bear in mind ( ل s.th.),
pay attention ( ل to), take an interest ( ل in)
كريث karīt oppressed, depressed,
distressed, anguished, worried, troubled,
vexed, annoyed
كراث karrāt, kurrāt leek (Allium
parrum L.; bot.)
اكتراث iktirāt attention, notice, concern,
interest │ قلة الاكتراث qillat al-ikt.
indifference
كارث kārit oppressive, grievous, painful
كارثة kārita pl. كوارث kawārit2 disaster,
catastrophe │ كارثة الأمطار k. al-amṯār
natural catastrophe, torrential rains
الكرج al-kurj the Georgians
كرجي kurjī Georgian (adj and n.) 819
كرح kirḥ pl. اكراح akrāḥ monk’s cell
كرخانة karkāna pl. -āt, كراخين karākīn
workshop, factory; (eg.) brothel
كرخانجي karkānjī artisan, craftsman
الكرد al-kurd the Kurds │ بلاد الكرد Kurdistan
كردي kurdī Kurdish; (pl. اكراد akrād)
Kurd │ جبل الأكراد jabal al-a. the Kurdish
mountains, Kurdistan
كردان kirdān pl. كرادين karādīn2 necklace
كردس kardasa to heap up, pile up ( ھ s.th.); to
crowd together, cram together ( ھ , s.o.,
s.th.) II takardasa to be heaped up, be
piled up; to flock together, crowd together
كردون (Fr. cordon) kordōn pl. -āt cordon;
ribbon, braid, lace, trimming │ كردون صحي
(ṣiḥḥī) sanitary cordon
كرز 1 karaza i ( كروز kurūz) to hide, seek refuge
الى) with)
كرز 2 karaza (karz) to preach, spread ( بالإنجيل
bi-l-injīl the Gospel)
كرز karz and كرازة karāza sermon,
preaching of the Gospel │ الكرازة المرقسية
(marqusīya) the missionary province of
St. Mark, the jurisdiction of the Coptic
Patriarchate
تكريز takrīz pl. تكاريز takārīz
consecration, benediction (Chr.)
كارز kāriz preacher
كرز 3 karaz (coll.; n. un. ة) cherry
كرزى karazī cherry-red
كرس 1 II to lay the foundation ( ھ of a building)
V to stick together, cohere
كرسي kursī pl. كراسي karāsīy, كراس
karāsin chair; throne, see; seat;
professorial chair; base, pedestal, socle;
bearing (techn.) │ كرسي بيل k. bīl and كرسي
بلى (billī) hall bearing; كرسي دائر revolving
stool, swivel chair; الكرسي الرسولي (rasūlī)
the Apostolic See; كرسي طويل chaise
longue; deck chair; كرسي الملك k. l-malik
royal throne; كرسي المملكة k. l-mamlaka
capital, metropolis; كرسي ھزاز (hazzāz)
rocking chair; استاذ كرسي ustād k. full
professor
كراسة kurrāsa pl. -āt, karārīs2 quire;
booklet; notebook, copy book;
sketchbook; brochure; installment,
fascicle (of a book)
كرس 2 II to consecrate, dedicate, inaugurate,
open ceremonially ( ھ s.th.; Chr.); to
hallow, sanctify ( ھ e.g., principles); to
dedicate, devote ( ل ھ s.th. to s.o.)
تكريس takrīs consecration, dedication,
ceremonial inauguration (Chr.); devoting,
dedication
مكرس mukarras consecrated; dedicated
│ ماء مكرس holy water (Chr.)
كرسوع kursū‘ pl. كراسيع karāsī‘2 carpal end of
the ulna, carpal bone, wristbone
كرسف karsafa to hamstring, hook ( ھ an
animal)
كرسنة kirsinna, kirsanna variety of vetch (bot.)
كرش kariša a (karaš) to be wrinkled,
shriveled, crumpled, crinkled, puckered;
to shrivel, form wrinkles, be drawn into
wrinkle II to wrinkls one’s face, knit one’s
brows, frown V = I
كرش kirš, kariš f., pl. اكراش akrāš, كروش
kurūš stomach (primarily of ruminants =
craw); paunch; belly
كرشة kirša (eg.) tripe, intestines
كريشة (eg.) krēša a thin, crinkled fabric;
crepe
اكرش akraš2 and مكرش mukriš
potbellied, paunchy
كرشوني karšūnī Karshuni, Arabic
written in Syriac characters 820
كريطة look up alphabetically; كرارط, كرارطي
ibid.
كرع kara’a and kari’a a (kar’, كروع kurū’) to
sip V to wash one’s feet, perform the
partial ablution of the legs (in preparation
for prayer); to belch, burp, eruct
كرعة kar’a (n. vic.) sipping, sip,
swallow
كراع kurā’ m. and f., pl. اكرع akru’,
اكارع akāri’2 foot, trotter (esp. of sheep or
oxen); leg; extremity │ اكارع الأرض a. alarḍ
the remotest areas of the earth
تكريعة takrī’a belching, eructation
كارع kāri’ pl. كوارع kawāri’ foot, trotter;
ankle, anklebone; pl. (eg.) dish prepared
of sheep’s trotters
كرفس karafs celery (Apium graveolens L.;
bot.)
كرك 1 kurk (syr.) fur
كركة 2 karaka distilling apparatus, distilling
flask, retort
كركي 3 kurkī pl. كراكي karākīy crane (zool.); (
سمك) الكراكي (samak) al-k. pike (zool.)
كراكة 4 karrāka pl. -āt dredging machine,
dredge; penitentiary
كريك 5 look up alphabetically
كركب karkaba (eg.) to throw into disorder,
upset, confuse, disturb (III s.th.); to make
a noise
كركبة karkaba disorder, confusion,
muddle, jumble
كركدن karkaddan, karkadann rhinoceros │
كركدن بحري (baḥrī) narwhal (zool.)
كركر karkara to repeat, reiterate, do repeatedly
ھ) s.th.); to rumble (stomach); to tickle │
كركر في الضحك (ḍaḥk) to burst into loud
laughter, roar with laughter
كركرة karkara loud laughter; rumbling
(of the stomach)
كركم kurkum (bot.) turmeric (Curcuma longa
L.; plant and rootstock); curoumin
كركند karkand spinel ruby (gem); (eg.) lobster
(zool.)
كركوز karakūz shadow play
كركون karakōn (eg.) police station
كرم 1 karuma u (karam, كرمة karama, كرامة
karāma) to be noble, high-minded, noblehearted,
magnanimous, generous, liberal,
munificent; to be precious II to call noble
and high-minded ( ه s.o.); to honor, revere,
venerate, treat with deference ( ه s.o.); to
exalt ( على ه s.o. above another), bestow
honor ( على ه upon s.o. before others) │ كرم
لله وجھه (wajhahū) may God honor him I
III to vie in generosity ( ه s.o.); to meet
reverentially, with deference, politely ( ه
s.o.) IV to call noble and high-minded ( ه
s.o.); to honor ( ه s.o.): to treat
reverentially, with deference, politely,
hospitably ( ه s.o.), bestow honors ( ه upon
s.o.); to prove o.s. to he high-minded and
generous; to honor, present ( ب ه s.o. with),
confer ( ب ه upon s.o. s.th.) V to feign
generosity; to show one’s generous side;
to be noble; to be friendly, kind, kindly; to
be so kind, have the kindness ( ب to do
s.th., على with regard to or in behalf of
s.o.); to present ( على ب s.o. with),
graciously bestow ( ب على upon s.o. s.th.)
كرم karm (coll.) pl. كروم kurūm vine,
grapes, grapevines; vineyard; garden,
orchard │ بنت الكرم bint al-k. wine
كرمة karma grapevine, vine
كرم karam noble nature; highmindedness,
noble-mindedness, nobleheartedness,
generosity, magnanimity;
kindness, friendliness, amicability;
liberality, munificence; كرما karaman
moat kindly, obligingly, out of kindness │
كرم الأخلاق noble-mindedness, noble
character; كرم الحتد k. al-maḥtid noble
descent 821
كرمة لك kurmatan laka and كرمانا لك
kurmānan laka for your sake, as a favor to
you, in your honor
كرامة karāma nobility; highmindedness,
noble-heartedness;
generosity, magnanimity; liberality,
munificence; honor, dignity; respect,
esteem, standing, prestige; mark of honor,
token of esteem, favor; (pl. -āt) miracle
(worked by a saint) │ حبا وكرامة لك
(ḥubban wa-karāmatan) for your sake and
in your honor; most gladly, with the
greatest pleasure; صاحب كرامات worker of
miracles
كريم karīm pl. كرماء kuramā’2, kirām
noble; distinguished, high-ranking,
eminent; high-minded, noble-minded,
noble-hearted; generous, liberal,
munificent, hospitable, beneficent;
benefactor; kind, kindly, friendly,
amicable, obliging, gracious; respectable,
honorable, decent; precious, valuable,
costly; thoroughbred; see also
alphabetically; الكريمان the two noble
things, namely Holy War and the
pilgrimage to Mecca │ كريم الأخلاق highminded,
noble-minded, noble-hearted,
noble; كريم الأصل k. al-aṣl of noble descent,
highborn, highbred; حجر كريم (ḥajar)
precious stone, gem; حصان كريم
thoroughbred horse; دخل كريم (dakl) a
decent income; القارئ الكريم the gentle
reader; المعادن الكريمة the precious metals;
مرمر الكرام see مر 1 marra
كريمة karīma pl. كرائم karā’im2 precious
thing, object of value, valuable; vital part
(of the body; esp. eye); daughter; see also
alphabetically; الكريمتان the two eyes │
كرائم المال (الأموال ) the most prized
possession(s)
كرام karrām pl. -ūn winegrower,
vinedresser
اكرم akram2 pl. اكارم akārim2 nobler
more distinguished; more precious, more
valuable; moat honorable; very highminded,
very noble-hearted, most
generous
مكرم makram and مكرم makrama pl.
مكارم makārim2 noble trait, excellent
quality │ مكارم الأخلاق noble
characteristics, noble traits of character
مكرمة makruma pl. مكارم makārim2
noble deed
تكريم takrīm and تكرمة takrima honoring,
tribute, honor (bestowed on s.o.) │ تكريما له
(takrīman) in his honor
اكرام ikrām honor, respect, deference,
tribute; hospitable reception, hospitality;
kindness; honorarium │ اكراما له (ikrāman)
in his honor
اكرامية ikrāmīya pl. -āt honorarium;
bonus
مكرم mukarram honored, revered,
venerated; venerable; المكرمية epithet of
Mecca
كريم 2 and كريمة look up alphabetically
كرمش karmaša (eg.) to pucker, be drawn into
folds; to crinkle, become wrinkled, shrivel
II takarmaša do.
كرمش karmaša fold, crease, wrinkle,
crinkle, pucker; knitting
كرمل: الكرمل 2 al-karmal Mount Carmel
(promontory in N Palestine)
كرملي karmalī Carmelite
كرملا 2 karamillā caramel (candy)
كراميل look up alphabetically
الكرملين al-kremlīn the Kremlin
كرنب kurunb (coll.) cabbage
كرنبة kurunba (n. un.) head of cabbage
كرنتينة kurantīna pl. -āt quarantine
كرنيش look up alphabetically 822
كرناف kurnāf pl. كرانيف karānīf2 palm stump
كرنافة kunāfa pl. -āt gunstock, rifle butt
كرنك 1 (Engl.) krank pl. -āt crank, crank shaft
كرنك 2 karnak a brand of Egyptian cotton
(named after الكرنن , a village near Luxor)
كرنيش and كورنيش (Fr. corniche) kornīš pl.
كرانيش karānīš2 cornice, ledge, molding,
shelf; coast road, road skirting the
shoreline
كره kariha a (karh, kurh, كراھة karāha, كراھية
karāhiya) to feel disgust ( ھ at), be
disgusted ( ھ by); to detest, loathe, abhor,
hate ( ھ s.th.); to dislike ( ھ s.th.); karuha u
كراھة) karāha) to be repugnant, offensive,
hateful, odious, detestable II to make s.o. (
على or ه) hate s.th. ( ھ ), arouse aversion ( ھ
الى or ھ ه in s.o. to s.th.) IV to force,
compel, coerce ( على ه s.o. to) V to have an
aversion ( ھ to), feel disgust ( ھ for),
loathe, detest ( ھ s.th.) X to have an
aversion ( ھ to), feel disgust ( ھ for),
loathe, detest ( ھ s.th.); to force, compel,
coerce ( على ه s.o. to)
كره karh, kurh hatred, hate; aversion,
antipathy, dislike, distaste; detestation,
abhorrence, disgust, repugnance, loathing;
كرھا karhan, kurhan and على كره ‘ala
kurhin, على كره منه unwillingly, reluctantly,
grudgingly, forcedly; under compulsion,
under duress
كره karih loathsome, repugnant,
offensive
كريه karīh unpleasant, disagreeable,
offensive, bad, repugnant, repulsive,
loathsome, hateful, detestable,
abominable, ugly
كراھة karāha hatred, hate; aversion,
antipathy, dislike, distaste; abhorrence,
detestation, disgust, repugnance, loathing
كراھية karāhiya aversion, antipathy,
dislike, distaste, disgust, repugnance,
loathing; incompatibility (as a reason of
divorce); baseness, abominableness,
reprehensibility (Isl. Law) │ على كراھية
unwillingly, grudgingly, forcedly
كريھة karīha pl. كرائه karā’ih2 adversity;
misfortune, calamity
مكره makrah loathsome thing,
unpleasant situation
مكرھة makraha, makruha hatred, hate,
detestation, abhorrence
مكاره makārih2 loathsome things;
adversities, calamities
اكراه ikrāh compulsion, coercion,
constraint, force; use of force │ بالإكراه by
force
اكراھي ikrāhī compulsory, coercive,
forced, enforced
تكره takarruh aversion, antipathy,
dislike, distaste, disgust, repugnance,
loathing
كاره kārih reluctant, grudging,
unwilling, averse
مكروه makrūh detested, abhorred, hated,
hateful, odious, loathsome, disgusting,
distasteful, disagreeable, unpleasant;
reprehensible (Isl. Law); مكروه and مكروھة
makrūha inconvenience, discomfort,
nuisance, adversity; accident, mishap,
misadventure
مكره mukrah forced, compelled
متكره mutakarrih unwilling, reluctant
كرو 2 ) and كري) كرا karā u (karw) and كرى karā
i (kary) to dig ( ھ s.th.)
كرو karw digging, excavation
كرة 2 kura pl. -āt, كرى kuran globe, sphere; ball
│ كرة الأرض k. al-a. and كرة ارضية (arḍīya)
terrestrial globe, globe; كرة الثلج k. at-talji
snowball; كرة السلة k. as-salla basketball;
كرة الطاولة k. al-ṭāwula table tennis; كرة القدم
k. al-qadam football, soccer; كرة 823
الكواكب celestial sphere; كرات لحم k. laḥm
small meatballs; كرة الماء water polo; كرة اليد
k. al-yad (European) handball; نصف الكرة
niṣf al-k. hemisphere
كرية kurayya globule; pellet │ الكريات
الحمراء (الحمر ) (ḥamrā’, ḥumr) the red
corpuscles, erythrocytes
كري kuriy and كروي kurawī globular,
globate, globose, ball-shaped, ball-like,
spherical
كروية kurawīya globosity, sphericity,
roundness │ كروية الأرض k. al-arḍ the
sphericity of the earth
كرواتيا kuruwātiyā Croatia
كروان karawān and كيروان a variety of plover
(Charadrius cedicnemus L.; zool.)
كروب karūb and كروبي karūbī pl. -ūn, كروبيم
karūbīm cherub, archangel
كروسة (It. carozza) karōsa pl. -āt state carriage,
coach
كروكي (Fr. croquis) krōkī pl. كروكيات krōkīyāt
sketch, draft, croquis
كروم krōm chrome, chromium
كرويا karawyā caraway (Carum carvi L.; bot.)
كري 1 kariya a (karan) to sleep, be asleep,
slumber; -- karā i (kary) to dig ( ھ e.g., a
canal) III and IV to rent, lease, let, let out,
farm out, hire out ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.) V to
sleep, be asleep, slumber VIII and X to
rent, hire ( ھ s.th.); to lease, take on lease (
ھ s.th.), take a lease ( ھ of s.th.); to hire,
employ, engage ( ه s.o.), engage the labor
or services ( ه of s.o.)
كرى karan sleep, slumber
كراء kirā’ rent, hire, hiring; lease;
rental, hire; wages, pay
اكراء ikrā’ renting, rent; leasing, letting
on lease, farming out
اكتراء iktirā’ renting, rent; leasing,
taking on lease; hiring
مكار mukārin pl. -ūn hirer (esp. one of
horses, donkeys, mules, etc.); donkey
driver, muleteer
مكر mukrin hirer, lessor; landlord
مكرى mukran rented, let, hired out, let
on lease
مكتر muktarin and مستكر mustakrin
renter, tenant, lessee │ مكتر ثان (tānin)
subtenant, sublessee
كرى، كرية 2 see كرو 1
كرى 3 karrī curry
كريت kirīt, كريد kirīd Crete
كريطة (Span. carreta) karrīṭa pl. كراريط karārīṭ2
(tun.) cart, wagon, dray
كرارطي karariṭī carrier, carter, drayman
كريك (Turk. körek) kurīk pl. -āt shovel
كري (Fr. crème) krēm cream │ كريم
الحلاقة k. al-ḥilāqa shaving cream
كريمة (It. crema; eg.) kréma cream; a kind of
thick sauce (served as a condiment)
كز kazza (1st pers. perf. kazuztu) u ( كزازة
kazāza, كزوزة kuzūza) to become dry and
tough, dry up, shrivel; to be withered,
shriveled, shrunk; to contract, shrink; (eg.)
to have an aversion ( من to), feel disgust (
من at), have a distaste ( من for); -- (kazz) to
contract, shrink, narrow ( ھ s.th.); pass.
kuzza to have tetanus │ كز على اسنانه (eg.)
to gnash one’s teeth
كز kazz pl. كز kuzz dry, dried up,
withered, desiccated; shriveled, shrunk;
tough, inflexible, unyielding, rigid, stiff │
كز اليدين k. al-yadain closefisted, miserly,
niggardly 824
كزز kazaz miserliness, niggardliness
كزاز kuzāz, kuzzāz tetanus
كزازة kazāza dryness; boringness,
dullness, tediousness; stinginess,
niggardliness; stiffness, rigidity
كزبرة kuzbara, kuzbura coriander (Coriandrum
sativum L.; bot.) │ كزبرة الثعلب k. at-ta‘lab
pimpernel; كزبرة خضراء (kaḍrā’) chervil;
كزبرة الصخر k. aṣ-ṣakr hair-cap moss
(Polytrichum communis L.; bot.)
كزورنة (eg.) kazarāna (from It. casseruola)
casserole, cooking vessel
كسب kasaba i (kasb) to gain, win, acquire ( ھ
s.th.); to earn ( ھ s.th.); to profit, win, gain;
to gather, acquire ( ھ knowledge); to
obtain, get, attain ( ھ s.th.) │ كسب ھتافا ل
(hutafan) win acclaim for, he applauded
for; ما كسبت يداه (yadāhu) what he has
earned in the hereafter by his (good and
evil) deeds II to make or let s.o. ( ھ ) gain,
win or obtain ( ھ s.th.); to let s.o. ( ه) share
the profit IV to make or let s.o. ( ه) gain,
win or obtain ( ھ s.th.), secure ( ھ ه for s.o.
s.th.); to impart ( ھ ھ or ه to s.o. or to s.th.
s.th., also e.g., to the face a certain
expression) │ اكسب مناعة ضد (manā‘atan
ḍidda) to make immune to ... V to earn ( ھ
s.th.); to acquire, obtain ( ھ s.th.); to gain,
win ( ھ s.th.) VIII do.; to possess have,
own ( ھ s.th.); to take on ( ھ a new quality,
a color, a different aspect, and the like)
كسب kasb acquisition; earnings; gain,
profit; winnings; s.th. acquired or gained,
acquirement; acquired knowledge,
learning
كسب kusb and كسب kusba oil cake
مكسب maksab, maksib and مكسبة
maksiba pl. مكاسب makāsib2 gain, profit
تكسب takassub earning, gaining;
acquisition; earnings; gain, profit
اكتساب iktisāb acquisition; gaining,
winning │ اكتساب بمرور الزمان (bi-murūr zzamān)
prescription, usucapion,
acquisition of property or rights by
uninterrupted possession of them for a
certain period (jur.)
كاسب kāsib winner; earner, provider
مكسب muksib profitable, lucrative
كسبرة kasbara coriander (bot.; = كزبرة , q.v.)
كستاك kustāk see كستك
كستبان kustubān pl. كساتبين kasātibīn2 thimble
كسكت (Turk. köstek) kustak and كستيك pl. كساتك
kasātik watch chain
كستلية (It. sastoletta) kustulēta, kustalēta cutlet,
chop
كستنة kastana chestnut (bot.)
كستنائي kastanā’ī maroon, chestnutcolored
كسح kasaḥa a (kasḥ) to sweep; to clean, clean
out, empty; -- kasiḥa a (kaṣaḥ) to be
crippled; to become a cripple II (eg.) to
cripple ( ه s.o.); to bend, twist, warp (o
s.th.) VIII to sweep away ( ھ s.th.); to
wash away, flush out, remove ( ھ s.th.); to
overrun ( ھ s.th.); to flood, overflow ( ھ
s.th.), spread, fan out ( ھ over s.th.); to
plunder, pillage, sack ( ھ a captured town);
to snatch up, seize ( ھ s.th.), take hold ( ھ
of)
كسح kasḥ sweeping; cleaning; clearing;
emptying (e.g., of a latrine); lameness,
paralysis, palsy
كساح kusāḥ rachitis, rickets
كساحة kusāḥa sweepings; refuse,
garbage, rubbish, trash
كسيح kasīḥ lame, palsied, paralyzed;
crippled
اكسح aksaḥ lame, palsied, paralyzed;
crippled 825
مكسحة miksaḥa broom
اكتساح iktisāḥ a sweeping away, sweep;
removal, elimination; flooding,
overflowing, submersion, inundation;
rape, seizure, usurpation
كاسحة kāsiḥa: كاسحة الألغام k. al-algām
mine sweeper
مكسح mukassaḥ crippled; cripple; lame
person, paralytic
كسد kasada and kasuda u ( كساد kasād, كسود
kasūd) to find no market, not to move, sell
badly (merchandise); to be stagnant, dull,
listless (business, market) IV to be dull,
listless (market)
كساد kasād unsalableness of
merchandise; economic depression,
dullness of the market, stagnation of
commerce, recession; slump
O مكاسدة mukāsada dumping
كاسد kāsid and كسيد kasīd selling badly,
little in demand (merchandise); stagnant,
dull, listless (market)
كسر 1 kasara i (kasr) to break, shatter, fracture (
ھ s.th.); to break open, force open, pry
open ( ھ a door, and the like); to break
(also fig.: power, resistance); to violate,
infringe ( ھ a legal duty); to destroy,
annihilate, rout ( ھ s.th.); to defeat ( ھ an
army); to fold ( ھ s.th.); to provide with
the vowel, ( ھ a consonant; gram.) │ كسر
خاطره to disappoint, disoblige, offend,
afront s.o.; كسرت kusirat ir-rīḥu the wind
has calmed down; كسر الصمت (ṣamt) to
break the silence; كسر العطش (‘aṭaš) to
quench the thirst; كسره عن مراده (murādihī)
to dissuade or hinder s.o. from carrying
out his intention; كسر عينه (‘ainahū) (eg.)
to shame s.o., put s.o. to shame; كسر قلبه
(qalbahū) to break s.o.’s heart; to
discourage s.o.; كسر من حدته (ḥiddatihi) to
blunt the edge of s.th., tone down s.th.,
curb, temper s.th. or s.o. II to break into
pieces, fragmentize ( ھ s.th.); to shatter,
smash ( ھ s.th.) V to be broken to pieces,
be shattered, be fragmentized; to break, be
refracted, be diffracted (also light, rays,
phys.); to be refined, civilized VII to get
broken; to be defeated, be routed, be
broken (force, violence); to break; to be
refracted, be diffracted; to abate, subside
(e.g., heat), be quenched (thirst) │ انكسرت
ساقه (sāquhū) he broke his leg
كسر kasr breaking, fracturing;
shattering, fragmentation; -- (pl. كسور
kusūr) break, breach, fracture; crack,
rupture; fracture of a bone; (pl. كسر kusūr,
كسورات ) fraction (arith.) │ كسر عشري
اعشاري ) ) (‘ušrī, a‘šārī) decimal fraction;
وكسور wa-kusūr (after figures) ... and
some, a little over ..., e.g., جنيه وكسور one
pound and some, a little over a pound
كسر kasr, kisr: كسر البيت k. al-bait nook
of the house; جثم في كسر بيته to live in
seclusion, stay in one’s four walls
كسرة kasra defeat, breakdown, collapse;
the vowel point for i; nook of the house
كسرة kisra pl. كسر kisar, -āt fragment; a
small piece; chunk (of bread); slice (of
bread)
كسير kasīr pl. كسرى kasrā, كسارى kasārā
broken, fractured, shattered; defeated; see
also كسرى alphabetically
O كسارة kassāra nutcracker
كسيرة kusaira diopter (phys.)
كسر maksir: صلب المكسر ṣulb al-m. hard
to break, robust, sturdy, hardy, firm,
strong; طيب المكسر ṭayyib al-m. standing
the test, proving its value, of excellent
quality; لين المكاسر layyin al-makāsir soft,
gentle
تكسير taksīr breaking, fracturing;
shattering, fragmentation │ جمع التكسير
jam‘ at-t. broken plural (gram.) 826
تكاسر takassur a being broken,
breaking; refraction, diffraction (opt.) │
تكسر الأشعة t. al-aši‘‘a refraction of rays
انكسار inkisār (state or process of) being
broken, brokenness, breaking; fracture;
breach, rupture; fragility; defeat, rout;
brokenness in spirit, broken-heartedness,
dejection; contrition; refraction,
diffraction (phys.) │ انكسار القلب ink. alqalb
dejectedness, despondency,
contrition
كاسر kāsir breaking, shattering, etc.; (pl.
كواسر kawāsir2) rapacious, ferocious,
savage (predatory animal) │ كاسر الحجر k.
al-ḥajar saxifrage, stonebreak (bot.); طير
كاسر (ṭair) bird of prey; كواسر الطير k. aṭ-
ṭair predatory birds
مكسور maksūr broken, fractured;
shattered, fragmented; defeated;
unsuccessful, thwarted, frustrated;
bankrupt; having a kasra (consonant;
gram.)
مكسر mukassar fragmented, shattered,
smashed; broken (also, e.g., language);
مكسرات almonds and nuts │ جمع مكسر
(jam‘) broken plural (gram.)
اكسير 2 iksīr elixir
كسرونة kasarōna (eg.) see كزرونة
كسرى kisrā pl. اكاسرة akāsira, اكاسر akāsir2
Khosrau; designation of the Persian kings
in general
كسع kasa‘a a to chase away ( ه s.o.); to strike,
shove, push, kick ( ه s.o. from behind) VIII
to put its tail ( ب) between its legs
كسف kasafa i ( كسوف kusūf) to be or become
dark, gloomy; to be eclipsed, pass through
an eclipse (sun); -- to reprimand, reprove (
ه s.o.); to abash, shame, put to shame ( ه
s.o.) VII to be eclipsed; to be shamed, be
ashamed; to blush
كسف kasf darkening, occultation,
eclipse; dark, darkness, gloominess
كسوف ١ cuaUf occultation, eclipse, solar
eclipse
انكساف inkisāf occultation, eclipse, solar
eclipse
كاسف kāsif dejected, downcast, sad,
worried, grieved; gloomy
كسكس kaskasa to pound, bray, grind, powder,
pulverize; (eg.) to retreat, fall back,
withdraw
كسكسو kuskusū and كسكسي kuskusī
couscous, dish prepared of groats and salt
water (staple food in northwest Africa)
كسكاس kuskās, kaskās sieve for
preparing couscous
كسل kasila a (kasal) to be lazy, idle, sluggish,
indolent, negligent; to idle, loaf II to make
lazy or negligent ( ه s.o.) VI = I
كسل kasal laziness, sluggishness,
idleness, inactivity, loafing, indolence,
negligence
كسل kasil and كسول kasūl lazy, idle
كسلان kaslān f. ة، كسلى kaslā, pl. كسالى
kasālā, kusālā, كسلى kaslā lazy, sluggish,
slothful, indolent, idle, inactive
مكسال miksāl lazybones, sluggard, idler,
loafer
تكاسل takāsul laziness, sluggishness,
indolence
متكاسل mutakāsil lazy, sluggish,
slothful, indolent
كسم kasama i (kasm) to make living ( على عياله
‘alā ‘iyālihī for one’s family) II to give
form ( ھ to s.th.), shape, fashion ( ھ s.th.)
كسم kasm cut, style (of a dress);
clothing, clothes, costume, fashion; form,
shape; manner, mode
كسيم kasīm duty, rate, tax 827
تكسيم taksīm forming, shaping,
fashioning, molding; O milling
مكسم mukassam well-shaped, shapely
كسو ) and كسي) كسا kasā u (kasw) to
clothe, dress, garb, attire ( ھ s.o. with or
in); to hang, drape, face, line, case ( ب or ھ
ھ s.th. with), incase ( ب or ھ ھ s.th. in); to
cover ( ب or ھ ھ s.th. with), put, slip ( ب or
ھ ھ over s.th. s.th.) │ كساه صبغة كذا
(ṣibgata) to give s.th. the appearance of ...,
make s.th. look like ...; -- كسي kasiya a ( كسا
kasā) to be or get dressed; to dress IV to
clothe, dress, garb, attire ( ھ ه s.o. with or
in) V to be dressed, be clothed, be garbed;
to clothe o.s., array o.s., attire o.s. ( ب with
or in); to cover o.s. VIII do.; to burst into
leaf (tree)
كسوة kiswa pl. كسى kusan, kisan, كساو
kasāwin clothing, clothes, apparel, attire,
raiment; dress, garment; suit of clothes;
uniform; draping, lining, casing, facing,
paneling, wainscoting (e.g., of walls) │
الكسوة (الشريفة ) the kiswa, the covering of
the Kaaba (black, brocaded carpet
covering the walls of the Kaaba, made
annually in Egypt and transported with the
pilgrimage caravan to Mecca); كسوة التشريفة
full-dress uniform, gala uniform
كساء kisā’ pl. اكسية aksiya garment;
dress
تكسية taksiya clothing, dressing; draping,
lining, casing, facing, paneling,
wainscoting (e.g., of walls); course of
stones (of a macadam road)
كش kašša i to recoil ( من from)
كشة kušša lock of hair
كشتبان kuštubān, kuštibān pl. كشاتبين kašātibīn2
thimble
كشح kašaḥa a (kašḥ): كشح له بالعداوة (bil-‘
adāwa) to harbor enmity toward s.o.,
hate s.o.; -- to disperse, scatter, break up ( ه
a crowd), send away, dismiss, drive away,
chase away ( ه s.o.) III كاشحة في العداوة (bil-‘
adāwa) to harbor enmity toward s.o.,
hate s.o. VII to be dispersed, be scattered;
to disperse, scatter, break up; to be
dispelled
كشح kašḥ pl. كشوح kušūḥ region of the
hip, haunch, flank, side, waist; Venus’sshell,
cowrie │ طوى كشح على (ṭawā
kašḥahū) to keep s.th. to o.s., keep s.th.
secret; طوى كشحه ( كشحا) عن to turn from
s.o., break with s.o.; ولاه كشحه (wallāhu) to
turn one’s back on s.o.
كشاحة kušāḥa secret enmity, rancor,
grudge, resentment, hate
كاشح kāšiḥ secret enemy
كشر kašara i (kašr) and II to bare one’s teeth;
to grimace; to grin, smile ( الى at s.o.); to
scowl, glower, bear a grim expression │
كشر عن اسنانه to bare or show one’s teeth;
كشر عن نابه (انيابه ) do.
كشرة kišra grimace
تكشيرة takšīra (n. vic.) flash of the teeth
ھو جاري مكاشري huwa jārī mukāširī he is
my nearest neighbor
انكشاري look up alphabetically
كشط kašaṭa i (kašṭ) to take off ( ھ a wrapping, a
covering); to pull off ( ھ s.th.); to erase ( ھ
s.th. written); to remove ( ھ s.th.); to
scratch off, scrape off ( ھ s.th., ب e.g., with
a knife so as to clean it)
مكشط mikšaṭ erasing knife
كشب kašafa i (kašf) to pull away,
remove, take off, throw open, lift, raise ( ھ
a covering, a curtain, a veil, etc., عن
from); to reveal, disclose, uncover,
expose, bare ( ھ or عن s.th.); to clear up ( ھ
or عن s.th.), shed light ( ھ or عن on); to
show, demonstrate ( ھ or عن s.th.); to open
up, lay open, lay bare ( ھ or عن s.th.); to
bring to light ( ھ or عن s.th.); to study,
scrutinize, 828 investigate, examine ( عن
s.th.); to examine medically ( على s.o.) │
كشف القناع عن to unveil, unmask s.o. or
s.th.; كشف عليه طبيا (ṭibbīyan) to examine
s.o. medically ; كشفت الحرب عن ساقھا
(ḥarbu) the war was or become violent,
flared up; war broke out III to discuss,
reveal, manifest, demonstrate, show ( ب ه
to s.o. s.th.), evince ( toward s.o. s.th.); to
make known ( ب or ھ ه to s.o. s.th.),
inform ( ب or ھ ه s.o. of) │ كاشفه بالعداوة (bil-‘
adāwa) to manifest open hostility
toward s.o. V to be uncovered, be
exposed, be laid open, be bared, be
disclosed, be revealed, be brought to light;
to come to light, become visible, manifest
itself, show; to open, be opened up ( عن
شيء so as to reveal s.th.) │ تكشف الأمر عن لا
شيء (amru) the matter turned out to be of
no consequence; تكشف عن منتھى العجز
(muntahā l-‘ajz) to show o.s. utterly
helpless VII to be removed, be lifted, be
raised (veil); to be uncovered, be
disclosed, be revealed, become manifest (
ل to s.o.) VIII to discover ( ھ s.th., esp.
scientifically); to find out, detect, uncover
ھ) s.th.) X to seek to discover ( ھ s.th.); to
explore ( ھ s.th.); to investigate ( ھ s.th.),
search, inquire ( ھ into s.th.); to scout,
reconnoiter (mil.); to discover ( ھ s.th.,
scientifically); to detect, spot, seek out,
search out, find out ( ھ s.th.)
كشف kašf uncovering, disclosure;
baring, exposure, unveiling; revelation,
illumination (mys.); investigation, inquiry,
search, quest, study; examination,
scrutiny; inspection; boy scout movement;
-- (pl. كشوف kušūf, كشوفات kušūfāt) report,
account; statement, specification,
enumeration; table, schedule, chart; list,
roster, index, register, inventory; pl. كشوف
discoveries │ كشف طبي ṭibbī) medical
examination; كشف الاقتراع muster roll; كشف
الحساب bill, invoice
كشفي kašfī of or pertaining to boy scouts
│ حركة كشفية (ḥaraka) boy scout
movement
كشاف kaššāf pl. كشافة kaššāfa discoverer,
inventor; explorer, reconnoiterer, scout;
boy scout │ O كشاف كھربائي (kahrabā’ī)
searchlight; مصباح كشاف (miṣbāḥ) and نور
كشاف (nūr) pl. انوار كشافة do.
كشافة kaššāfa exploration;
reconnaissance, reconnoitering, scouting
(mil.); boy scout movement, scouting
كشافي kišāfī of boy scouts, boy scout
(adj.)
كشيف kašīf uncovered, open, exposed
اكتشاف iktišāf uncovering, disclosure,
detection, spotting, location; (pl. -āt)
(scientific) discovery
استكشاف istikšāf uncovering,
clarification, elucidation; discovery; close
observation; reconnaissance,
reconnoitering, scouting (mil.) │ طائرة
الاستكشاف reconnaissance plane; الاستكشاف
البعيد المدى (madā) long-range
reconnaissance
استكشافي istikšāfī explorational,
exploratory, of discovery,
reconnaissance-, scout- (in compounds)
كاشف kāšif pl. كشفة kašafa uncovering,
revealing, etc.; serving exploratory
purposes, instrumental in reconnaissance,
conducive to discovery, detection or
disclosure; examiner, investigator,
discoverer; supervisor, inspector; (Eg.)
head of a muqāṭa‘a, district chief
(obsolete); detector (radio); كاشف and كاشفة
reagent (chem.) │ ضوء كاشف (ḍau’) pl.
اضواء كاشفة and نور كاشف (nūr) pl. انوار كاشفة
search-light; O زورق كاشف الألغام (zauraq)
mine-locating craft, mine sweeper; كاشف
بلوري (ballūrī, billaurī) crystal detector
(radio); كاشف المحيط k. al-muḥīṭ periscope;
بان بالكاشف (bāna) to manifest itself clearly
and unmistakably 829
مكشوف maksūf bared, exposed,
uncovered, open, roofless, coverless,
unveiled, naked, bare; (mil.) open,
undefended, devoid of military
installations or fortifications; uncovered
(com.) │ مكشوف الرأس m. ar-ra’s,
bareheaded, hatless; بالمكشوف or على
المكشوف openly, publicly, overtly, for
everyone to see
مكتشف muktašif discoverer, explorer
مكتشفات muktašafāt (scientific)
discoveries
كشك 1 kušk pl. اكشاك akšāk kiosk; summerhouse,
pavilion, cabin, log cabin; hut,
shed, shanty; (telephone) booth; stall,
stand, booth (at a fair, etc.) │ كشك الاستحمام
bathhouse; beach chair; كشك الاشارات k. alilšārāt
block station, signal box (railroad);
كشك الديدبان k. ad-daidabān sentry box; O
كشك محول (muḥawwil) transformer house
كشك 2 kišk a dough made of bulgur and sour
milk, cut into small pieces, dried and need
for the preparation of other dishes (so in
Egypt; there are several other ways of
preparing it) │ (eg.) كشك الماز kišk almāz
asparagus
كشكش kaškaša to rustle; to flee, run away; (eg.)
to pleat
كشكش kaškaš pl. كشاكش kašākiš2 seam;
hem, edge, border
رواية كشكشية riwāya kaškašīya
burlesque, popular comedy
كشكول kaškūl beggar’s bag; scrapbook; album
كشمش kišmiš a kind of currants
كشمير kašmīr2 Kashmir (region in NE India);
kašmīr cashmere (a soft, twilled woolen
fabric)
كشنى kušnā lentil tare, slender vetch (bot.)
□ كض (for كظ ) V to be replete, overfull,
overloaded, overburdened VIII to be
overfilled, be replete ( ب with s.th.), be
chock-full
تكضكض takaḍkūḍ overexertion,
overstrain, overburdening
كظ kaẓẓa u (kaẓẓ) to fill, overfill ( ھ s.th.); to
burden, weight, encumber ( ھ s.th.); to
overstuff, surfeit, cloy ( ھ the
stomach)VIII to be crammed full, be jampacked,
be overcrowded ( ب with, esp.
with people); to sate o.s. eat one’s fill; to
be overstuffed, be surfeited, be cloyed ( ب
with); to be abundant, copious, plentiful
كظة kiẓẓa gorging, cloying, overstuffing
(of the stomach); surfeit
كظيظ kaẓīẓ overfilled, overstuffed,
cloyed, surfeited
مكتظ muktaẓ overcrowded ( ب with, esp.
with people), crammed full, jam-packed (
ب with), chock-full ( ب of)
كظر kuẓr suet
كظم kaẓama i (kaẓm, كظوم kuẓūm) to conceal or
suppress ( ھ one’s anger); to be mum, keep
silent
كظيم kaẓīm filled with anger
كعب ka‘aba u i ( كعوب ku‘ūb) to be full and
round, be swelling (breasts) II to make
cubic, to cube ( ھ s.th.); to dice ( ھ s.th.)
كعب ka‘b pl. كعاب ki‘āb, كعوب ku‘ūb
knot, knob, node (of cane); joint,
articulation; ankle, anklebone; heel (of the
fact, of a shoe); ferrule; die; cube; high
rank, fame, glory, honor │ كعب الكتاب (pl.
كعوب ) spine of a book; ارقى كعبا arqā
ka‘ban abler, more capable, more
qualified, more efficient; رجل عالي الكعب
rajul ‘ālī l-k. a distinguished, capable,
successful man; علو الكعب ‘ulūw al-k. high
rank, outstanding position; ذھب كعبھم their
days of glory are past 830
كعب ku‘b breasts, bosom
كعبة ka‘ba pl. ka‘abāt cube, cubic
structure; الكعبة the Kaaba (in Mecca);
(fig.) shrine; object of veneration, focus of
interest
كعبي ka‘bī cubic
كعبة ku‘ba virginity
كعاب ka‘āb having swelling breasts,
buxom (girl)
ابو كعيب abū ku‘aib (eg.) mumps (med.)
تكعيب tak‘īb cubing, dicing; raising to
the third power, cubing
تكعيبة tak‘ība trellis, espalier
تكعيبي tak‘ībī cubic
كاعب kā‘ib pl. كواعب kawā‘ib2 welldeveloped,
full and round, swelling
(bosom); having swelling breasts, buxom
(girl); كواعب buxom girls
مكعب muka‘‘ab cube-shaped, cubiform,
cubic; (pl. -āt) cube │ قدم مكعب (qadam)
cubic foot; متر مكعب (mitr) cubic meter
كعبرة ku‘bura and كعبورة ku‘būra pl. كعابر
ka‘ābir2 knotty excrescence, knot, knob,
node; كعبرة radius (anat.) │ عظم الكعبرة
‘aẓm al-k. radius (anat.)
مكعبر muka‘bar knotty, knobbed,
gnarled
كعبل ka‘bala (eg.) to trip up ( ه s.o.); to make ( ه
s.o.) stumble
كعك ka‘k (coll.; n. un. ة) cake; designation of
various kinds of pastry, also of small
baked goods; pretzel (syr.)
كعم ka‘ama a (ka‘m) to muzzle ( ھ a camel); to
gag ( ه s.o.); to cap, seal ( ھ a vessel)
كغم abbreviation of كيلوغرام kīlogrām kilogram
كف kaffa u (kaff) to border, edge, hem ( ھ a
garment); to desist, refrain ( عن from),
cease, forbear ( عن doing s.th.), give up,
stop ( عن s.th.); to renounce, waive, forgo (
عن s.th.), abstain ( عن from); to hold back,
restrain ( عن ه s.o. from); to hinder, prevent
عن ه) s.o. from); to avert ( عن s.th.); to
check, curb, restrict ( من s.th.) │ كف بصره
kaffa (and pass. kuffa) baṣaruhū to
become blind II to hem ( ھ a garment) V to
beg VII to desist, refrain, abstain ( عن
from) X to hold out the hand with an
imploring gesture, beg, practice begging;
to shade one’s eyes with the hand; to coil
(snake); to surround ( ل or حول s.o., s.th.),
flock around s.o. or s.th. ( (ل، حول
كف kaff desistance, refraining ( عن
from); abstaining, abstention ( من from);
cessation, suspension, stop, stoppage,
discontinuation ( عن of s.th.); -- kaff f., pl.
كفوف kufūf, اكف akuff palm of the hand;
glove; paw, foot, claw (of an animal);
slap; scale (of a balance); handful; quire;
bar (of chocolate) │ كف مريم k. mayam
(eg.) agnus castus, chaste tree (Vitex
agnus-castus; bot.); rose of Jericho,
resurrection plant (Anastatica
hierochuntica L.; bot.); الكف الجذماء
(jadmā’) star α in the constellation Cetus;
الكف الخضيب star β in Cassiopeia; كف الأسد
k. al-asad lion’s-leaf (bot.); وضع حياته على
كفه (ḥayātahū) to risk one’s life; استدر الأكف
istadarra l-akuffa to secure generous
contributions
كفة kiffa, kaffa pl. كفف kifaf, كفاف kifāf
palm of the hand; scale (of a balance)
كفة kaffa: كفة بارود k. bārūd (eg.)
cartridge pouch
كفة kuffa pl. كفف kufaf edge, seam, hem,
border
كفاف kafāf sufficiency, sufficient means
for a living
كفاف kifāf border, edge, fringe, seam,
hem 831
كفافة kifāfa hemming; hem
كفيف kafīf blind │ كفيف البصر k. al-baṣar
blind
كافة kāffa totality, entirety; (with foll.
genit.) all; the people, the masses, the
populace; kāffatan all without exception,
one and all; altogether, in the aggregate,
collectively
مكفوف makfūf pl. مكافيف makāfīf blind
كفأ kafa’a a (kaf’) to turn around, turn over,
reverse, invert ( ھ s.th.); to turn away, turn
aside, turn back ( من from) III to reward ( ه
s.o.); to requite,
return, repay,
recompense ( ب ھ s.th. with); to
compensate, make up ( ب ھ for s.th. with);
to be similar, equal ( ھ to s.th.), equal ( ھ
s.th.), be commensurate ( ھ with); to
measure up, come up ( ھ to s.th.), compare
favorably ( ھ with) IV to turn over,
reverse, invert ( ھ s.th.) VI to be equal, be
on a par; to (counter)balance each other,
be perfectly matched VII to be turned
away, be turned aside; to be changed, be
altered; to recede, change, fade (color); to
turn back, withdraw, retreat, fall back,
give way; to be inverted, be reversed, be
turned around or over; to fall down.
tumble, topple
كفء kaf’, kif’, kuf’ pl. اكفاء akfā’, كفاء
kifā’ equal, alike; adequate, appropriate,
suitable, fit ( ل for); equal ( ل to s.o.), a
match ( ل for); qualified, capable, able,
competent, efficient
كفوء kufū’, كفؤ kufu’ equal, comparable (
ل to), a match ( ل for)
كفاء kifā’ an equivalent
كفاء kafā’ equality; adequacy,
adequateness
كفاءة kafā’a equality; adequacy,
adequateness; comparableness; fitness,
suitability, appropriateness; competence,
efficiency, ability, capability; pl. كفاءات
qualifications, abilities, capabilities
مكافأة mukāfa’a pl. -āt requital;
recompense, remuneration; compensation,
indemnification, indemnity; reward;
stipend
تكافؤ takāfu’ mutual correspondence,
equivalence; homogeneity, sameness
انكفاء inkifā’ retreat, withdrawal
مكافئ mukāfi’ equal, (a)like, of the same
kind, homogeneous, corresponding,
commensurate, equivalent
متكافئ mutakāfi’ alike, (mutually)
corresponding, commensurate, equivalent,
equal
كفت kafata i (kaft) to restrain, detain, turn
away, prevent, hold back ( من ه s.o. from)
II to plate ( ب ھ s.th. with); to inlay ( ھ
s.th.)
كفت kift cooking pot
كفتة kufta meat balls, hamburgers,
oblong or round │ سمك كفتة (samak) fried
fish cakes; كفتة بطاطس potato dumplings
stuffed with meat
كفيت takfīt inlaid work, inlay; plating,
platework
مكفت mukaffat inlaid; coated, overlaid,
plated
كفح kafḥ a (kafḥ) to face frankly, confront,
encounter or meet face to face ( ه s.o.) III =
I; to combat ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.), fight, battle,
struggle, contend ( ه against); to defend ( عن
s.th.), fight ( عن for) │ كافح اموره (umūrahū)
to manage one’s affairs personally
كفاح kifāḥ and مكافحة mukāfaḥa
opposition, fight, battle, struggle (with
genit.: against); contention, strife
كفر 1 kafara i (kafr) to cover, hide ( ھ s.th.); --
(kufr, كفران kufrān, كفور kufūr) to be
irreligious, be an infidel, not to believe (
􀍿 با in God); 􀍿 كفر با also: to blaspheme
God, curse, swear; to 632 renege one’s
faith. become an infidel; to be ungrateful (
ب or ھ for a benefit) II to cover, hide ( ھ
s.th.); to expiate ( عن s.th.); to do penance,
atone, make amends ( ب عن for s.th. by or
with); to grant remission ( ھ عن to s.o. of
his sins); to forgive ( عن or ل ھ s.th. to
s.o.), grant pardon ( عن or ل ھ for s.th. to
s.o.); to make ( ه s.o.) an infidel, seduce ( ه
s.o.), o unbelief; to accuse of infidelity,
charge with unbelief ( ه s.o.) IV to make ( ه
s.o.) an infidel; to call ( ه s.o.) an infidel,
accuse ( ه s.o.) of infidelity
كفر kafr pl. كفور kufūr small village,
hamlet
كفر kufr and كفران kufrān unbelief,
infidelity │ 􀍿 كفر با godlessness, atheism;
blasphemy, profanity; كفران بالنعمة (ni’ma)
ingratitude, ungratefulness
كفار kaffār infidel, unbeliever
كفارة kaffāra penance, atonement ( عن
for a sin), expiation ( عن of); reparation,
amends; expiatory gifts, expiations
(distributed to the poor at a funeral)
تكفير takfīr expiation ( عن of),
atonement, penance ( عن for a sin);
seduction to infidelity; charge of unbelief
كافر kāfir pl. –ūn, كفار kuffār, كفرة
kafara, كفار kifār irreligious, unbelieving;
unbeliever, infidel, atheist; ungrateful │
كافر بالنعمة (ni’ma) ungrateful
كافور 2 look up alphabetically
كفس kafisa a (kafas) to be bandy-legged VII
do.
اكفس akfas2, f. كفساء kafsā’2, pl. كفس kufs
bandy-legged
كفكف kafkafa to hold back ( ھ tears)
كفل kafala u (kafl, كفالة kafāla) to feed, support
ه) s.o.), provide ( ه for s.o.; عائلة ‘ā’ilatan
for a family); -- kafala u i, kafila a and
kafula u (kafl, كفول kufūl, كفالة kafāla) to
vouch, answer, go bail, be guaranty, be or
stand sponsor, be responsible, liable,
answerable ( ب for); to guarantee, sponsor
ه) s.o.); to be legal guardian ( ه of s.o.); to
secure; to warrant, ensure ( ھ s.th.); to
guarantee ( ل ھ s.th. to s.o.); O to cover,
back (currency with gold) II to feed,
support ( ه s. o.), provide ( ه for); to admit
as security sponsor or bail ( ه s.o.); to name
sponsor, ask to be security or to go bail,
appoint security or bail ( ه s.o.) III to
conclude an agreement, make a contract ( ه
with s.o.) IV to appoint as security,
sponsor or bail ( ه s.o.), make ( ه s.o.) go
bail V to be security, go bail, vouch, be or
become responsible, answerable or liable (
ب ل to s.o. for), be sponsor ( ب ل of s.o. for
s.th.), guarantee ( ب ل to s.o. s.th.); to
obligate o.s. pledge o.s. ( ب ل to s.o. to do
s.th.); to undertake, take upon o.s. ( ب s.th.)
VI to vouch for each other, guarantee each
other
كفل kafl guaranty, warranty
كفل kafal pl. اكفال akfāl, كفول kufūl rump,
buttocks; croup of a horse
كفالة kafāla bail, guaranty, security,
sponsorship; pledge, deposit, surety,
collateral │ كفالة مالية (mālīya) surety,
security; bail; caution money; كفالة بالنفس
(nafs) bail (esp. for due appearance of a
person in court; Isl. Law); في كفالة فلان
under the protection or tutelage of s.o., in
s.o.’s custody
كفيل kafīl pl. كفلاء kufalā’2 responsible,
liable, answerable; bail, bailsman,
security, surety, sponsor, bondsman;
guarantor ( ب of s.th.); vouching ( ب for
s.th.), guaranteeing ( ب s.th.); protector;
legal guardian │ كفيل بالنفس (nafs) bail,
bailsman (esp. one guaranteeing the due
appearance of a person in court; Isl. Law)
833
تكافل takāful mutual or joint
responsibility; solidarity; mutual
agreement
كافل kāfil pl. كفل kufal breadwinner,
supporter, provider; bail, bailsman,
security, surety, sponsor, bondsman;
protector; legal guardian
مكفول (به ) makfūl (bihī) guaranteed;
covered, backed (banknotes in circulation)
كفن kafana i (kafn) to cover with a winding
sheet, to shroud, dress for the grave ( ھ the
deceased) II do.; to wrap ( ب ھ s.th. in),
cover ( ب ھ s.th. with)
كفن kafn saltless
كفن kafan pl. اكفان akfān shroud,
winding sheet
كفھر IV kafhara ( اكفھرار ikfihrār) to be dark,
grow dark, darken, be or become gloomy
اكفھرار ikfihrār darkness, dark; dusk,
gloom, gloominess
مكفھر mukfahirr dim, dusky, gloomy;
clouded, overcast; grave, sullen,
melancholy
كفى kafā i ( كفاية kifāya) to be enough, sufficient
ه) for s.o.), suffice ( ه s.o.); to meet all
requirements; to protect ( ه ه s.o. from s.o.,
ھ ه s.o. from s.th.); to save, spare ( ھ ه s.o.
a trouble) │ وكفى wa-kafā and that’s all!
enough of that! that’s enough! كفى الل عنك
may God give satisfaction in your stead,
or, may God make up for your
shortcoming (said to s.o. making a
mistake, or showing himself inadequate);
وكيلا 􀍿 كفى با (wakīlan) God is the best
protector; كفى حزنا ان (ḥazanan) it is sad
enough that ...; كفاه مؤنة كذا (mu’nata) to
save s.o. the trouble of ... III to be
sufficient, enough ( ه for s.o.), suffice ( ه
s.o.); to requite, repay, recompense,
reward ( ب ه s.o. with) VIII to be content,
content o.s. ( ب with s.th.)
كفاية kifāya sufficient amount, degree,
extent, etc., sufficiency; that which
suffices for performing a duty, a task, etc.;
capability, capacity, ability, qualification;
appropriateness, suitability, fitness;
competence, efficiency, skill │ بالكفاية
sufficiently, enough; كفاية القتال fighting
power; عدم الكفاية الجنسية ‘adam al-k. aljinsīya
sexual impotence; في ھذا كفاية
enough of that, that’s enough
كفي kafīy sufficient, enough
مكافاة mukāfāh reward; gratification
اكتفاء iktifā’ contentedness, contentment
كاف kāfin pl. كفاة kufāh sufficient,
enough, adequate; appropriate, suitable,
suited, fit; capable, able, qualified, skilled,
skillful, competent, efficient
مكتف muktafin contented, content
كلا 1 kilā, f. كلتا kiltā; كلي kilai, f. كلتي kiltai (with
dependent genit. or suffix) both (of); see
also alphabetically
كل 2 kalla i (kall, كلة killa, كلال kalāl, ; كلالة
kalāla, كلول kulūl, كلولة kulūla) to be or
become tired, fatigued, weary, exhausted,
weak; to be dim, dull, languid,
expreosionless, (glance, eyes); to become
blunt (sword) │ لا يكل indefatigable,
untiring II to crown ( ه s.o., also fig. ھ
s.th.); (Chr.) to perform the marriage
ceremony
(priest); to become dull, obtuse,
expressionless (face); to become blunt
(sword) │ كلل بالنجاح kullila bi-l-najāḥ to
be crowned by success IV to make
languid or tired, to weary, tire, fatigue,
exhaust, wear out, harass, torment ( ه s.o.);
to dim ( ھ the glance) V to be crowned; to
wear a crown; (Chr.) to be married
كل kall weariness, tiredness, fatigue,
exhaustion; dimness, dullness; dull, dim,
feeble (glance, mind) 834
كلة killa pl. -āt, كلل kilal thin veil, drape,
curtain; mosquito net
كلل kalal, كلال kalāl and كلالة kalāla
weariness, tiredness, fatigue, exhaustion;
dimness, dullness
كليل kalīl exhausted, tired, weary, faint,
languid; weak, feeble; dull, blunt
اكليل iklīl pl. اكاليل akālīl اكلة , 2 akilla
crown; diadem; chaplet, wreath, garland,
festoon; tonsure (Chr.); wedding,
marriage ceremony (Chr.); umbel (bot.) │
اكليل الجبل i. al-jabal rosemary (bot.); اكليل
الشوك i. aš-šauk crown of thorns; اكليل الملك
i. al-malik yellow sweet clover, melilot
(Melilotus officinalis L.; bot.)
تكليل taklīl coronation, crowning
كال kāll tired, fatigued, faint, languid
مكلل mukallal adorned with a wreath,
crowned; married (Chr.)
كل 3 kull totality, entirety; everyone, each one,
anyone; (with foil. def. noun) whole,
entire, all; (with fall. indef. noun) every;
الكل the whole. all, everything │ بالكل on
the whole, in the aggregate, taken
altogether, in bulk; الكل بالكل everything,
all-embracing, all-comprehensive, allpowerful;
كل من فلان وفلان وفلان (kullun
min) A as well as B as well as C; على كل
‘alā kullin in any case, at any rate; كله
kulluhū he entirely, all of him, it entirely,
all of it; كل ذلك kullu dālika all that; كل البيت
kullu l-baiti or البيت كله al-b. kulluhū the
whole house; كل الرجال or الرجال كلھم all
men; الحقيقة كل الحقيقة (kullu l-ḥ.) the whole
truth, nothing but the truth; السر كل السر
(sirr) a very great secret; الخير كل الخير
(kair) true or complete happiness; كل رجل
kullu rajulin every man; كل شيء k. šai’in
every thing, everything, all; كل احد k.
aḥadin and كل واحد k. wāḥidin every
(single) one, each one; كل من kullu man
everyone who, whoever, whosoever; كل ما
kullu mā all that …, whatever,
whatsoever; كل ما في الأمر ان k. mā fī l-amri
anna there is no more to it than ..., it’s
nothing but ...; كل وقت kulla waqtin at any
time, always; في كل سبعة ايام fī kulli sab‘ati
ayyāmin in each seven days, every seven
days; لكل الف li-kulli alfin per (one)
thousand
كلما kullamā whenever; the more ..., in
the same measure as … │ كلما – كلما the
more -- the more
كلي kullī total, entire, all-round, overall,
sweeping, comprehensive, complete;
absolute, universal
كلية kullīya totality, entirety; integrity,
wholeness, entireness, completeness; (pl.
-āt) faculty, school (of a university);
college; institute of higher learning,
academy, secondary school; كليات the
complete works (of an author); الكليات the
five logical predicates or general
conceptions (philos.); kullīyatan wholly,
entirely, totally, absolutely │ بالكلية on the
whole, in the aggregate, altogether; -- لا
بالكلية not at all, absolutely not; بكليته in its
entire being, completely, totally, entirely,
wholly; كلية التجارة commercial college; كلية
حربية (ḥarbīya) military academy
كلة 4 kulla pl. كلل kulal bullet; cannon ball; shell,
grenade; a marble
كلا kallā not at all, on the contrary; by no
means! certainly not! never! no! (see also
كلا ثم كلا 1 │ كل (tumma) a thousand times
no! not at all!
كلأ kala’a a ( كلء kal’, كلاء kilā’, كلاءة kilā’a) to
guard, preserve, watch, protect ( ه s.o.)
VIII to find no sleep (eye)
كلأ kala’ pl. اكلاء aklā’ grass, herbage,
pasture
كلوء kalū’: كلوء العين k. al-‘ain sleepless,
awake 835
كلاسكي kilāsikī classic(a1)
كلاكس kalāks pl. -āt horn of an automobile
كلب kaliba a (kalab) to be seized by
hydrophobia; to become mad, crazy; to
covet greedily ( على s.th.) VI to rage, rave,
storm; to fan, pounce, rush in ( على upon),
assail ( على s.o.); to assail each other, rush
against each other X to be raging, raving,
rabid, furious, mad, frenzied, possessed
كلب kalb pl. كلاب kilāb dog │ الكلب الأكبر
the constellation Canis Major with its
main star Sirius; الكلب الأصغر the
constellation Canis Minor with its main
star Procyon; كلب البحر k. al-baḥr shark;
كلب الماء otter; beaver
كلبة kalba pl. -āt bitch
كلبي kalbī canine (adj.)
كلب kalab rabies, hydrophobia; burning
thirst; greed ( على for)
كلب kalib affected with rabies, rabid;
mad; greedy
كلاب kullāb and كلوب kallūb pl. كلاليب
kalālīb2 hook; cramp
كلابة kullāba pl. -āt (pair of) pincers,
tongs
كليب kalīb pl. كلبى kalbā affected with
rabies, rabid, raging
تكالب takālub fierce struggle, dogfight,
free-for-all, melee, brawl; avidity, greed
مكلوب maklūb rabid, frenzied, crazed,
possessed
كلبش kalabš manacles, handcuffs
كلت kalata i to pour, pour out ( ھ s.th.)
كلح kalaḥa a ( كلاح kulāḥ, كلوح kulūḥ) to frown,
scowl, look gloomy IV and V do.
كلحة kalaḥa zone around the mouth,
mien, facial expression
كالح kāliḥ grave, austere, somber,
gloomy; fallow, livid, dull grey; turned
colorless, faded
كلخ kalk giant fennel (Ferula communis L.;
Ferula sinaica B.; bos.); -- (eg.) kalak
ammoniac
الكلدان al-kaldān the Chaldeans
كلداني kaldānī Chaldean (adj. and n.);
astrologer
كلس 1 II to plaster with lime, whitewash ( ھ
s.th.); to calcine, calcify ( ھ s.th.)
كلس kils lime
كلسي kilsī calcic, limy, lime- (in
compounds) │ حجارة كلسية limestone
كلاسة kallāsa limekiln
مكلس mukallas calcified
كلسة 2 (It. calza) kalsa pl. -āt stocking
كواليس see كوليس
كلسون (Fr. caleçon) kalsūn pl. -āt (pair of
men’s) drawers
كلسيطة (It. calzeta) kalsīṭa pl. كلاسط kalāsiṭ2
stocking
كلسيوم kalsiyōm calcium
كلف kalifa a (kalaf) to become brownish red
(face); to become freckled, be covered
with freckles; to like ( ب s.th.), be intent,
bent, set. keen ( ب on), be very attached ( ب
to s.o. or s.th.), be very fond ( ب of s.o. or
s.th.); to be in love, fall in love ( ب with
s.o.) II to commission, charge, entrust ( ه
s.o., ب or ھ with), assign ( ب or ھ ه to s.o.
a task, a job); to cost ( ھ ه s.o. a certain
amount) │ كلف خاطره (kāṭirahū) (eg.) to
take the trouble, go to the trouble, bother;
to put s.o. to the trouble, bother s.o.; كلفه
شططا (šaṭaṭan) to overtask s.o., expect or
demand too much of s.o.; ( مشقة ... or
مؤونة ...) كلف نفسه عناء ... ٨٣٦ (‘anā’a,
ma‘ūnata, mašaqqata) to take the trouble
to ..., to bother to ..., go to the trouble of
كلفه ثمنا باھظا ;… (tamanan) to cost s.o.
dearly; مھما كلفه الأمر (mahmā, amr)
whatever it may cost him, at any cost V to
burden o.s., be burdened ( ھ or ب with
s.th.); to take upon o.s. ( ھ a job, a task,
coats, an office, etc.); to take over, defray,
have to bear ( ھ s.th., e.g., expenses); to do
reluctantly or unwillingly, do in a studied
or affected manner, simulate, feign, affect
ھ) s.th.); to force o.s. ( ھ to do s.th.). do
s.th. ( ھ ) with difficulty, e.g., تكلف الضحك
(ḍaḥk) to force a laugh; to be affected,
mannered, unnatural, stiff, formal,
ceremonious, punctilious, stand on
ceremony; to employ ( ھ e.g., care), spend
على ھ) an amount for); to cost ( على s.o., ھ
so-and-so much)
كلف kalaf (coll.; n. un. ة) freckles │ كلف
الشمس k. aš-šams sunspots
كلف kalif very much in love ( ب with),
very attached ( ب to), very fond ( ب of)
كلفة kulfa pl. كلف kulaf discomfort;
trouble, inconvenience; nuisance;
ceremonial, ceremony, formality,
ceremoniousness, affectedness of
behavior, affectation, mannerism, pose;
costs, expenses, expenditure, outlay;
trimmings, fittings, accessories, notions,
ornaments (buttons, buckles, clasps,
braiding, lace, etc.); lady’s maid │ الكلف
الشمسية (šamsīya) the sunspots
كلاف kallāf stable hand, hostler, groom
كلافي kallāfī hirer of donkeys
اكلف aklaf2, f. كلفاء kalfā’2, pl. كلف kulf
brownish red, russet; freckled; spotted
تكليف taklīf pl. تكاليف takālīf2 burdening,
bothering, troubling, inconveniencing;
commissioning, charging, authorization;
commandment (of God); burden,
annoyance, nuisance, bother; trouble,
inconvenience, discomfort; fuss, ado;
formality, ceremonial of courtesy,
ceremony; expenses, expenditure, outlay,
costs, charges, overhead; prime cost;
taxes, imposts, duties; taxation,
encumbrance with a tax; legal capacity
(Isl. Law) │ بلا تكليف informal(ly),
unceremonious(ly), without (standing on)
ceremony; كشف التكليف kašf at-t. terrier;
تكاليف المعيشة t. al-ma‘īša cost of living
تكلف takalluf constraint, unnaturalness
of manner; mannerism, airs, affectation,
affected behavior; studied, unnatural
manner; dissimulation, hypocrisy
مكلف mukallaf commissioned,
authorized, charged ( ب with); obligated,
under obligation, liable ( ب to do s.th.),
responsible ( ب for); bound, obliged ( ب to
do s.th.); subject to taxation, taxable;
taxpayer; obligated to observe the
precepts of religion (Isl. Law); legally
capable, sane in mind, compos mentis (Isl.
Law) │ مكلف بالشؤون chargé d’affaires,
diplomatic envoy
مكلفة mukallafa pl. -āt (eg.) terrier
متكلف mutakallaf formal, ceremonial,
ceremonious; affected, studied, forced,
outward., sham, false, artificial │ ضحكة
متكلفة (ḍahka) forced laugh
كلك kalak pl. -āt (ir.) raft of inflated skins
كلكتا kalkattā Calcutta (city in NE India)
كلاكيع kalākī‘ كلاكيع العظام : 2 k. al-‘iẓām bone
fragments
كلكل kalkala and II takalkala to become callous
(skin)
كلكل kalkal pl. كلاكل kalākil2 chest,
thorax │ تحت كلاكله, تحت كلكله under the 837
oppressive burden of s.th.; بكلكله to oppress
s.o. gravely, weigh heavily upon s.o.
كلكلة kalkala callosity, callus
مكلكل mukalkal callous (skin)
كلم II to address ( ه s.o.), speak, talk ( ه to or with
s.o.) III to speak, talk, converse ( ه with
s.o.) V to speak, talk ( مع with or to s.o., عن
or على about, of); to utter, express, voice,
say ( ب or ھ s.th.)
كلم kalm pl. كلوم kulūm, كلام kilām
wound, cut, slash
كلمة kalima pl. -āt (coll. كلم kalim) word;
speech, address; utterance, remark,
saying; aphorism, maxim; brief
announcement, a few (introductory)
words; short treatise; importance, weight,
influence, authority, ascendancy, powerful
position │ كلمة فكلمة kalimatan fakalimatan
word by word, literally; بكلمة
اخرى (ukra) in other words; القى كلمة alqā
kalimatan to make a speech, give a public
address; لي كلمة معك I’ve got to talk to you;
جمعوا كلمتھم على (jama’ū kalimatahum) they
decided unanimously to ..., they were
unanimous about ...; اجتمعت كلمتھم ijtama’at
kalimatuhum they united, joined forces,
came to an agreement; اجتمعت كلمتھم على
they were agreed that ...; توحيد الكلمة or جمع
الكلمة jam’ al-k. union, joining of forces,
unanimity; اتحاد الكلمة ittiḥād al-k. concord,
agreement, harmony; تقسيم الكلمة dissension,
variance, disunion; اعلى كلمته (a’lā) to raise
the prestige of s.o.; علو الكلمة ‘ulūw al-k.
and الكلمة العليا (‘ulyā) supremacy,
hegemony; قال كلمته he said what he had to
say, he had his say; كلمة لله the word of
God, the Holy Scriptures; O كلمة المرور
password, watchword, parole; الكلمات العشر
(‘ašr) the ten Commandments; كلمة تمھيدية
(tamhīdīya) preface; كلمة السر k. as-sirr,
(ir.) كلم السر kalim as-sirr parole, watchword,
countersign
كلام kalām talking, speaking; speech;
language, mode of expression, style; talk,
conversation, discussion; debate, dispute,
controversy; words, word, saying,
utterance, statement, remark; aphorism,
maxim, phrase, idiom, figure of speech;
(gram.) sentence, clause │ بالكلام orally,
verbally; فتح فمه بالكلام (famahū) to open
one’s mouth in order to say s.th., prepare
to say s.th.; كلام فارغ idle talk, prattle,
poppycock, bosh, nonsense; طريق الكلام
manner of speaking, diction; علم الكلام ‘ilm
al-k. scholastic theology (Isl.); كثير الكلام
talkative, loquacious, garrulous; لغة الكلام
lugat al-k. colloquial language, everyday
speech
كلامي kalāmī of or pertaining to speech
or words, speech-, word- (in oompounds),
verbal; spoken, oral; scholastic,
theological │ مشادة كلامية (mašādda) battle
of words, dispute, altercation
كليم kalīm pl. كلمى kalmā wounded,
injured; sore; -- (pl. كلماء kulamā’) person
addressed; speaker, spokesman,
mouthpiece │ كليم لله epithet of Moses
كليم see also alphabetically
كلماني kalmānī, kalamānī, killimānī
eloquent; fluent speaker
تكلام tiklām, tikillām and تكلامة tiklāma,
tikillāma eloquent; good talker,
conversationalist; talkative, loquacious,
garulous
مكالمة mukālama talk, conversation,
discussion │ مكالمة تليفونية telephone
conversation
تكلم takallum speaking; talk,
conversation; speech
متكلم mutakallim speaking (act. part.);
speaker, spokesman; first person (gram.);
Muslim theologian, scholastic 838
كلما kullamā see كل 2
كالون look up alphabetically
كلية kulya and كلوة kulwa pl. كلى kulan, □ كلاوى
kalāwī kidney
كلوي kulwī of or pertaining to the
kidneys, renal, nephric, nephritic, nephro-
(in compounds) │ التھاب كلوي inflammation
of the kidneys, nephritis; مغص كلوي (magṣ)
renal colic
كليشيه kilīšēh pl. -āt cliché
كليم kilīm pl. اكلمة aklima kilim, carpet, rug
(usually long and narrow)
كم 1 kam (interrogative and exclamatory particle
with foll. noun in acc.) how much? how
many! how much! │ كم ولد لك (waladan)
how many sons do you have? كم مرة
(marratan) or كم من مرة how many times?
how often? how often! كم بالحري (ḥarīy)
how much more ...! how much rather ...!
بكم for how much? how much (is it)?
كم 2 kamm amount, quantity │ نظرية الكم
naẓariyat al-k. quantum theory (phys.)
كمي kammī quantitative
كمية kammīya pl. -āt amount, quantity,
magnitude
كم 3 kamma u (kamm) to cover, cover up,
conceal, hide, cloak ( ھ s.th.); to plug up,
stop up ( ھ s.th.); to muzzle ( ھ s.o.) │ كم
فمه (famahū) to stop s.o.’s mouth, silence
s.o. II to muzzle ( ھ s.o.); to muffle s.o.’s (
ه) mouth; O to spike ( ھ a cannon); to
provide with sleeves ( ھ a garment) IV to
provide with sleeves ( ھ a garment)
كم kumm pl. اكمام akmām, كممة kimama
sleeve
كم kimm pl. اكمام akmām, اكمة akimma,
كمام kimām, اكاميم akāmīm2 calyx (bot.);
perianth (bot.)
كمام kimām muzzle
كمامة kimāma pl. -āt, كمائم kamā’im2
muzzle; cloth for muffling the mouth;
mask; O gas mask; perianth, calyx
كمء kam’ pl. اكمؤ akmu’ truffle; mushroom
كمأة kam’a (pl.) truffles
كما ka-mā see ك ka
كمان kamān violin, fiddle
كمانجي kamānjī player of a كمنجة (q.v.)
كمب (Engl.) kamb camp
كمبيالة (It. cambiale) kambiyāla pl. -āt bill of
exchange, draft
كمبريت kambarīt batiste, cambric
كمبيو (It. cambio) kambiyō exchange, money
exchange; rate of exchange
كمت kamata u (kamt) to suppress ( ھ one’s
anger)
كميت kumait (m. and f.) reddish-brown,
chestnut, bay, maroon
كمثرى kummatrā (coll.; n. un. كمثراة kummatrāh
pl. كمثريات kummatrayāt) pear
كمح kamaḥa a (kamḥ) to pull up, rein in ( ھ an
animal) IV do.
كمخ 1 kamaka a (kamk) with بانفه bi-anfihī to
turn up one’s nose, be haughty IV = I
كماخ kumāk pride, haughtiness,
overweening, self-conceit
كامخ 2 kāmak, kāmik pl. كوامخ kawāmik2 vinegar
sauce, pickle; (mixed) pickles
كمخا 3 kamkā silk fabric, damask
كمد kamida a (kamd) to be sad, grieved,
distressed, heartsick; to be smutty,
swarthy, dull, flat (color); to fade, lose
color, become discolored II to apply a hot
compress, a hot pack ( ھ to a limb) IV to
sadden, grieve, worry, make heartsick ( ه
s.o.) X to become smutty, swarthy, dull,
flat; to darken, become dark (color) 839
كمد kamd, kamad and كمدة kumda dull,
swarthy color; dullness, duskiness,
swarthiness; sadness, grief
كمد kamid and كميد kamld aad, grieved.
worried. heartaick; gloomy. dark
كمد kimād and كمادة kimāda compress,
pack
اكمد akmad2 dark-colored, blackish,
swarthy
تكميد takmīd application of hot
compresses, fomentation
كامد kāmid sad, grieved, worried,
heartsick; gloomy, dark; swarthy, darkcolored
مكمد mukammad and مكمدة mukammada
pl. -āt compress, pack
كمر 1 kamar pl. اكمار akmār belt
كمرة kamara pl. -āt beam, girder,
specif., iron girder; arm, jib │ كمرة حمالة
(ḥammāla) and كمرة تحميل قضبان الونش
(quḍbān al-winš) beam, bridge (of a
traveling crane)
مكمور 2 makmūr (eg.) dish of chopped meat and
vegetables
كمرك (syr.) gumrug pl. كمارك gamārig2
customs; customhouse
كمركي gumrugī customs-, tariff- (in
compounds)
كمساري kumsārī pl. كمسارية kumsārīya (eg.)
(streetcar, railroad, etc.) conductor
كمش kamaša u (kamš) to seize, grasp, grip,
clutch ( ھ s.th.) V to become wrinkled, to
wrinkle; to shrink; to contract; to recoil
within o.s. cower, quail VII to become
wrinkled, to wrinkle; to shrink; to
contract; to tighten, become cramped, be
convulsed; to recoil within o.s., cower,
quail; to withdraw within o.s., become or
be preoccupied with o.s. be self-absorbed;
to collect one’s thoughts, gather one’s
strength, concentrate (also with (على نفسه
كمشة kamša a handful
كمش kamiš, كميش kamīš adroit, skillful,
skilled │ كميش الإزار k. al-izār do.;
efficient, active, diligent, industrious
كماشة kammāša pl. -āt (pair) of pincers
انكماش inkimāš absorption,
preoccupation, self-absorption
منكمش munkamiš shrunk; cramped,
clenched, convulsed; absorbed,
preoccupied, self-absorbed, introverted
كمع III to sleep ( ه with s.o.), embrace ( ه s.o.),
have sexual intercourse ( ه with s.o.)
كميع kamī’ bedfellow
كمل kamala, kamula u and kamila a ( كمال
kamāl, كمول kumūl) to be or become
whole, entire, integral, perfect, complete;
to be finished, done, completed,
accomplished; to be concluded, come to a
close II and IV to finish, wind up,
conclude, complete, consummate ( ھ s.th.);
to carry out, execute ( ھ s.th.); to perfect,
round out, complement, supplement ( ھ
s.th.) VI and VIII to be perfect,
consummate, integral, be or become
complete, finished, done, accomplished,
concluded; to reach completion,
fulfillment or perfection, to mature, ripen;
to be perfected X to complete ( ھ s.th.); to
perfect ( ھ s.th.); to round out,
complement, supplement (. s.th.); to carry
out, meet, fulfill ( ھ s.th., e.g., conditions)
كمال kamāl pl. -āt perfection;
completeness; completion, consummation,
conclusion, termination, windup; maturity,
ripeness │ بكماله in its full scope,
completely, entirely, wholly, totally
كمالي kamālī luxury, luxurious, de luxe;
كماليات luxuries; luxury
كمالة kamāla (colloq.) that which fills
up or completes a weight or number, a
complement; addition, supplement 840
اكمل akmal 2 more complete, more
perfect │ باكمله entirely, wholly, totally;
لندن باكملھا all London
تكميل takmīl completion,
complementing, perfecting, perfection;
conclusion, termination, windup;
consummation, execution
تكميلي takmīlī completing,
complementing, complementary,
supplementary │ انتخاب تكميلي by-election
تكملة takmila supplement, complement
اكمال ikmāl completion, complementing,
perfecting, perfection; conclusion,
termination; windup; consummation,
execution
تكامل takāmul integration; unification to
a perfect whole │ O حساب التكامل integral
calculus
تكاملي takāmulī integrative; allincluding
and unifying to form a perfect
whole
اكتمال iktimāl completion; maturity,
ripeness
استكمال istikmāl conclusion, termination,
finishing
كامل kāmil pl. كملة kamala perfect,
consummate; genuine, sterling; complete,
full, plenary, full-strength; completed,
concluded; whole, entire, total, integral;
name of a poetic meter; folio format
(paper) │ بكامله wholly, entirely, totally,
altogether, in its entirety; O لبن كامل
(laban) unskimmed, full-bodied milk
متكامل mutakāmil perfect; integrative;
complete, integral
كمن kamana u and kamina a ( كمون kumūn) to
hide; to be hidden, concealed, latent; to
have its secret seat ( في in); to ambush,
waylay ( ل s.o.) V to lie in wait ( ل for s.o.),
ambush, waylay ( ل s.o.) X to hide, lie
concealed
كمنة kumna black cataract (med.)
كمان look up alphabetically
كمون kammūn cumin (Cuminum
cyminum L.; bot.) │ كمون اسود black
caraway, black cumin (Nigella sativa L.;
bot.); كمون بري (barrī) do.; كمون حلو (ḥulw)
anise, aniseed
كمين kamīn pl. كمناء kumanā’2 hidden,
lying in ambush; ambush, secret attack │
دبر كمينا (dabbara) to hatch a plot; نصب له
كمينا to set a trap for s.o.
مكمن makman pl. مكامن makāmin2 place
whore s.th. is hidden; ambuscade;
ambush, hiding place │ ھنا مكمن السر
hunā m. as-sirr that’s where the secret lies
كامن kāmin hidden, concealed, latent;
secret; pl. كوامن kawāmin2 underlying
factors, hidden background, latent depths
كمنجا kamanjā and كمنجة kamanja
oriental stringed instrument having one or
two strings; (Western) violin, fiddle
كمه kamah blindness (from birth)
اكمه akmah2, f. كمھاء kamhā’2, pl. كمه
kumh blind, born blind
كمي kamīy pl. كماة kumāh, اكماء akmā’ armed
and ironclad, in full armor; brave, valiant,
courageous
كميون (Fr. camion) kamiyōn pl. -āt truck, lorry
كن kanna u (kann, كنون kunūn) to hide ( ھ
s.th.); to conceal, cover, cloak ( ھ s.th.); to
shelter, ensconce, contain ( ھ s.th.); to
harbor ( ل ھ friendship toward); to calm
down, subside, abate (wind) II to hide,
conceal, secrete, keep secret ( ھ s.th.); to
calm, quiet, still, assuage ( ھ s.th.) IV to
hide, conceal, secrete, keep secret ( ھ s.th.)
VIII to be hidden, be concealed X to be
hidden, be concealed; to seek shelter; to
lie comfortably, nestle, cuddle, snuggle; to
calm down 841
كن kann, kinn pl. اكنان aknān, اكنة
akinna place where one is sheltered;
cover, shelter, retreat, refuge; nest; home,
house, hut; arbor, bower
كنة kanna pl. كنائن kanā’in2 daughter-inlaw;
sister-in-law
كنة kinna shelter, cover, covering
كنة kunna pl. -āt, كنان kinān shed roof,
pent roof, awning
كنان kinān pl. -āt akinna shed roof, pent
roof, awning
كنانة kināna pl. كنائن kanā’in2 quiver (for
arrows) │ ارض كنانة arḍ kināna, الكنانة
Egypt (land of the Kinana tribe)
كانون kānūn pl. كوانين kawānīn2 stove
كانون kānūn: كانون الأول k. al-awwal
December (Syr., Leb., Jord., Ir.); كانون
الثاني k. at-tānī January (Syr., Leb., Jord.,
Ir.)
كنين kanīn hidden, concealed; well-kept
مكنون maknūn hidden, concealed; wellkept;
hidden content
كنار 1 kanār edge, rim, border, fringe, hem,
selvage
كناري 2 kanārī canary
كنب 1 kanab callocity, callus
كنب kanib and مكنب muknib callous
(skin)
كنبه 2 or كنبيه (Fr. canapé) kanabēh pl. -āt sofa
الكنج al-kunj the Congo
كنجرو kangarū kangaroo (eg.)
كنود 1 kunūd ingratitude
كنود kanūd ungrateful
كندا 2 kanadā Canada
كندي kanadī Canadian
كندر 1 kundur frankincense
كندرة 2 kundura pl. كنادر kanādir2 (syr.)
(Western-style) shoe
كندش kunduš magpie
كنار look up alphabetically
كنز kanaza i (kanz) to bury ( في الأرض in the
ground, ھ a treasure); to pile up, heap up,
lay up, accumulate, amass, collect, gather,
save, hoard ( ھ s.th.) VIII to be firm,
compact, sturdy, strapping; to accumulate,
amass, gather ( ھ money, treasures); to
hide ( ھ money, treasures)
كنز kanz pl. كنوز kunūz treasure
كنز kaniz firm, compact (flesh); sturdy,
strapping (body)
اكتناز iktināz strong, sturdy build,
sturdiness, compactness, stoutness (of the
body)
مكتنز muktaniz firm, compact (flesh);
sturdy (body); compressed, pinched (lips);
massive, strong; -- muktanaz accumulated,
amassed; hidden, buried
كنس kanasa u (kans) to sweep ( ھ the house) II
do.
كنس kans sweeping, cleaning
الكنسة al-kansa visit of the ulema to the
tomb of the Imam al-Shāfi‘ī where they
sweep away the dust
كناس kannās sweeper; street sweeper,
street cleaner
كناسة kunāsa sweepings, refuse,
garbage, offal
كنيس kanīs nose bag
كنيس kanīs synagogue
كنيسة kanīsa pl. كنائس kanā’is2 church
(Chr.); synagogue, temple (Jud.)
كنسي kanasī and كنائسي kanā’isī
ecclesiastic(al); clerical 842
مكنسة miknasa pl. مكانس makānis2
broom; O sweeper, street sweeper
(machine) │ مكنسة كھربائية (kahrabā’īya)
vacuum cleaner
مكناس miknās مكناسة , 2 miknāsa2 Meknes
(city in N Morocco)
كناش kunnāš, كناشة kunnāša scrapbook; كناشات
fundamentals, principles
كنصول (Fr. console) kunṣōl pl. -āt console
كنعان kan‘ān Canaan
كنغر kangar kangaroo
كنف kanafa u (kanf) to guard, protect ( ه s.o.); to
fence in, hedge, provide with an enclosure
ھ) s.th.); to surround ( ھ s.th., ه s.o.); to
help, assist ( ه s.o.) III and IV to shelter,
protect, help, assist ( ه s.o.) VIII to
surround (on both sides), enclose,
embrace ( ھ s.th.)
كنف kanaf pl. اكناف aknāf side, flank;
wing; shadow, shelter, pale, fold; bosom
│ في كنف under cover of ..., in an
atmosphere of ...; في اكنافه under his
protection, under his sponsorship
كنافة kunāfa pl. -āt vermicelli baked in
sugar, melted butter and honey
كنيف kanīf pl. كنف kunuf water closet,
toilet; public lavatory
مكتنف muktanaf surrounded, enclosed (
ب by)
كنفاش (Engl.) kanfāš canvas
كنكة kanaka (= تنكة eg.) pl. -āt coffee pot
كنكن 1 kankana to stay at home; to settle down,
make o.s. at home; to nestle, snuggle,
cuddle up
كنكينا 2 kanakīnā quinine
كنه VIII to fathom, probe, sound, investigate,
explore ( ھ s.th.), look ( ھ into
s.th.); to get to the bottom ( ھ of s.th.);
to understand thoroughly, grasp in its
entirety ( ھ s.th.) X to seek to explore or
find out ( ھ s.th.); to fathom, discover, find
out, grasp, understand ( ھ s.th.)
كنه kunh utmost degree, extreme; core,
essence, substance, true nature, essential
being │ يعرفه كنه المعرفة ya‘rifuhū kunha lma‘
rifa he understands it most thoroughly,
he grasps its very essence
تكنھات takannuhāt = تكھنات
اكتناه iktināh and استكناه istiknāh
fathoming, penetration, exploration
كنھور kanahwar cumuli
كنو ) and كنا (كني kanā u and كنى kanā i ( كناية
kināya) to use metonymically ( ب عن s.th.
for); to allude ( عن ب with s.th. to); -- كنى
kanā i ( كنية kunya) and II to call ( ه s.o.) by
the surname of ( ب) V and VIII to be
known by the surname of ( ب), call o.s. by
the surname of ( (ب
كنية kunya pl. كنى kunan surname,
agnomen (consisting of abū or umm
followed by the name of the son)
كناية kināya indirect expression,
metonymy; allusion; indirect declaration
of (legal) intent (Isl. Law) │ بالكناية
indirect, not clear and unequivocal (as
opposed to صريح) ؛ ھو كناية عن it is
tantamount to ..., it means ..., it stands
for ..., it consists in ...; كناية عن kināyatan
‘an tantamount to; in lieu of, instead of
مكني عنه maknīy ‘anhu metonymically
expressed
مكنى mukannan surnamed
كھرب kahraba to electrify, electrize ( ھ s.th.);
to ionize ( ھ s.th.) II takahraba to be
electrified, be electrized, become electric;
to be charged with electricity; to be
ionized
كھربة kahraba electrization,
electrification; electricity 843
كھرب kahrab pl. كھارب kahārib2
electron
كھيرب kuhairib pl. -āt electron
كھيربي kuhairibī electronic, electron- (in
compounds) │ المجھر الكھيربي (mijhar)
electron microscope
كھاربي kahāribī electronic, electron- (in
compounds)
كھرباء kahrabā’ and كھربا kahrabā
amber; electricity; الكھرباء (eg.) the streetcar,
the trolley
كھربائي kahrabā’ī and كھربي kahrabī
electric(al); electrician │ تيار كھربائي
(ṭayyār) electric current; جامعة كھربائية
storage battery, secondary battery,
accumulator; مصباح كھربائي (miṣbāḥ)
electric lamp, lightbulb; علاج كھربائي
diathermy; عالم كھربائي electrophysicist;
مغنطيس كھربائي (magnaṭīs) electromagnet;
مغنطيسية كھربائية electromagnetism; نور
كھربائي (nūr) electric light
كھربائية kahrabā’īya and كھربية
kahrabīya electricity
مكھرب mukahrab electrically charged,
electrized, electrified; O electrically
conductive, conducting, ionized; O
electrically ignited, provided with electric
ignition
كھرطيسي kahraṭīsī electromagnetic
كھرمان kahramān amber
كھف kahf pl. كھوف kuhūf cave, cavern;
depression, hollow, cavity │ كھف رئوي
(ri’awī) pulmonary abscess, vomica
(med.); اصحاب الكھف the Seven Sleepers
كھل kahala a ( كھول kuhūl), kahula u ( كھولة
kuhūla) and VIII to be middle-aged, be at
the height of one’s life
كھل kahl pl. كھل kuhhal, كھال kihāl, كھول
kuhūl, كھلان kuhlān middle-aged, man of
mature age
كھل kuhūla maturity of age
كاھل kāhil pl. كواھل kawāhil2 upper part
of the back; withers │ ثقل كاھله taqqala
kāhilahū to load, burden, encumber s.o. or
s.th., e.g., ثقل كاھل الميزان (k. al-mīzān) to
burden the budget; تخفيف العبء عن كاھله (t.
al-‘ib’) unburdening, disencumbrance of
s.o. or s.th.
كھامة kahāma dullness, bluntness; lassitude
languor, weakness
كھن 1 kahana a u ( كھانة kahāna) to predict the
future, tell the fortune ( ل of s.o.), prophesy
ل) to s.o.) V to predict, foretell, presage,
prophesy ( ب s.th.)
كھانة kahāna prediction; prophecy
كھانة kihāna divination, soothsaying,
fortunetelling
كھنوت kahnūt, kahanūt priesthood │
رجال الكھنوت the clergy, the ministry
كھنوتي kahanūtī priestly, sacerdotal,
ministerial, clerical, ecclesiastic(al)
مكھن makhan (place of an) oracle
تكھن takahhun pl. -āt prediction,
prophecy; conjecture, surmise
كاھن kāhin pl. كھان kuhhān, كھنة kahana
diviner, soothsayer, prognosticator,
fortuneteller; priest رئيس الكھنة and كبير
الكھنة high priest
متكھن mutakahhin diviner, soothsayer,
prognosticator, fortuneteller
كھنة 2 kuhna rags, shreds, scrap, junk; ragged,
tattered
كھنجي kuhnajī ragman, rag picker
كھاية kihāya administrative district in Tunisia
كاھية kāhiya pl. كواه kawāhin chief
officer of a كھاية ; deputy, vice-, under-,
sub- (Tun.)
كوة kūwa pl. -āt, كوى kuwan, كواء kiwā’
aperture; small window, attic window,
skylight; peephole 844
كواليني kawālīnī pl. -ya locksmith
كوب kūb pl. اكواب akwāb drinking glass,
tumbler, (ir.) cup
كوبة kūba drinking glass, tumbler;
hearts (in a deck of cards)
كوبرته (It. coperta) kūbarta deck (of a ship)
كوبري (Turk. köprü) kūbrī pl. □ كباري kabārī
bridge (eg.)
كوبنھاج (Fr. Copenhague) Copenhagen
كوبنھاجن kōbinhāgin Copenhagen
كوبيا (It. copia) kōbiyā copy │ قلم كوبيا qalam k.
copying pencil, indelible pencil
كوبيل (Engl. cobble) cobbled pavement,
cobblestones
كوبيه (It. copia) kōbiya copy
الكويت al-kuwait Kuwait
كوتر (Engl. cutter) kōtar pl. كواتر kawātir2 (eg.)
cutter, yawl
كوثة kauta fertility; abundance, profusion
كوثر kautar much, ample, abundant, plentiful,
large quantity; الكوثر al-kautar name of a
river in Paradise
كوثل kautal stern (of a ship)
مكوجي see كوى 1
كوخ 2 kūk pl. اكواخ akwāk hut
كاخية 2 look up alphabetically
كاد (كود 1 ) kāda (1st pers. perf. kidtu) imperf. يكاد
yakādu to be on the point ( ان of doing
s.th.), be about ( ان to do s.th.), (with
imperf.) it wouldn’t have taken much
more ..., he (it) all but ..., he (would have)
almost ... │ كاد يموت he almost died; كدت
اذھب kidtu adhabu I almost went; يكاد يكون
في حكم العدم (ḥukmi l-’adam) it is almost as
good as nonexistent; (with neg.
corresponding to Engl. “hardly, scarcely,
barely; no sooner ..., as soon as ...”:) ما كاد
يقوم no sooner had he got up ...; لا تكاد ترى
(tarā) you will hardly ever see, or, you
barely see, or, the moment you see …; لم
يكد يراھا lam yakad yarāhā no sooner had
he seen her, the moment he saw her; لم يكد
حتى – and ما كاد -- حتى no sooner – than, as
soon as he -- he ..., the moment he – he …
كاد kād: بالكاد almost, nearly; see also
alphabetically
كود 2 II to heap up, pile up ( ھ s.th.)
كودة kauda pl. اكواد akwād heap, pile
كودية زار 3 (eg.) kudyit zār woman leader of the
Zar ritual
كور 1 II to roll, roll up, coil, roll into a ball ( ھ
s.th.), to wind ( ھ the turban); to make
round, ball-shaped ( ھ s.th.); to clench (
قبضته qabḍatahū one’s list) V to become
round, be or become ball-shaped,
globular, spherical, to curl up (in a lying
position); to conglomerate, form or gather
into a ball
كور kūr pl. اكوار akwār, اكور akwur,
كيران kīrān camel saddle; forge, furnace,
smelting furnace, bellows
كورة kūra pl. كور kuwar district, rural
district, small town, village, ball (= (كرة
كورى see below, alphabetically
كوارة kuwāra pl. كوائر kawā’ir2 beehive
كوروي kūrawī ball-shaped, globular,
spherical
مكور mikwar and مكورة mikwara turban
مكور mukawwar ball-shaped, globular,
round
كار 2 look up alphabetically
بالكورجة bi-l-kauraja in the bulk, wholesale, in
the lump
كوردون (Fr. cordon) kordōn pl. -āt cordon;
ribbon, braid, lace, trimming 845
كورس (Engl.) kōras chorus (also fig.); choir
كورسيه (Fr. corset) korsēh pl. كورسيھات
korsēhāt corset
كورك، كوريك (Turk. kürek) kūrēk forced labor
(eg.)
كورنيش (Fr. corniche) see كرنيش
كورريا kōriyā Korea
كوري kōrī Korean
كوريك see كريك and كورك
كوز kūz pl. اكواز akwāz, كيزان kīzān small jug of
clay or tin; mug, tankard │ كوز الذرة k. addura
(eg.) corncob
كوس 1 kūs pl. -āt small drum
كاس 2 kās pl. اكواس akwās = كأس
كويس 3 kuwayyis (eg.) nice, fine, pretty,
comely, handsome, beautiful
اكوس akwas2 more beautiful, prettier,
nicer
كوسا or كوسى kūsā (coll.; n. un. كوساة kūsāh, □
كوساية kūsāya) (eg., syr.) zucchini; see also
under كيس
كوسج kausaj swordfish (Xiphias gladius)
كوشة kūša pl. كوش kuwaš kiln (specif.,
limekiln)
كوع kū’ and كاع kā’ pl. اكواع akwā’, كيعان kī’ān
projecting carpal end of the radius,
wristbone; elbow (anat.); kū’ elbow,
angle, bend (of a pipe); curve, turn, bend
(of a road) │ كوع الماسورة kneepiece or
elbow of a pipe; لا يعرف الكوع من البوع
(ya’rifu) he doesn’t know his knee from
his elbow (proverbially of a stupid person)
كوف V to band together, throng together,
gather in a crowd
الكوفة al-kūfa Kufa (town in Iraq)
كوفي kūfī Kufic; Kufic writing; الكوفيون
the Kufic (school of) grammarians
كوفية kūfīya pl. -āt kaffiyeh, square
kerchief diagonally folded and worn under
the ‘iqāl as a headdress
كوك (Engl.) kōk coke
كوكب kaukab pl. كواكب kawākib2 star (also, fig.,
of screen, stage, etc.); leucoma, white
opacity in the cornea of the eye │ كوكب
سينمائي (sīnamā’ī) film star
كوكبة kaukaba star; group, troop, party;
(pl. كواكب kawākib2) (Syr.; mil.) squadron
(of armored units, of cavalry)
كوكبي kaukabī star-shaped, stelliform,
starlike, stellular, stellate, stellar; starry,
starred; astral
كوكتيل koktēl cocktail
كولان kaulān, kūlān papyrus (Cyperus papyrus;
bot.)
كولومبو kolombō Colombo (capital of Ceylon)
كولومبيا kolombiyā Colombia
كولونيا kolōniyā Cologne; Eau de Cologne
كوليرا (Fr. choléra) kōlīrā cholera
كوليس kūlīs pl. كواليس kawālīs2 side scene,
coulisse, backdrop │ وراء الكواليس behind
the scene, backstage (also fig.)
كوالين pl. of كالون , which see (alphabetically);
كواليني ibid.
كوم II to heap, pile up, stack up ( ھ s.th.) V to
be piled up; to pile up; to accumulate; to
sink to the ground, crumple, collapse in a
heap
كوم kaum pl. اكوام akwām, كيمان kīmān
heap, pile; hill; pl. كيمان kīmān esp.
garbage piles, refuse dump
كومة kauma, kūma pl. -āt, كوم kuwam,
اكوام akwām heap, pile; mass │ كومة الحطب
k. al-ḥaṭab pyre, stake
كوماندان kom6ndan commBndant, commander
846
كومساري see كمساري
كومسيوجي kūmisyōjī commission merchant
كومودينو (It. coomidino) komudīnū bedside
table
كوميديا kōmīdiyā comedy
كان (كون 1 ) kāna u (kaun, كيان kiyān, كينونة
kainīna) to be; to exist; to happen, occur,
take place; with acc. of the predicate: to
be s.th.; with foll. perf. denoting the
pluperfect; with foll. imperf. expressing
duration in the past = Engl. progressive
past: was doing (often corresponding to
Engl. “used to ...”, “would ...”); with ل: to
belong to, be one’s own ( كان له بيت he had
or owned a house); with ل and s.th.: to be
the right man for, be qualified for; with
من : to belong to, pertain to; with على : to be
incumbent on, be the duty of; with الى : to
be assigned to, be the lot or share of, be
left to, be due (s.o.) │ ما يكون foll. the
elative: على اتم ما يكون (atammi) in the moat
perfect manner conceivable, as perfect(ly)
as possible; اقوالھم اقرب ما تكون الى الصواب
(ṣawāb) what they said came quite close
to the truth: لم يكن ل (lam yakun) or ما كان ل
(with foll. subjunctive) he is (or was) not
the right man for, he was not capable of,
he was not in a position to ...; it is (or was)
not apt to ...; لم يكن ليصعب عليه ان (liyaṣ’
uba) it wouldn’t have been difficult
for him to …, there was no reason why he
couldn’t have ...; ما كان منه الا ان (or (لم يكن
(illā an) he had no other choice but to ...,
there was nothing for him to do but to ...;
he did no more than ...; ما كان له ان it is (or
was) impossible for him to ...; he is (or
was) unable to ...; اصبح في خبر كان aṣbaḥa
fī kabari k. to disappear, become dated,
belong to the past; كان وكان a popular form
of poem consisting of quatrains II to
make, create, produce, originate, bring
forth, bring into being, form, shape,
fashion ( ھ s.th.) V to be created, be
formed; to come into existence, form,
arise, develop; to consist, be composed, be
made up ( من of), be formed ( من by) X to
become lowly, humble, miserable; to
submit, yield, surrender, humble o.s.,
abase o.s., eat humble pie; to abandon o.s.,
give o.s. over ( الى to s.th.)
كون kaun pl. اكوان akwān being, esse;
existence; event, occurrence, incident;
الكون the existent, the existing, reality; the
world; the cosmos, the universe │ الكون
الأعلى (a‘lā) the Supreme Being, God; with
foll. genit. or suffix of the logical subject
and acc. of the predicate: the fact that s.o.
or s.th. is ..., لكونه مجنونا li-kaunihī
majnūnan because he is mad, مع كونه مجنونا
although he is mad
كوني kaunī of or relating to the universe
or cosmos, universal, cosmic, cosmo- (in
compounds) │ O الأشعة الكونية (aši‘‘a)
cosmic rays; نظام كوني cosmic system
كيان kiyān being, esse; existence;
essence, substance; nature
اليكون al-yakūn the sum total
مكان makān pl. امكنة amkina, اماكن
amākin2 place where one is or stands;
place, site, spot, location; passage (in a
book); locality, locale; seat, place (e.g., in
a railroad compartment); position,
standing, rank, dignity; importance,
consequence, weight; space (philos.);
presence; situation, conditions,
circumstances; مكان makāna in the place
of, in lieu of, instead of │ لو كنت مكانك lau
kuntu makānaka if I were in your place, if
I were you; مكانه makānahū on the spot, at
once; مكانك makānak stop! في كل مكان
everywhere; اخلى مكانا (aklā) to make
room; احتل مكانا مكينا (ihtalla) to have or
hold a strong, powerful position; ھو من
الشجاعة بمكان (šajā‘a) he is 847 extremely
brave; ذلك من الأھمية بمكان (ahammīyah) that
is of considerable importance; ھاته النظرية
من الضعف بمكان (naẓarīya, ḍu‘f) this theory
is rather weak; مكان الشيء من نفسه (nafsihī)
the importance of s.th. for s.o., the place
that s.th. has in s.o.’s mind; مكان الحديث site
of action, scene of the crime, locus delicti;
ظرف المكان ẓarf al-m. adverb of place
(gram.); اماكن وعرة (wa‘ra) difficult
terrain, rugged country
مكانة makāna pl. -āt place; location,
situation; position, office; standing,
authority, influence, rank, dignity │ مكانة
الصدر m. aṣ-ṣadr first place, precedence,
priority
مكاني makānī local
مكانية makānīya spatiality (philos.)
تكوين takwīn forming, shaping,
formation, creation, origination; (pl. تكاوين
takāwīn2) formation (of rock; geol.) │
جميل التكوين well-shaped, shapely; سفر
التكوين sifr at-t. the Genesis
تكون takawwun genesis, birth, nascency,
origin, incipience, rise, development;
formation
استكانة istikāna yielding, submission,
resignation, passivity
كائن kā’in being; existing, existent;
situated, located; a being, entity, creature,
creation; (pl. -āt) thing; s.th. existing, an
existent │ الكائن المطلق (muṭlaq) the
Absolute Being, God; الكائنات the created
things, the universe, the world; كائنا من كان
(man) whoever it may be; كائنا ما كان be it
what it may, whatever it may be
مكون mukawwin creator; -- mukawwan
made, created; consisting, composed,
made up ( من of), formed ( من by)
مستكين mustakīn humiliated, oppressed,
resigned, submissive
كيوان 2 look up alphabetically
كونتراتو (It. contratto) kontrātō agreement,
accord, treaty, contract
كونكرداتو (It. concordato) konkurdātō
settlement, composition (between debtor
and creditors)
كونياك konyāk cognac
□ مكوه for مكوى see كوى 1
كوى 1 kawā i ( كي kayy) to burn ( ھ s.th.); to sear
ھ) s.th.); to cauterize, treat with a cautery
ه) s.o.; med.); to brand ( ه s.o.); to bite, burn
(acid); to sting (scorpion); to press, iron (
ھ laundry, and the like) VIII to be burned,
be seared; to be cauterized; to be pressed,
be ironed; to burn o.s., burn one’s skin
كي kayy burning; cauterization, cautery;
pressing, ironing │ حجر الكي ḥajar al-k.
lunar caustic, silver nitrate; O الكي الكھربائي
(kahrabā’ī) diathermy
كية kayya a burn, a brand
كواء kawwā’ slanderer, calumniator;
ironer, presser
كواية kawwāya ironing woman, ironer
كوية kawīya (syr.) press, crease (in
trousers)
مكواة mikwāh and مكوى makwan pl. مكاو
makāwin flatiron; hot iron (for
cauterizing), cautery (med.) │ مكواة الشعر
m. aš-ša‘r curling iron
مكوى makwan ironing establishment
□ مكوجي makwajī ironer, presser;
laundryman
كاو kāwin caustic
كوى 2 kuwan see كوة
كي 1 kai, لكي li-kai so that, in order that, in order
to │ كي لا and لكي لا in order not to, lest
848
كيما kai-mā, لكيما li-kai-mā that, so that,
in order that, in order to
كي 2 kayy and كية kayya see كوى 1
كيت 1 kīt Indian dress material
كيت وكيت 2 kaita wa-kaita, kaiti wa-kaiti so and
so, such and such, thus and thus
كاد (كيد 1 ) kāda i (kaid, مكيدة makīda) to deceive,
dupe, outwit ( ه s.o.); to harm by artful
machinations ( ل s.o., s.th.), lay snares ( ل
for s.o.), plot s.o.’s ( ل) downfall, conspire
ل) against s.o.) III to deceive, dupe, outwit
ه) s.o.); to seek to double-cross ( ه s.o.)
كيد kaid pl. كياد kiyād ruse, artifice,
stratagem; craftiness, slyness, cunning,
subtlety; deception, deceit; artful plot;
trick, dodge
مكيدة makīda pl. مكايد makāyid2 ruse,
artifice, trick; smart action, clever
approach, shrewd policy; stratagem; plot,
conspiracy, machinations, schemes,
intrigues
كاد 2 look up alphabetically
كير kīr pl. اكيار akyār, كيران kīrān bellows
كيروسين (Engl.) kirūsīn kerosene
كاس (كيس ) kāsa i (kais, كياسة kiyāsa) to be
smart, clever, intelligent; to be nice, fine,
pretty, comely, handsome, attractive, chic
II to refine, make elegant
كيس kais smartness, cleverness,
intelligence; subtlety, finesse,
gracefulness, elegance
كيس kais m. and f., pl. اكياس akyās, كيسة
kiyasa, sack; bag; pouch; purse; Turkish
towel │ كيس الوسادة pillowcase, pillow slip;
كيس الصفراء k. aṣ-ṣafrā’ gall, bile; على كيسه
at his expense
كيس kayyis pl. اكياس akyās, كيسى kaisā,
f. كيسة kayyisa, pl. كياس kiyās sly, smart,
astute, shrewd, sagacious; adroit,
dexterous, skillful; nice, fine, elegant,
stylish, chic, attractive, comely, pretty,
handsome
كياسة kiyāsa adroitness, dexterity, skill;
cleverness, smartness, astuteness,
shrewdness, slyness, sagacity, subtlety,
finesse; courtesy, civility, politeness;
gracefulness, grace; elegance, chic,
stylishness
اكيس akyas2, f. كيسى kīsā and كوسى kūsā,
pl. كيس kīs smarter, slier; more skillful;
more stylish, more chic, nicer
مكيس mukayyis and □ مكيساتي
mukayyisātī (eg.) bath attendant, masseur
مكيس mukayyas shrewd, subtle, astute,
smart, sly
كيف II to form, shape, fashion, mold ( ھ s.th.);
to fit, condition, modify, conform, adjust,
adapt ( ھ s.th., نفسه o.s.); to regulate ( ھ
s.th.); to put in high spirits, exhilarate,
amuse, delight ( ھ s.o.); to intoxicate
slightly, dope, stupefy ( ه s.o.; of a
narcotic) Y to be shaped, be formed; to
assume a form, take on a shape; to adapt
o.s., adjust o.s., conform; to be in high
spirits, be cheerful, gay; to amuse o.s.,
enjoy o.s., have a good time, have fun; to
revel; to be slightly intoxicated, be tipsy,
fuddled; to smoke (tobacco, etc.)
كيف kaifa (interrogative and
exclamatory particle) how? how ...! │ كيف
حالك (ḥāluka) how are you? كيف لا و ... why
shouldn’t it be so since ...! فكيف ب just
imagine how much more (or less) ...! and
how much more ...! and how much less
…!
كيفما kaifamā however, howsoever │
كيفما كان الحال whatever the case may be, be
that as it may; in any case, at any rate
كيف kaif state, condition; mood, humor,
state of mind, frame of mind; pleasure,
delight, well-being, good humor, 849 high
spirits; discretion, option. will; (pl. كيوف
kuyūf) narcotic, opiate │ على كيفك at your
discretion, as you please; as you wish, as
you like; اصحاب الكيف bons vivants,
epicures
كيفي kaifī arbitrary, discretionary,
optional; qualitative
كيفية kaifīya manner, mode, fashion;
property, quality; nature, state, condition;
particulars, particular circumstances (e.g.,
of an event) │ كيفية العمل k. al-‘amal
operation (e.g., of a machine); كيفية
الاستعمال directions for use
تكييف takyīf forming, shaping,
fashioning; formation; a.daptation,
adjustment, conditioning, modification;
regulation; descriptive designation,
qualification; air conditioning, = تكييف
الھواء t. al-hawā’
تكيف takayyuf adaptation, adjustment,
conformity
مكيفة mukayyifa, مكيفة الھواء m. al-hawā’
pl. -āt air-conditioning installation, air
conditioner
مكيفات mukayyifāt narcotics, opiates
كيكة 1 kaika pl. كياكي kayākī egg
كيكة 2 kīka, كيكا kīkā (eg.) hide-and-seek
كال (كيل ) kāla i (kail, مكال makāl, مكيل makīl) to
measure ( ھ s.th.); to weigh ( ھ s.th.); to
compare by measuring ( ب ھ s.th. with),
measure s.th. ( ھ ) by the standard of ( ;(ب
to measure out, mete out, allot, apportion (
ل ھ s.th. to s.o.) │ كال له الشتائم to heap
abuse on s.o.; كال له اللطمات (laṭamāt) to
give s.o. a beating, spank, thrash s.o. II to
measure ( ھ s.th.) III to return like for like,
repay in kind ( ه to s.o.)
كيل kail pl. اكيال akyāl measure; dry
measure for grain; holding capacity
كيلة kaila pl. -āt kilah, a dry measure
(Eg. = 16.72 l; Pal. = 361)
كيلي kailī and مكيل makīl
(volumetrically) measurable,
volumetric(al)
كيال kayyāl corn measurer; one who
metes out, who determines the right
measure, muter, lord
مكيال mikyāl pl. مكاييل makāyīl2 and مكيل
mikyal, مكيلة mikyala pl. مكايل makāyil2
measure; dry measure for grain │ الموازين
والمكاييل the weights and measures
كيلو kīlō and كيلوجرام kilogrām pl. -āt kilogram
كيلوسيكل (Fr. kilocycle) kīlōsikl pl. -āt kilocycle
(radio)
كيلومتر kīlōmitr pl. -āt kilometer
كيلوواط kīlōwāṭ kilowatt
كيلون = كالون look up alphabetically
كيما kai-mā see كي 1
كيموس kaimūs gastric juice
كيمياء kīmiyā’ chemistry; alchemy │ الكيمياء
الاحيائية (aḥyā’īya) biochemistry; كيمياء التربة
k. at-turba agricultural chemistry
كيمي kīmī chemical
كيميائي kīmiyā’ī, كيماوي kīmāwī
chemical; -- (pl. -ūn) chemist; alchemist;
كيماويات kīmāwīyāt chemicals
كين) كان) kāna i (kain) to humble o.s., abase
o.s., eat humble pie, submit, resign o.s. X
do.
كينا kīnā quinine │ خشب الكينا kašab al-k.
cinchona, china bark, Peruvian bark
كينين kīnīn quinine
كيھك kiyahk, kīhak the fourth month of the
Coptic year
كيوان kaiwān the planet Saturn
كيوبيد (Engl.) kiyūbīd Cupid 850
ل
ل 1 la (intensifying particle) truly, verily;
certainly, surely; frequently after ان inna,
introducing the predicate: ان ربي لسميع الدعاء
inna rabbī la-samī’ d-du’ā’ truly, my
Lord hears the prayer; also as a correlative
of لو lau and لولا lau-lā: لو كنت تفعل ھذا لكان
انفع (la-kāna anfa’a) if you did this it
would be more useful; لولا تاب لھلك lau-lā
tāba la-halaka if he had not repented he
would have perished; (particle of oath)
لعمرك la-’amruka by your life!
ل 2 li 1. (prep.) for; on behalf of, in
favor of; to (of the dative); because of; for
the sake of; due to, owing to; for, for the
purpose of; at the time of, when, as; by
(designating the author or originator);
occasionally substituting for الى ; as to ل
paraphrasing the genit. and acc. see
grammar │ لي عليه مال he owes me money;
ما له وما علبه his right and his duty; his
credit and his debit, his assets and his
liabilities; له ان he has a right to ..., he is
entitled to ..., he may ...; it is possible for
him to ..., he is able to ..., he can ...; ليس لي
ان I have no right to ... , it does not
behoove me to ...; لك ھذا or لك ذلك you can
have that! it’s up to you; it’s all right with
me! all right! O.K.! agreed! ھل لك في or الك
في would you like ...? do you want ...? do
you feel like ...? قرأت له كتابا I read a book
by him, I read one of his books; لا تدوم له
حال (tadūmu) no state is of any
permanence with him, he is never the
same for a very long time قاموا لمعاونتنا (limu’āwanatinā)
they set out in our support;
لسبع ليال خلون من شعبان li-sab’i layālin
kalauna min ša’bāna when seven nights
of Shaban had passed; للمرة الأولى li-lmarrati
l-ūlā for the first time; لأول وھلة liawwali
wahlatin at first sight, at once; اخوه
لأبيه وأمه li-abīhi wa-ummihī his brother on
the paternal and maternal side, his
brother-german, his full brother 2. (conj.
with the subjunctive) that, so that, in order
that, in order to; (with apoc.) expressing
an order. an invitation: ليكتب li-yaktub he
shall write, let him write (with preceding و
wa or ف fa contracted to wal- ... or fal ...
with elision of the i)
لأجل li-ajli (with foll. genit.) because of,
on account of, for
لأن li-an (conj. with the subjunctive)
that, so that, in order that, in order to;
(with لا) لئلا li-allā in order not to, lest
لأن li-anna (conj.) on the grounds that;
because; for
لذلك li-dālika therefore, hence, that is
why, for that reason
لكي li-kai and لكيما li-kai-mā (conj. with
the subjunctive) that, so that, in order that,
in order to
لما li-mā (shortened لم li-mā) why?
wherefore? for what reason? لماذا li-mā-dā
why (on earth)?
لھذا li-hādā therefore, hence, that is
why, for that reason
لا lā (particle) not, no! with apoc. expressing
negative imperative: لا تقل lā taqul don’t
say! with indef. acc. expressing a general
negation; there is not, there is no ..., e.g., لا
اله الا لله lā ilāha illa llāh there is no god
but Allah; لا خير فيه (kaira) there is no
good in it, it’s no good; لا بد منه (budda)
there is no escape from it, it is inevitable;
لا جرم lā jarama certainly, surely; لا شك
٨٥١ lā šakka no doubt, doubtless; لا سيما lā
siyyamā especially. particularly; الا a-lā
see أ؛ بلا bi-lā without; ولا wa-lā (with
preceding neg.) nor, ... either; not even,
also حتى ولا ḥattā wa-lā, e.g., لم يعطني حتى
ولا قرشا (lam yu‘ṭinī, qiršan) he did not
give me even a piaster, he did not give me
as much as a piaster; لا – ولا neither -- nor
لا ابالية lā-ubālīya indifferent attitude,
indifference
لا أدرية lā-adrīya skepticism;
agnosticism
اللا أنا al-lā-anā the nonego (philos.)
لا أنانية lā-anānīya selflessness,
unselfishness
لا جنسية lā-jinsīya statelessness, being
without nationality
لا ديني lā-dīnī antireligious, irreligious,
without religion
لا دينية lā-dīnīya irreligion, godlessness
لا سامي lā-sāmī anti-Semitic; anti-
Semite
لا سامية lā-sāmīya anti-Semitism
لا سلكي lā-silkī wireless, radio (adj.);
radio, broadcasting; radio message │ اشارة
لا سلكية (išāra) radio message
اللاشعور al-lā-šu‘ūr the unconscious,
unconscious mind, unconsciousness
لاشعوري lā-šu‘ūrī unconscious, unaware
لا شيء lā-šai’ nothing, nonentity, nil
لا شيئية lā-šai’īya nonexistence,
nothingness; nullity, nihility
لامبالاة lā-mubālāh and لامبالية lāmubālīya
indifferent attitude, indifference
لامركزية lā-markazīya decentralization
لامسؤولية lā-mas’ūlīya irresponsibility
لا نظام lā-niẓām lack of system,
confusion
اللانھاية al-lā-nihāya the infinite
لانھائي lā-nihā’ī infinite
اللاتين al-lātīn the (ancient) Latins
لاتيني lātīnī Latin │ الحي اللاتيني (ḥayy)
the “Quartier latin” (in Paris)
اللاتينية al-lātīnīya the Latin language,
Latin
لادن lādan, lādin laudanum
لازورد lāzuward, lāzaward lapis lazuli; azure
لازوردي lāzuwardī azure-blue, azure,
sky-blue, cerulean
لازوردية lāzuwardīya azure, blue of the
sky
لاسيه (Fr. lacet) lāsēh lace, cord
لأك 1 IV to send as a messenger ( الى ه s.o. to)
ملأك mal’ak and ملك malak pl. ملائك
malā’ik ملائكة , 2 malā’ika angel; messenger,
envoy
ملائكي malā’ikī angelic(al); heavenly
لائكي 2 look up alphabetically
لاكن lākin, lākinna however, yet, but
لألأ la’la’a ( لألأة la’la’a) to shine, flash, glitter,
glisten, sparkle, gleam, shimmer,
glimmer, beam, radiate; to wag ( بذنبه bidanabihī
the tail) II tala’la’a to shine,
glitter, glisten, sparkle, gleam, shimmer,
glimmer, beam, radiate
لألأة la’la’a shine, glow, brightness,
brilliancy, radiance, flash, glitter, twinkle
لألاء la’lā’ glitter, flash; light, glow,
gleam; perfect joy, unruffled gaiety;
dealer in pearls
لؤلؤ lu’lu’ (coll.; n. un. ة) pl.: لآلي la’ālī2
pearls │ زھر اللؤلؤ zahr al-l. daisy; عرق
اللؤلؤ ‘irq al-l. mother-of-pearl, nacre
لؤلؤى lu’lu’ī pearly; pearl-colored,
whitish │ شعير لؤلؤي pearl barley 852
تلألؤ tala’lu’ shining, radiance,
brilliancy
متلألئ mutala’li’ shimmering,
glistening, glittering, flashing, sparkling
لأم la’ama a (la’m) to dress, bandage ( ھ a
wound); to repair, mend ( ھ s.th.); to
solder, weld; -- لؤم la’uma (lu’m, لآمة
la’āma, ملأمة mal’ama) to be ignoble,
lowly (of character and birth); to be base,
mean, vile, evil, wicked III to agree ( ه
with s.o.); to suit, fit (garment; ه s.o.); to
be adequate, appropriate ( ھ to s.th.), be
suitable, fit, proper, convenient, favorable,
propitious ( ھ for s.th.); to be adapted ( ھto),
be in harmony ( ھ with), match ( ھ
s.th.); to agree (climate, food; ه with s.o.),
be wholesome (climate, air, food; ه for
s.o.); to bring about a reconciliation, make
peace ( بين between), reconcile ( بين – و s.o.
with); to make consistent or congruous,
reconcile, harmonize, bring into harmony
بين) different things) IV to act ignobly,
behave shabbily VI to be mended, be
repaired, be corrected; to go well ( مع
with); to act meanly VIII to be mended, be
repaired, be corrected; to be joined, be
connected, be patched up, be soldered, be
welded; to match, fit together, harmonize,
be in harmony, agree, go together, be
congruous, conformable, consistent; to be
tuned or geared to each other (fig.); to
unite, combine; to cohere, stick together;
to heal, close (wound); to gather,
assemble, convene (persons); to meet
(committee, congress, council, etc.)
لأم la’m dressing, bandaging (of a
wound); joining, junction, connection;
repair
لؤم lu’m ignoble mind, baseness,
meanness, vileness, wickedness;
niggardliness, miserliness; sordidness;
iniquity
لئم li’m peace; concord, agreement,
union, unity, unanimity; conformity,
consistency, harmony
لأمة la’ma cuirass, pair of cuirasses
لئيم la’īm pl. لئام li’ām, لؤماء lu’amā’,
لؤمان lu’mān, ignoble, lowly, low, base,
mean, evil, vile, wicked, depraved; sordid,
filthy, dirty; niggardly, miserly
ملاءمة mulā’ama adequacy,
appropriateness, properness, suitability,
fitness; peacemaking, (re)conciliation;
concord, union, agreement, harmony
ملائم mulā’im adapted, suited,
appropriate ( ل to), suitable, fit, proper,
convenient, favorable, propitious ( ل for);
agreeing, harmonizing, in conformity,
consistent ( ل with)
لام lām name of the letter ل
لامي lāmī lām-shaped, resembling the
letter ل
لاما lāmā llama (zool.)
لانش (Engl.) lanš pl. -āt launch, motorboat,
small steamer
لاھاي lāhāy The Hague (city in SW
Netherlands)
لاھوت lāhūt godhead, deity; divine nature,
divinity │ علم اللاھوت ‘ilm al-l. theology
لاھوتي lāhūtī theological; theologian
اللاھوتية al-lāhūtīya theology
لاھور lāhūr2 Lahore (city in W Pakistan)
لأواء la’wā’ 2 severe distress, hardship
لأي la’y slowness, tardiness; tediousness,
tiresomeness │ بعد لأي after great
difficulties, in the end, finally, after all
لائكي (from Fr. laïque) lā’ikī layman; secular,
laic, lay
لائكية lā’ikīya laicism 853
لب labba u (labb) to remain, abide, stay
ب) in a place); -- (1st pers. perf. labibtu) a
لبب) labab) and (1st pers. perf. labubtu) u (
لبابة labāba) to be sensible, reasonable,
intelligent II to kernel, ripen into kernels,
produce kernels (grain, nuts) V to gird o.s.
prepare o.s. ( ل for)
لب lubb pl. لبوب lubūb kernels, core (of
fruits); the innermost, marrow, pith; core,
gist, essence; prime, best part; -- (pl. الباب
albāb) heart; mind, intellect, reason,
understanding
لبة labba pl. -āt upper part of the chest;
throat of an animal, spot where its throat
is slit in slaughtering
لبة libba (eg.) golden necklace
لبب labab pl. الباب albāb upper part of
the chest; throat of an animal, spot where
its throat is slit in slaughtering; breast
collar (of a horse’s harness); martingale
لباب lubāb marrow, pith, core,
quintessence, gist, prime, beet part │ لباب
الخشب l. kašab cellulose
لبيب labīb pl. الباء alibbā’ understanding,
reasonable, sensible, intelligent
تلبيب talbīb pl. تلابيب talābīb2 collar │
اخذ بتلابيبه to collar s.o., seize s.o. by the
collar
لبؤة labu’a pl. -āt lioness
لبتة labta carp (zool.)
لبث labita a (labt, lubt, labat, لباث lubāt) to
hesitate, tarry, linger; to abide, remain,
stay ( ب in a place); (with imperf.) to
persist in an activity, keep doing s.th. │ ما
لبث (لم يلبث) أن (حتى ) it did not take long
before he …, presently he ..., he lost no
time in …; لبث يفعله he did it for a while V
to hesitate, tarry, linger; to abide, remain,
stay
لبث labt, lubt, labat hesitation, tarrying,
delay; stay, sojourn
لبثة lubta short delay, brief respite;
pause; temporary stay or stop, stopover
لبخ labk, labak (coll.; n. un. ة) a variety of
acacia (Mimosa lebbec L.), also lebbek
tree (Albizzia lebbek Bth.; bot.)
لبخة labka pl. labakāt cataplasm,
poultice; soft mass, mush; emollient
plaster, emollient
لبيخ labīk fleshy, corpulent
لبد labada u ( لبد lubūd) to stick, adhere, cling (
ب to s.th.), get stuck ( ب on); to abide,
remain, stay ( ب in a place) II to cause to
adhere and mat together, to felt, mat ( ھ
wool); to line with felt ( ھ s.th.); to beat
down, weigh down ( ھ s.th., e.g., the hail
-- grass); to full ( ھ s.th.) IV to cling
firmly, adhere, stick ( ب to s.th.) V do.; to
stick together; to become felted, matted,
entangled, interwoven; to be compressed;
to become clouded; to become overcast (
بالغيوم with clouds; sky); to become
gloomy (face)
لبد libd pl. لبود lubūd, الباد albād felt │
لبود من الغمائم thick masses of clouds
لبد labad wool
لبد labid coherent; compact
لبد lubad the seventh vulture of Luqmān
(whose death ended Luqmān’s life;
metaphor of longevity)
لبدة libda pl. لبد libad mane (of a lion);
(eg.) skullcap of felt, worn under or
without a tarboosh; felt hat (of the
dervishes)
لبدة lubda pl. لبد lubad matted and
pressed wool or hair, felt
لباد labbād feltmaker; felt
لبادة lubbāda pl. -āt horse blanket,
saddle blanket; -- (pl. لبابيد labābīd 2) felt
cap 854
ملبد mulabbad: ملبد بالغيوم (bi-l-guyūm)
overcast, heavily clouded (sky)
متلبد mutalabbid: متلبد بالغيوم overcast,
heavily clouded (sky)
لبس labisa a (lubs) to put on, wear ( ھ a dress,
garment); to dress ( ھ in), clothe o.s. garb
o.s. ( ھ in or with) II to dress ( ھ ه s.o. in),
clothe, garb, attire ( ھ ه s.o. with); to cover,
envelop, overlay, coat ( ب ھ s.th. with.
layer); to drape, line, face, case ( ب ھ s.th.
with); to inlay (e.g., wood with ivory); to
suffuse ( ه s.o., e.g., pallor), seize ( ه s.o.,
e.g., so tremor); to make obscure, unclear,
abstruse, involved, complicated ( على ھ
s.th. for s.o.); to deceive, dupe ( على s.o.)
III to be on intimate terms, associate
closely, hobnob ( ه with s.o.); to be in close
contact ( ھ، ه with s.o., with s.th.); to
surround ( ه s.o.; environment, milieu,
conditions) IV to dress ( ھ ه s.o. in), clothe,
garb, attire ( ھ ه s.o. with); to drape,
envelop, coat, overlay, cover, face, line,
case ( ھ s.th.) V to dress, get dressed ( ب
in), clothe o.s. ( ب in or with); to be
dressed, clad, attired; to be covered ( ب
with), be enveloped, wrapped ( ب in); to
get involved ( ب in s.th.), be drown ( ب into
s.th.); to meddle, bother ( ب with), go into
s.th. ( ب); to be obscure, incomprehensible,
dubious, equivocal, ambiguous ( على for
s.o.) VIII to be obscure, dubious,
equivocal, ambiguous ( على for s.o.); to get
mixed up ( ب with); to mistake ( ھ s.th., ب
for)
لبس labs, lubs and لبسة lubsa tangle,
muddle, confusion, intricacy, obscurity,
uncertainty, abstruseness, ambiguity │ كان
في لبس من امره to be uncertain about s.o.; to
have doubts about s.o.
لبس libs pl. لبوس lubūs clothes, clothing,
dress, apparel; costume
لبسة libsa manner or style of dressing,
costume
لباس libās pl. -āl, البسة albisa clothes,
clothing; costume; apparel; garment, robe,
dress; (eg., syr.) (men’s) drawers │ لباس
الرأس l. ar-ra’s headdress, headgear; لباس
التقوى l. at-taqwā decency, modesty; لباس
رسمي (rasmī) and لباس عسكري (‘askarī)
uniform; لباس السھرة l. as-sahra evening
gown, evening clothes, formal dress; لباس
وطني (waṭanī) national costume; البسة جاھزة
ready-made clothes
لبيس labīs worn; worn clothes,
secondhand clothes; Nile carp (Cyprinus
niloticus: zool.)
لبوس labūs clothing, clothes;
suppository (med.) │ لبوس رسمي (rasmī)
uniform
ملبس malbas pl. ملابس malābis2 garment,
dress, robe, apparel, suit; pl. also:
clothing, clothes, costume │ O ملبس الوقاية
protective clothes; ملابس التشريفة dress
uniform; ملابس داخلية وخارجية (dākilīya wakārijīya)
underwear and outer clothes;
ملابس رسمية (rasmīya) livery, uniform; O
ملابس الميدان m. al-maidān field uniform;
محل الملابس maḥall al-m. ready-madeclothes
store
تلبيس talbīs clothing, dressing, garbing;
draping, lining, facing, casing; overlaying,
coating; wall facing, wall plaster,
paneling; inlay work; deception, deceit,
fraud
تلبيسة talbīsa suppository (med.)
ملابسة mulābasa intercourse, intimate
association, close relations; ملابسات
relations, connections; concomitants,
accompanying phenomena; surrounding
conditions, environment
الباس ilbās clothing, dressing, garbing
تلبس talabbus: قضايا التلبس qaḍāyā t-t.
(jur.) cases of “flagrante delicto”, criminal
cases in which the perpetrator was caught
in the act
التباس iltibās confusion, tangle,
intricacy, obscurity, ambiguity,
dubiousness, 855 doubt │ رفع الالتباس raf‘
al-ilt. correction, rectification,
clarification; احاط به الالتباس (aḥāṭa) to be
wrapped in obscurity, be completely
ambiguous
ملبوس malbūs worn, used (clothes);
(eg.) possessed, in a state of frenzy or
religious ecstasy; pl. ملبوسات articles of
clothing, clothes
ملبس mulabbas involved, intricate,
obscure, dubious; inlaid, coated,
incrusted; sugar-coated, candied; (pl. -āt)
bonbon, candy; dragée
متلبس mutalabbis: متلبسا بالجريمة (he was
caught, and the like) redhanded, in the act,
flagrante delicto
ملتبس multabis involved, intricate,
ambiguous, equivocal; dubious, doubtful,
uncertain, unclear
لبط labaṭa II (labṭ): لبط به الأرض (arḍ) to throw
s.o. to the ground, fell s.o.; -- i to kick; to
gallop about (animal)
لبق labaqa II ( لباقة labāqa) to be clever, slick,
adroit, skilled, skillful, versatile, suave,
elegant, have refined manners; -- labiqa a
(labaq) do.; to fit, suit, become (clothes; ب
s.o.) II to fit, adapt, adjust ( ھ s.th.)
لبق labaq cleverness, smartness,
slyness, subtlety; skill, adroitness,
slickness, ingenuity; seemliness,
propriety, decency, decorum
لباقة labāqa cleverness, smartness,
slyness, subtlety; skill, adroitness,
slickness, ingenuity; seemliness,
propriety, decency, decorum; elegance,
refined manners, suavity, gracefulness
لبق labiq clever, smart, sly, subtle;
slick, adroit, skilled, skillful, versatile;
elegant, suave, of refined manners; fitting,
proper, becoming, seemly
لبيق labīq clever, smart, sly, subtle;
skillful, adroit; elegant, suave, refined
لبك labaka u (labk) and II to mix. Mingle,
intermix ( ھ s.th.); to confuse, mix up,
muddle, jumble ( ھ s.th.); -- labika a, V
and VIII to get confused, be thrown into
disorder, be disarranged, become
disorganized
لبك labk and لبكة labka mixture;
confusion, muddle, jumble
لبيك see لبي
لبلب lablaba to fondle, cares ( ب her child;
mother)
لبلب lablab, lublub affectionate, tender
لبلاب lablāb English ivy (Hedera helix;
bot.); (eg.) lablab, hyacynth bean
(Dolichoe lablab; bot.)
لبلوب lablūb (eg.) pl. لباليب labālīb2
young shoot, sprout, vine
لبن II to make brick VIII to suck milk
لبن libn, labin (coll.) unburnt brick(s),
adobes
لبنة labina (n. un.) pl. -āt brick, adobe
لبن laban pl. البان albān, لبان libān milk;
(syr.) leban, coagulated sour milk; pl. البان
dairy products, milk products │ لبن الخض
l. al-kaḍḍ buttermilk; شرش اللبن širš al-l.
whey; O ميزان اللبن mīzān al-l. lactoscope;
فرع الألبان far‘ al-a. dairy department
لبني labanī lactic, milk (adj.); milky,
milklike, lacteous, lacteal
لبنية labanīya a dish prepared of milk
لبنات labanāt lactate │ لبنات الجير l. al-jīr
calcium lactate
لبان labān breast
لبان lubān frankincense, olibanum │ لبان
جاوي (jāwī) benzoin; لبان ذكر dakar (eg.)
olibanum, oriental frankincense (resin of
Boswellia carteri; bot.); لبان شامي (eg.) a
pitchy resin used as a depilatory 856
(resin of Pinus Brutia Ten.); لبان العذراء
al-‘adrā’ magnesia, Epsom salts, bitter
salt
لبان libān sucking, nursing; (eg.)
towline
لبان labbān brickmaker; milkman
لبانة lubāna pl. -āt, لبان lubān wish,
desire, object, aim, goal, end; business,
undertaking, enterprise
لبانة libāna selling or production of milk
products, dairy
لبنة labina, لبون labūn, لبونة labūna pl.
لبان libān, لبن lubn, lubun, لبائن labā’in
milk, giving milk │ حيوان لبون (ḥayawān)
mammal
لبنى lubnā storax tree
لبنان lubnān2 Lebanon
لبناني lubnānī Lebanese (pl. -ūn) a
Lebanese
ملبن malban a sweet made of
cornstarch, sugar, mastic and pistachios
ملبنة malbana dairy
لبوة labwa pl. labawāt lioness
لبى II to follow, obey ( ھ a call, an invitation),
respond, accede ( ھ to), comply ( ھ with a
request), carry out ( ھ an order) │ لبى نداء
ربه (nidaā’a rabbihī) to be called away by
the Lord, pass away
لبيك labbaika here I am! at your service!
تلبية talbiya following, obeying,
observance, accedence, response,
compliance │ تلبية ل (talbiyatan) in
compliance with; تلبية لدعوته (li-da‘watihī)
upon his invitation
لبيريا libēriyā Liberia
لت latta u (latt) to pound, bray, crush ( ھ s.th.);
to mix with water ( ھ flour); to knead ( ھ
dough); to roll ( ب s.th. in), coat ( ب ھ s.th.
with); (eg.) to prattle, chatter │ لت وعجن في
مسألة (wa-‘ajana, mas’ala) not to tire of
raising a problem anew, discuss a question
back and forth
لت latt (eg.) idle talk, prattle
لتات lattāt (eg.) prattler, chatterbox,
windbag
لتر litr pl. -āt liter
لتموس (Engl.) litmūs litmus
لتوانيا lituwāniyā Lithuania
التي allatī see الذي (alphabetically)
لثة see لثو
لثغ latiga a (latag) to pronounce defectively
(esp. the lingual r), lisp ( ث for لثغ │ ( س
بالسين (sīn) to lisp the s
لثغة lutga defective pronunciation,
lisping
الثغ altag2, f. لثغاء latgā’2, pl. لثغ lutg
having a speech defect, lisping
لثم latama i (latm) to kiss ( ھ s.th.); to strike,
hit, wound, injure ( ھ s.th.) II to veil ( ھ the
face) with the li/dm (q.v.); to veil, cover (
ھ s.th.) V and VIII to veil one’s face; to
cover o.s., wrap o.s. up, muffle o.s.
لثمة latma kiss
لثام litām veil (covering the lower part
of the face to the eyes); cover, wrapping
ملثم mutallam and متلثم mutalattim veiled
لثة lita pl. -āt, لثى litan gums
لثوي litawī gingival, alveolar, of or
pertaining to the gums │ الحروف اللثوية the
interdental sounde ث، ذ and ظ; (phon.)
لج lajja (1st pers. perf. lajijtu) a and (1st pers.
perf. lajajtu) i ( لجج lajaj, لجاج lajāj, لجاجة
lajāja) to be stubborn, obstinate,
unyielding, relentless; to persist, persevere
في) in); to insist ( في on); to continue ( في
s.th.), keep doing s.th. ( في ); to importune,
857 pester, trouble, bother, inconvenience
على) s.o.); to bear down ( ب on s.o.), hit
hard, wear out, weaken, exhaust ( ب s.o.,
e.g., battle), torment, harass ( ب s.o., e.g.,
hunger) III to argue or dispute obstinately
ه) with s.o.) VIII to be noisy, uproarious,
tumultuous; to roar, storm, rage
لج lujj and لجة lujja pl. لجج lujaj, لجاج
lijāj depth of the sea; gulf, abyss, chum,
depth
لجي lujjī fathomless, of tremendous
depth (sea)
لجة lajja clamor, din, noise, hubbub
لجاجة lajāja stickling, disputatiousness;
obstinacy, stubbornness; insistence,
persistence
لجوج lajūj and لاج lājj obstinate,
stubborn, unyielding, relentless, insistent,
troublesome, importunate, obtrusive,
officious
لجأ laja’a a ( لجء laj’, لجوء lujū’) and لجئ laji’a
a ( لجأ laja’) to take refuge ( الى in), resort,
have recourse ( الى to), fall back ( الى on); to
seek information ( الى from), refer ( الى to) II
to coerce, force, compel ( الى ه s.o. to) IV
do.; to shelter, protect, guard ( ه s.o.); to
entrust, commit ( امره الى amrahū one’s
cause, one’s affairs to) VIII to flee ( الى to),
take refuge ( الى in), resort, have recourse (
الى to)
ملجأ malja’ pl. ملاجئ malāji’2 (place of)
refuge, retreat; shelter; sanctuary, asylum;
home; base; pillbox, bunker, dugout │ ملجأ
الأطفال day nursery, nursery school,
children’s home; ملجأ الأيتام orphanage; ملجأ
الشيوخ home for the aged; ملجأ العميان m.
al-‘umyān institution for the blind; ملجأ
العجزة m. al-‘ajaza infirmary; O ملجأ مضاد
للغارات الجوية (muḍādd, jawwīya) air-raid
shelter
التجاء iltijā’ resorting, recourse ( الى to),
seeking refuge ( الى in, with)
لاجئ lāji’ one seeking refuge; refugee;
emigrant; inmate of an asylum
ملتجئ multaji’ one seeking refuge, a
refugee
لجب lajab noise, uproar, tumult; huge,
boisterous army
لجب lajib uproarious, tumultuous,
noisy, clamorous
لجلج lajlaja and II talajlaja to repeat words`in
speaking; to stammer, stutter
لجلجة lajlaja stutter; stammering,
stammer
لجلاج lajlāj stutterer, stammerer
ملجلج mulajlaj constantly repeated,
reiterated
لجم lajama u (lajm) to sew ( ھ s.th.) II and IV
to bridle, rein in ( ھ a horse); to restrain,
curb, hold down, silence ( ه s.o.); to put the
bridle ( ه on s.o.) VIII to be bridled, be
curbed, be tamed, be harnessed (e.g.,
energies)
لجام liillm pl. الجمة aljima, لجم lujum
bridle, rein
ملجوم maljūm and ملجم muljam bridled,
curbed, harnessed
لجن lajina a (lajn) to cling, adhere, stick ( ب to)
لجنة lajna pl. -āt, لجان lijān, لجن lijan
board, council, commission, committee │
لجنة التحقيق investigating committee; لجنة
ادارية (idārīya) administrative board,
committee of management; لجنة الامتحان
board of examiners, examination board;
لجنة الانضباط disciplinary board; لجنة تنفيذية
(tanfīdīya) executive committee; لجنة صلحية
(ṣulḥīya) arbitration committee, board of
arbitration; لجنة فرعية (far‘īya)
subcommittee; لجنة قارة (مستديمة ) (qārra,
mustadīma) standing committee, 858
permanent committee; لجنة المراقبة l. almūrāqaba
board of directors
لجين lujain silver
لجيني lujainī silvery
لح laḥḥa (laḥḥ) to be close
(relationship) IV to implore, beseech,
request with urgency; to insist ( في on); to
be سet, importune, pester, harass ( على
s.o.); to urge, press ( ب or في على s.o. to do
s.th.)
لحح laḥiḥ and لاح close, narrow
لحوح laḥūḥ obstinate, stubborn,
persistent
ملحاح milḥāḥ obstinate, stubborn,
persistent; importunate, obtrusive
الحاح ilḥāḥ urging, pressing, urgency,
insistence; emphasis; urgent solicitation,
earnest request │ بإلحاح or في إلحاح
insistently, earnestly, urgently
ملح muliḥḥ pressing, urgent; persistent;
insistent, emphatic; importunate, obtrusive
لاحب lāḥib open, passable (road); o electrode
لحج laḥaj2 Lahej (sultanate and city in the
Aden Protectorate)
لحد laḥada a (laḥd) to dig a grave; to bury,
inter ( ه s.o.); to deviate from the right
course, digress from the straight path; to
abandon one’s faith, apostatize, become a
heretic; to lean, incline, tend ( الى to) IV =
I; VIII to deviate, digress; to abandon
one’s faith, apostatize, become a heretic or
unbeliever; to be inclined, lean, incline,
tend ( الى to)
لحد laḥd pl. لحود luḥūd, ألحاد alḥād grave,
tomb; (ancient meaning: charnel vault
with a niche for the corpse in the lateral
wall)
لحاد laḥḥād gravedigger
إلحاد ilḥād apostasy; heterodoxy, heresy
إلحادي ilḥādī of or pertaining to
godlessness
ملحد mulḥid heretical, unbelieving; --
(pl. -ūn, ملاحدة malāḥida) apostate,
renegade; heretic
لحس laḥasa a (laḥs) to eat away ( ھ
s.th., esp. a moth the wool), devour ( ھ
s.th.); -- laḥisa a (laḥs, لحسة laḥsa, luḥsa,
ملحس malḥas) to lick ( ھ s.th.); to lick up,
lap up, lick out ( ھ s.th.)
ملحوس malḥūs licked; (eg.) imbecilic
لحظ laḥaẓa a (laḥẓ, لحظان laḥaẓān) to regard,
view, eye ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), look ( ھ، ه at); to
notice, see, perceive, observe ( ھ s.th., ان
that) III to regard, view, eye ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), look ( ھ، ه at); to see, behold ( ه s.o.),
catch light ( ه of); to notice, perceive,
observe ( ان that, ھ s.th.); to remark, say,
make the remark ( ان that); to consider,
bear in mind, observe, heed, take into
consideration ( ھ s.th.); to pay attention ( ھ
to); to supervise, superintend ( ھ s.th.) │
لاحظ عليه شيئا to observe or notice s.th. in
s.o.; مما يلاحظ ان mimmā yulāḥaẓu anna it
will be noticed that ..., obviously ...,
evidently ...
لحظ laḥẓ pl. الحاظ alḥāẓ look, glance
لحظة laḥẓa pl. laḥaẓāt (quick or casual)
look, glance, glimpse; moment, instant │
اللحظة الراھنة the present moment, the
immediate present; في لحظة in a moment,
instantly; في ھذه اللحظة at that moment;
لحظات laḥaẓātin for a few moments
لحظتئذ laḥẓata’idin at that moment
ملاحظة mulāḥaẓa pl. -āt seeing,
noticing, perception; observation; remark,
comment, casual statement, note;
observance, heed, notice, attention,
consideration; supervision,
superintendence, surveillance, control │
ذو ملاحظة considerable, notable 859
لاحظة lāḥẓa pl. لواحظ lawāḥiz2 eye; look,
glance
ملحوظ malḥūẓ noted, noteworthy,
remarkable
ملحوظة malḥūẓa pl. -āt observation;
remark; note
ملاحظ mulāḥiẓ director, superintendent;
overseer, supervisor, foreman
ملاحظ mulāḥaẓ: والملاحظ ان obviously ...,
evidently ...
لحف laḥafa a (laḥf) to cover, wrap ( ه s.o.) IV
do.; to request or demand urgently V and
VIII to wrap o.s. ( ب in), cover s.o. ( ب
with)
لحف liḥf foot of a mountain
لحاف liḥāf pl. لحف luḥuf (also الحفة
alḥifa) cover, blanket; bedcover,
counterpane, coverlet, quilt, comforter,
wrap
ملحف milḥah and ملحفة milḥafa pl. ملاحف
malāḥif2 cover, blanket; wrap
الحاف ilḥāf importunity (of a petitioner)
ملتحف multaḥif wrapped ( ب in), covered
ب) with)
لحق laḥiqa a (laḥq, لحاق laḥaq) to catch up ( ب
or ه with s.o.), overtake ( ب or s.o.), to
reach ( ھ، ب s.th.); to catch, make ( ھ، ب
e.g., a train), to touch ( ب s.th.); to cling,
adhere, attach o.s., stick, hang on, keep
close ( ب to s.o.), to join ( ب s.o.), come
along ( ب with s.o.), to follow, succeed ( ب
s.o.), to unite ( ب with); to betake o.s., go (
ب to), to enter ( بمدرسة bi-madrasatin a
school, بخدمة bi-kidmatin a service, لحق
بخدمته to take up a position with s.o., enter
the services of s.o.), to overcome, befall,
affect, afflict ( ه s.o.; disease, fear, loss,
and the like), come, descend ( ه upon s.o.,
calamity, etc.), to be incumbent ( ه upon
s.o.), be imperative ( ه for) III to follow ( ه
s.o.); to go after s.o. ( ه), trail, pursue,
chase ( ه s.o.) IV to attach, affix, join,
subjoin, append, annex, add ( ب ھ s.th. to).
enclose ( ب ھ s.th. in); to connect ( ب ھ
s.th. with); to increase, augment ( ھ ب s.th.
by), to take in all a member, admit ( ب ه
s.o. to an organization, and the like),
enroll ( ب ه s.o. in), to inflict ( ھ ب upon
s.o. or s.th. s.th.), cause ( ھ ب s.o. or s.th.
s.th., esp. damage); pass. ulḥiqa to be
admitted ( ب to an organization, a society,
etc.), become a member ( ب of), enter ( ب a
service) VI to follow in close succession;
to pursue or chase each other, to blend
into a continuous sequence, pass
insensibly into each other VIII to reach ( ب
s.th. or s.o.); to catch up ( ب with),
overtake ( ب s.th. or s.o.); to join ( ب s.o.),
go or come along ( ب with), to enter ( ب a
service, a school, a university), join ( ب an
army, an organization, etc.), become a
member ( ب of), to matriculate ( ب at a
university), enroll ( ب in a faculty), to take
up ( ب a position, a job), to be attached ( ب
to), be connected, be affiliated ( ب with), to
be attached, devoted, loyal │ التحقبالحكومة
to go into government service X to annex
ھ) s.th.)
لحق pl. الحاق alḥāq cultivable alluvial
soil left behind by a flood
لحقي laḥaqī: مواد لحقية (mawādd) detritus
(geol.), alluvium, alluvial residues
لحاق liḥāq accession ( ب to), entry,
entrance ( ب to, into), joining ( ب of),
enrollment ( ب in), membership ( ب in)
ملاحقة mulāḥaqa pl. -āt pursuit, chase;
legal prosecution
الحاق ilḥāq joining, junction,
subjunction, attachment, appending,
affixation, affixture, addition, annexation;
admission ( ب to an organization, and the
like), enrollment ( ب in an association, and
the like), political annexation
التحق iltiḥāq entering ( ب of), entry,
entrance (y to office. into a school. etc.),
860 joining ( ب of), affiliation ( ب with);
accession ( ب to)
استلحاق istilḥāq annexation; avowal of
paternity (jur.)
لاحق lāḥiq reaching; overtaking;
subsequent, following; added, affixed,
appended, subjoined, attached, joined,
connected │ سابقا – لاحقا sābiqan – lāḥiqan
previously -- later on, at first --
subsequently
لاحقة lāḥiqa pl. لواحق lawāḥiq2
appendage, appurtenance, adjunct; pl.
acceasories, appurtenances, adjuncts,
dependencies
ملحق mulḥaq added, affixed, appended,
attached, subjoined ( ب to s.th.), enclosed (
ب in s.th.); adjoining, adjacent,
contiguous; written or printed in the
margin, marginal; appertaining,
appurtenant, incident, pertinent,
accompanying; incorporated, annexed;
supplement; -- (pl. -āt, ملاحق malāḥiq2)
appendix; addition, addendum, postscript;
supplement, extra sheet (of a newspaper,
periodical, book); enclosure (in a letter);
appendage; pendant, locket; tag, label;
trailer (of a truck, etc.); annex, subsidiary
building, wing or addition to a building; --
(pl. -ūn) attaché; assistant; pl. ملحقات also:
annexed provinces, dependent territories,
dependencies │ ملحق بحري (baḥrī) naval
attaché; ملحق تجاري (tijārī) commercial
attaché; ملحق جوي (jawwī) air attaché; ملحق
عسكري (‘askarī) or ملحق حربي (ḥarbī)
military attaché; ملحق صحفي (ṣuḥufī) press
attaché; ملحق فخري (fakrī) titular attaché
متلاحق mutalāḥiq successive,
consecutive, uninterrupted. continuous │
متلاحق الحركة m. al-ḥaraka in continuous
motion
لحم laḥama u (laḥm) to mend, patch, weld,
solder (up) ( ھ s.th.); -- laḥima a to get
stuck II to solder ( ھ s.th.) VI to join in
battle, engage in a mutual massacre; to
cling together, cleave together, stick
together, hang together, cohere; to hold
firmly together; to be joined, united VIII
to adhere, cleave, stick ( ب to); to be in
immediate contact ( ب with); to cling ( ب
to), fit closely ( ب s.th.); to grapple, fight,
struggle (in a clinch or in close combat);
to cling together, cleave together, cohere;
to stick together; to be interjoined,
intermesh, be closely united; to close, heal
up, sear over, cicatrize (wound)
لحم laḥm pl. لحوم luḥūm, لحام liḥām flesh;
meat │ بلحمه وشحمه (šaḥmihī) in his real
human form; لحما ودما (daman) dyed in the
wool, inveterate
لحمة laḥma (n. un.) a piece of flesh or
meat
لحمة laḥma, luḥma pl. لحم luḥam woof,
weft (of a fabric); decisive factor, motif;
luḥma relationship, kinship
لحمية laḥmīya conjunctiva
لحم laḥm fleshy, corpulent; carnivorous
لحام liḥām pl. -āt soldering; welding;
soldered seam, soldered joint; solder
لحام laḥḥām butcher; solderer; welder
لحيم laḥīm fleshy
لحامة laḥāma fleshiness, corpulence
ملحمة malḥama pl. ملاحم malāḥim2
bloody fight, slaughter, massacre, fierce
battle
شعر ملحمي ši‘r malḥamī heroic poem
التحام iltiḥām close union; cohesion;
conjunction, union, connection,
coherence; adhesion (phys.); grapple,
struggle, fight, close combat
ملتحمة multaḥima conjunctiva
لحن laḥana a (laḥn, لحون luḥūn, لحانة
laḥāna) to speak ungrammatical Arabic
(interspersed with barbarisms); -- laḥina a
861 to be intelligent II to chant,
psalmodize; to intone, strike up a melody;
to set to music, compose ( ھ s.th.)
لحن laḥn pl. الحان alḥān, لحون luḥūn air,
tune, melody; grammatical mistake,
solecism, barbarism
لحن laḥin intelligent, understanding,
sensible
تلحين talḥīn pl. تلاحين talāḥīn2 musical
composition, musical arrangement
تلحيني talḥīnī singable
ملحون malḥūn incorrect, ungrammatical
(language); (magr.) poetry in colloquial
language
ملحن mulaḥḥin composer
لحو) and لحي) لحا laḥā (laḥw) and لحى laḥā a
(laḥy) to insult, abuse, revile ( ه s.o.) VI to
call each other names, heap abuses on
each other VIII to grow a beard
لحو laḥw and لحي laḥy insult, abuse,
invective, vilification, defamation
لحي laḥy, dual: لحيان laḥyān, pl. الح
alḥin, لحي luḥīiy jawbone
لحية liḥya pl. لحى luḥan, liḥan beard,
whiskers (on cheeks and chin), full beard
│ اطلق لحيته aṭlaqa liḥyatahū to let one’s
beard grow; لحية التيس l. at-tais salsify
(Tregopogon porrifolium; bot.)
لحية luḥayya2 Luhaiya (town in NW
Yemen, on Red Sea)
لحاء liḥā’ bast
الحى alḥā long-bearded
ملتح multaḥin bearded, having a beard,
e.g., ماتح بلحية سوداء (bi-liḥya saudā’) a
black-bearded man
لخص II to abridge ( ھ s.th.); to summarize, sum
up, epitomize, condense, compress ( ھ
s.th.); to excerpt ( ھ s.th.), make an excerpt
or extract ( ھ of); to give the essence of
s.th.; to sketch, outline ( ھ s.th.); pass.
يلخص yulakkaṣu it can he summed up ( في
ان to the effect that) V to he summarized,
be epitomized, be condensed, be summed
up ( في in), amount briefly ( في to), be in its
essence ( في s.th.), narrow down ( في to)
تلخيص talkīṣ abridgement;
condensation; summary, resume; epitome,
abstract, synopsis, outline; brier, abort
report
ملخص mulakkaṣ abridged, excerpted,
summarized, condensed; (pl. -āt) extract,
excerpt, essence, gist
لخلخ laklaka to shake, shake off ( ھ s.th.) II
talaklaka to shake, totter
ملخلخ mulaklak shaky, unsteady,
tottering
لخمة lakama, lukama sluggish; gauche,
awkward, clumsy
لخن lakan putrid stench
لخن alkan2, f. لخناء laknā’2, pl. لخن lukn
stinking; uncircumcized (as an abusive
term)
لدة 1 lida see ولد
اللد 2 al-lidd Lydda (city and international
airport in W Israel)
لد 3 ladda a (ladd) to dispute violently, have a
fierce quarrel ( ه with s.o.) II to defame,
slander ( ب s.o.); to bewilder, perplex,
nonplus V to turn helplessly right and left,
be bewildered, perplexed, confused; to be
headstrong, recalcitrant
لدد ladad vehement quarrel, violent
dispute
لدود ladūd, الد aladd2, f. لداء laddā’2, pl. لد
ludd, لداد lidād, الداء aliddā’2 fierce, grim,
dogged, tough │ عدو الد (‘adūw) mortal
enemy, archenemy, foe; عدو لدود do.
متلدد mutaladdid obstinate, recalcitrant,
headstrong, rebellious 862
لدغ ladaga u (ladg) to sting, bite (snake, s.o.);
to taunt, hurt, offend ( ه s.o.)
لدغة ladga sting; bite
لديغ ladīg pl. لدغاء ludagā’ لدغى , 2 ladgā
stung; bitten
لدن 1 laduna u ( لدانة ladāna, لدونة ludūna) to be
soft, supple, pliant, flexible, resilient,
elastic II to soften ( ھ s.th.); to mollify,
attenuate, temper, ease, mitigate, alleviate
ھ) s.th.)
لدن ladn pl. لدن ludn, لدان lidān soft,
gentle; pliant, pliable, flexible, supple,
resilient, elastic; plastic
لادن lādan, lādin laudanum
لدانة ladāna and لدونة ludūna softness,
pliability, flexibility, suppleness,
plasticity, resilience, elasticity
لدائن ladā’in2 plastics
لدن 2 ladun (prep.) at, by, near, close to; in the
presence of, in front of, before, with; in
possession of; من لدن from, on the part of;
since; -- (conj.) since, from the moment
when; لدن ان do.
لدني ladunī (i.e. من لدن لله ) mystic; العلم
اللدني (‘ilm), العلوم اللدنية knowledge imparted
directly by God through mystic intuition
(in Sufism)
لدى ladā (prep.) at, by (place and time);
in the presence of, in front of, before, with
│ لدى الحاجة in case of need, if necessary;
لديه ladaihi he has; ما لديك the condition you
are in, your state of mind; ... ليس لدينا غيرما
(gairu) we know no more than what ...
لذ ladda (1st pers. perf. ladidtu) a ( لذاذ ladad,
لذاذة ladāda) to be sweet, delicious,
delightful, pleasant, gratify the senses II
and IV to please, gratify, delight ( ه s.o.); to
give pleasure ( ه to s.o.) V and VIII to be
pleased, delighted ( ب at), delight, revel,
take pleasure ( ب in), be gratified ( ب by);
to find ( ھ s.th.) delicious or pleasant, take
delight ( ھ in), enjoy, savor, relish ( ھ s.th.)
X to find delicious or pleasant ( ھ s.th.); to
find delightful ( ھ s.th.); to take pleasure (
ھ in)
لذة ladda pl. -āt joy, rapture, bliss;
pleasure, enjoyment, delectation, delight;
sensual delight, lust, voluptuousness
لذيذ ladīd pl. لذ ludd, لذاذ lidād delicious,
delightful; pleasant; beautiful, wonderful,
splendid, magnificent; sweet
لذاذة ladāda pl. لذائذ ladā’id2 sweetness;
charm; bliss; rapture; enjoyment,
delectation; pleasure, delight
ملذة maladda pl. -āt, ملاذ malādd2 joy,
pleasure, amenity, comfort; delightfulness,
enjoyment, delectation; voluptuousness
متلذذ mutaladdid epicure
لذع lada‘a a (lad‘) to burn ( ھ s.th.); to brand,
cauterize ( ه s.o.); to hurt (with words),
insult, offend ( ه s.o.) V to burn
لذع lada‘ burning, combustion;
conflagration, fire │ لذع البنادق rifle fire
لذاع laddā‘ burning; very hot,
scorching; pungent, acrid, sharp; biting
(words)
لوذع lauda‘ and لوذعي lauda‘ī
sagacious, ingenious, witty, quick-witted,
quick at repartee
لوذعية lauda‘īya sagacity, ingenuity,
esprit, wit, quick-wittedness, mental
alertness
لاذع lādi‘ burning; pungent, acrid,
biting; sharp
لاذعة lādi‘a pl. لواذع lawādi‘2 gibe, taunt
اللاذقية al-lādiqīya Latakia, the ancient
Laodicea (seaport in W Syria)
لذي 1 ladiya a (ladan) to adhere, cleave ( ب to)
الذي 2 look up alphabetically 863
لز lazza (1st pers. perf. lazaztu) u (lazz, لزز
lazaz, لززاز lizāz) to tie ( ب ه s.th. to),
connect or join firmly, unite ( ب ه s.th.
with), make ( ھ s.th.) stick ( ب to) II to
connect or join firmly, press together ( ھ
s.th.); to cram together; to urge, press,
coerce ( الى ه s.o. to) VI to be crammed
together; to lie close together V and VIII
to be united, joined, connected ( ب with);
to adhere, cleave, stick ( ب to)
لز lazz and لزة lazza U bolt, staple, cramp
ملزز mulazzaz crammed together;
closely united; firm, solid, compact
لزب lazaba u ( لزوب luzūb) to be firm, be firmly
fixed, hold fast; to adhere, cleave, cling ( ب
to); to stick ( ب to); -- laziba a (lazab) to
cohere, cleave together, stick together
لزب lazib pl. لزاب lizāb little
لزبة lazba pl. لزب lizab misfortune,
calamity
لازب lāzib sticking, adhering, clinging;
firm, firmly fixed │ صار ضربة لازب
(ḍarbata l.) to become necessary,
indispensable; ضرب ضربة لازب (ḍuriba) to
meet with grave misfortune, be stricken
by disaster
لزج lazija a (lazaj, لزوج luzūj) to be
sticky, ropy, gluey, viscid; to stick, cling,
get stuck ( ب to)
لزج lazij sticky, gluey, ropy, viscid;
adhesive
لزوجة luzūja stikiness, glueyness,
ropiness, viscidity
لزق laziqa a ( لزوق luzūq) to adhere, cling,
cleave, stick, ( ب to) II to affix, post ( ھ
s.th.); to stick on, paste on ( ھ s.th.); to
paste together ( ھ s.th.); (eg.) to palm off,
foist ( ھ ل s.th. on s.o.) IV to Palte on,
stick on, affix ( ھ s.th.) VIII = I
لزق lizq adjoining, adjacent, contiguous
│ لزقه lizqahū or بلزقه close to his side,
cose by
لزق laziq sticky, gluey
لزقة lazqa compress, stupe; plaster
لزاق lizāq adhesive, agglutinant, glue,
cement, paste
لزوق lazūq and لازوق lāzūq compress,
stupe; plaster, adhesive plaster, court
plaster
لزم lazima a ( لزوم luzūm) to cling,
adhere, belong ( ھ to), attend, accompany (
ھ s.th.); to persist, persevere ( ھ in), stick,
keep ( ھ to), keep doing ( ھ s.th.);to adhere,
be attached, keep close, stick ( ه to s.o.); to
be inseparable ( ھ، ه from s.o., from s.th.);
to stay permanently ( ھ in); to be
necessary; to be requisite, imperative,
indispensable ( ه for s.o.); to be incumbent
ه) upon s.o.), be s.o.’s ( ه) duty │ لزم داره
فراشة ) ) to stay at home (in bed); لزم الصمت
(ṣamta) to keep went, maintain silence III
to attend, accompany ( ھ s.th.); to adhere,
stick, keep ( ھ to); to pursue or practice
incessantly ( ھ s.th.); to be constantly with
s.o. or in s.o.’s company ( ه), be constantly
around s.o. ( ه) to be assigned ( ه to),
accompany, attend ( ه s.o.); to be
inseparable ( ه، ھ from s.th., from s.o.); to
keep doing ( ھ s.th.), persist, persevere ( ھin);
to work with perseverance, display
sustained activity ( ھ for) IV to force,
compel ( ھ ه s.o. to); to force, press ( ,ھ ه
also ب ه upon s.o. s.th.); to enjoin, impose
as a duty ( ھ ه , also ب ه on s.o. s.th.),
obligate ( ھ ه , also ب ه s.o. to or to do s.th.)
│ الزمه الحجة (ḥujja) to force proof on s.o.,
force s.o. to accept an argument; الزمه
الفراش to confine s.o. to bed, compel s.o. to
my in bed (of a disease); الزمه المال (or
بالمال ) to impose the payment of a sum on
s.o. VI to be attached or devoted to each
other, be inseparable VIII to 864 adhere,
stick, keep, hang on ( ھ to); to keep doing
ھ) s.th.), persist, persevere ( ھ in), keep
up, maintain preserve ( ھ s.th.), abide ( ھ
by); to take upon o.s. ( ھ s.th.); to make a
rule ( ھ of s.th.), make ( ھ s.th.) one’s duty,
impose upon o.s. ( ھ s.th.); to assume as a
duty ( ب or ھ s.th.); to undertake, obligate
o.s., bind o.s., pledge ( ب or ھ to do s.th.);
to be in duty bound, be obligated or under
obligation, be or become liable ( ب or ھ to
do s.th.); to be forced, be compelled ( ب or
a to do s.th.); to be responsible ( ب or ھ
for); to take over the monopoly ( ھ of
s.th.), monopolize, farm ( ھ e.g., the
levying of tax..) X to deem necessary ( ھ
s.th.); to necessitate, make necessary or
requisite (a s.th.); to require, need ( ھ
s.th.), call ( ھ for), be in need ( ھ of s.th.)
لزمة lazma pl. -āt official concessions,
license, franchise
لزوم luzūm necessity, exigency,
requirement; need, want │ حسب اللزوم
ḥasaba l-l. as required, as the occasion
demands; عند اللزوم in case of need, when
(if) necessary, if need be; بسكويت لزوم السفر
بالبحر (l. as-safar bi-l-baḥr) biscuit for the
voyage
لزام lizām necessary, requisite;
necessity, duty, obligation │ كان لزاما عليه
ان to be s.o.’s duty to ..., be necessary for
s.o. that he ...
الزم alzam2 more necessary, most
necessary
ملزمة malzama pl. ملازم malāzim2
section, signature (of a book, = 16 octavo
sheets)
ملزمة milzama pl. ملازم malāzim2 vise;
press
ملازمة mulāzama adhesion, clinging,
sticking; remaining, staying, dwelling;
close attachment; dependence;
inseparableness, inherence, intrinsicality;
following, pursuit, pursuance;
perseverance, assiduity, zeal
الزام ilzām coercion, compulsion
الزامي ilzāmī forced, compulsory,
obligatory, required
التزام iltizām pl. -āt necessity; duty,
obligation, commitment, liability;
engagement (philos. ); contract; farming
of taxes, farmage; concession, license,
franchise; monopoly; التزاما iltizāman by
contract, by the job │ قام بالتزاماته to meet
one’s obligations
لازم lāzim inherent, intrinsic,
inseparable, indissoluble; necessary,
requisite, imperative, indispensable,
unavoidable, inevitable, inescapable;
incumbent, binding, obligatory;
intransitive (gram.); legally binding,
irrevocable (Isl. Law) │ كالازم as it must
be, comme il faut, properly
لازمة lāzima fixed attribute, inherent
property; standing phrase (of s.o.)
لوازم lawāzim2 (pl.) necessary,
inseparable attributes or manifestations;
necessities, exigencies, requirements;
necessaries, requisites; necessaries,
fixtures
ملزوم malzūm obligated, under
obligation, liable │ ملزوم بالأداء (adā’)
liable for taxes, taxable
ملزومية malzūmīya duty, obligation,
commitment, liability
ملازم mulāzim tenacious (with foil. gen.
it.: of), clinging, keeping, sticking (with
foll. genit.: to); persevering, persisting,
remaining, abiding; inseparable; closely
connected, or attached; attending,
accompanying; adhering; adherent,
follower, partisan; second lieutenant
(U.A.R., Tun.) │ ملازم اول (awwal; U.A.R.,
Leb., Jord., Ir.) first lieutenant; ملازم ثان
(tānin; Leb., Jord., Ir., formerly also Eg.,
syr.) second lieutenant 865
ملتزم multazim engaged, committed,
under obligation; holder of a concession
or monopoly; tax farmer; concessionaire,
concessionary; contractor
ملتزم multazam pl. -āt requirement
مستلزمات mustalzamāt requirements,
prerequisites, requisites; necessary or
inevitable consequences
لستك lastik and لستيك lastīk rubber; eraser
لسع lasa‘a a (las‘) to sting ( ه s.o.); to burn
ھ) s.th., e.g., the mouth); to hurt (with
words; ه s.o.)
لسعة las‘a sting, bite; biting words
لسيع lasī‘ pl. لسعى las‘ā, لسعاء lusa‘ā’2
stung
لاسع lāsi‘ stinging; burning; biting,
acrid, pungent, sharp
لسن lasina a (lasan) to be eloquent II to point,
taper, sharpen ( ھ s.th.)
لسن lasan eloquence
لسن lasin and السن alsan2, f. لسناء lasnā’2,
pl. السن alsun eloquent
لسان lisān m. and f. , pl. السنة alsina, السن
alsun tongue; language; mouthpiece (fig.),
organ (esp., of a newspaper; = لسان الحال
see below) │ على لسان from his mouth,
through him; على لسان الصحف (l. iṣ-ṣuḥuf)
through the organ of the press; قيل على لسانه
ما (qīla) things were ascribed to him which
..., he was rumored to have said things
which ...; لسان رسمي (rasmī) official organ;
متحدث بلسان وزارة الخارجية (mutaḥaddit) a
spokesman of the Foreign Ministry; باللسان
or لسانا lisānan orally, verbally; دار على السن
الخاص والعام (a. il-kāṣṣ wa-l-‘āmm) to be
the talk of the town, be on everyone’s lips;
لسان الثور l. at-taur borage (Borago
officinalis; bot.); لسان الحال the language
which things themselves speak, silent
language, mute expression (as
distinguished from the spoken word);
organ (of a party or political movement; a
newspaper); ولسان حاله يقول while he
seemed to say ..., with an expression as if
he wanted to say ...; لسان الحمل l. al-ḥamal
plantain (Plantago major L.; bot.); لسان
العصفر l. al-‘uṣfur common ash (Fraxinus
excelsior; bot.); لسان القفل l. al-qufl bolt of
the lock; لسان القوم l. al-qaum spokesman
(of a crowd); لسان الكلب l. al-kalb hound’stongue
(Cynoglossum; bos.); (eg.) also a
variety of scorpion’s tail (Scorpiurus
muricatus L.; bot.), having circinately
coiled pods; لسان المفتاح l. al-miftāḥ bit of
the key; ذو لسانين dū lisanain doubletongued,
deceitful, insincere, two-faced
لساني lisānī oral, verbal
ملسون malsūn liar
لشبونة lišbōna2 Lisbon (capital of
Portugal)
لشى) *; from lā šai’a:) III to suppress,
crush, destroy, ruin, annihilate (. s.th.) VI
to be suppressed, be crushed, be
destroyed, be annihilated; to come to
nothing, be ruined, be frustrated, fail; to
disappear, vanish, dwindle, wane, fade
ملاشاة mulāšāh annihilation, destruction
تلاش talāšin annihilation, ruin, failure,
frustration; disappearance, evanescence,
vanishing, waning, decline
متلاش mutalāšin coming to nothing,
dwindling, waning; destructible;
evanescent, transient, ephemeral
لص laṣṣa u (laṣṣ) to do stealthily or secretly ( ھ
s.th.); to rob, steal ( ھ s.th.) V to become a
thief; to act stealthily
لص liṣṣ pl. لصوص luṣūṣ, الصاص alṣāṣ
thief, robber
لصوصية luṣūṣīya thievery, theft,
robbery
متلصص mutalaṣṣiṣ behaving like a
thief, thievish │ اتى متلصصا الى (atā) to
steal to, sneak up to 866
لصق laṣiqa a (laṣq, لصوق luṣūq) to adhere,
cleave, cling, stick ( ب to) II to paste
together, stick together ( ھ s.th.) III to
adjoin ( ھ s.th.), be next ( ھ to s.th.), be
contiguous (with), abut ( ھ on), touch ( ھ
s.th.); to be in touch, in connection, in
contact ( ه with s.o.) IV to attach, affix,
stick, paste, glue ( ب ھ s.th. to); to connect
ب ھ) s.th. with), join ( s.th. to); to bring ( ھ
s.th.) close ( ب to); to press ( ب ھ s.th.
against) │ الصق لوحة (lauḥa) to post a
placard; الصق به تھمة (tuhma) to raise an
accusation against s.o. VI to cleave
together, cling together, cohere, stick
together; to agglomerate, conglomerate,
cake, frit together; to blend, pass into each
other VIII = I; to hang on ( ب to), get stuck
ب) to, on); to fit closely ( ب s.th.), cling ( ب
to)
لصق liṣq adhering, clinging, cleaving │
لصق close to him (or it); (ھو بلصقي (لصقي
he and I are inseparable
لصق laṣiq sticky, gluey, glutinous;
adhesive, agglutinant; tenacious
لصيق laṣīq one who cleaves or clings (
ب to); adjoining, adjacent, bordering,
neighboring, abutting, contiguous; closefitting,
skintight (dress)
لصق laṣūq plaster
ملاصقة mulāṣaqa junction, conjunction,
connection, contact, union; adjacency,
contiguity; O adhesion, cohesion (phys.)
الصاق ilṣāq poster, bill
تلاصق talāṣuq and التصاق iltiṣāq
cohesion, adhesion; contiguity, contact;
coherence
ملاصق mulāṣiq adjoining, adjacent,
abutting, contiguous, bordering,
neighboring, in close contact; companion;
neighbor; adherent
ملصق mulṣaq attached, affixed; stuck
on, pasted on, glued on; fastened; brought
close; connected, joined; (pl. -āt) poster,
bill, placard
متلاصق mutalāṣiq cohering, sticking
together; blending, passing into each other
ملتصق multaṣiq attached, affixed,
adhesive, sticking; adjoining, adjacent,
bordering, neighboring; contiguous,
connected, meeting or touching each
other, in contact; in the immediate
proximity ( ب of), close to ( (ب
ملضوم malḍūm de (row), close (rank)
لطخ laṭaka a (laṭk) to stain, blot, sully, soil,
spatter, splash ( ب ھ s.th. with) II do. V to
he soiled or stained
لطخة laṭka pl. laṭakāt smear, blotch,
spot; stain, blemish, blot, disgrace
لطخة luṭaka pl. -āt and لطيخ liṭṭīk ass,
dolt, fool
لطس laṭasa u (laṭs) to strike, hit ( ه s.o.)
ملطاس milṭās pl. ملاطيس malāṭīs2 pickax
لطش laṭaša u (laṭš) to strike, hit ( ه s.o.)
لطع laṭa‘a a (laṭ‘) to strike, hit ( ه s.o.); to strike
out, erase ( ھ s.th.)
لطعة laṭ‘a blot, stain
لطف laṭafa u (luṭf) to be kind and
friendly ( ب or ل to, toward s.o.); -- laṭufa
u ( لطافة laṭāfa) to be thin, fine, delicate,
dainty; to be graceful; to be elegant; to be
nice, amiable, friendly II to make mild,
soft, gentle, soften ( ھ s.th.); to mitigate,
alleviate, ease, soothe, allay, palliate,
assuage, extenuate ( ھ s.th.; also من ); to
moderate, temper, lessen, diminish, reduce
ھ) s.th.; also من ); to tone down ( ھ s.th.;
also من ) III to treat with kindness, with
benevolence ( ه s.o.); to be civil and polite
ه) to, toward s.o.); to be complaisant,
obliging, indulgent, compliant ( ه toward
s.o.), humor ( ه s.o.); to flatter ( ه s.o.), fawn
ه) upon); to caress, fondle, pet ( ه s.o.) │
لاطفه على كتفه ٨٦٧ (katifihī) to pat s.o. on
the shoulder
V to be mitigated, be tempered, be
moderated; to be civil and polite, show
o.s. friendly and kind, be so kind as to do
s.th. ( ب); to bestow most kindly, have the
kindness to give ( ب s.th., also, e.g.,
advice. على to s.o.); to be tender,
affectionate, nice ( ب to s.o.); to win ( ب
s.o.) over by subtle means, by favors, by
tricks; to go about s.th. ( في or ب) gently,
carefully, with caution; to do secretly,
covertly, without being noticed ( ب with
verbal noun: s.th.) VI to show o.s. friendly
and kind; to be polite, courteous, civil,
nice X to find ( ھ s.th.) pretty, sweet, nice;
to like, find pleasant or charming ( ھ s.th.)
لطف lutf pl. الطاف alṭāf kindness,
benevolence, friendliness; gentleness,
mildness; civility, courteousness,
politeness; daintiness, cuteness,
gracefulness; delicateness, delicate grace
(e.g., of the limbs) │ بلطف gently, softly
لطافة laṭāfa thinness fineness,
delicateness; gracefulness, loveliness,
charm; kindness, benevolence;
friendliness; politeness, esprit, intellectual
refinement, sophistication; suavity,
urbaneness
لطيف laṭīf pl. لطاف liṭāf, لطفاء luṭafā‘2
thin; fine; delicate, dainty; little, small,
insignificant; gentle, soft, light, mild;
pleasant, agreeable; amiable, friendly,
kind, nice; civil, courteous, polite; affable,
genial; pretty, charming, lovely, graceful;
intellectually refined, full of esprit,
brilliant, witty; elegant; اللطيف the Kind
(one of the attributes of God) │ يا لطيف O
my God! good heavens! for goodness
sake! الجنس اللطيف (jins) the fair sex
لطيفة laṭīfa pl. لطائف laṭā’if2 witticism,
quip; joke, jest; subtlety, nicety │ لطائف
الحيل l. al-ḥiyal subtle tricks; لطائف النكات l.
an-nukāt nice jokes
الطف alṭaf2 finer; more delicate; kinder,
nicer, more elegant
ملاطفة mulāṭafa amiable treatment,
amiability; civility, courteousness,
politeness; friendliness; benevolence,
kindness; caress; pl. -āt caresses
تلطف talaṭṭuf friendliness ( ب toward
s.o.), amiability; favoring, favoritism;
civility, courteousness, politeness
ملطفات mulaṭṭafāt sedatives
لطم laṭama i (laṭm) to strike with the
hand ( ھ the face, with despair, in
lamentation); to slap ( ه s.o.); to jolt; to
eject; to bump, strike ( ھ against s.th.); to
hit ( ھ s.th.) VI to exchange blows, fight,
brawl, battle (hostile armies); to collide,
clash (waves) VIII to collide, clash
لطمة laṭma pl. laṭamāt blow; slap, box
on the ear; jolt, thrust
لطيم laṭīm parentless
ملطم malṭam cheek
متلطم multaṭam clash (esp., of waves),
tumult, turmoil (of a battle, and the like),
melee
لظي laẓiya a ( لظى laẓan) to burn brightly, flare,
flame, blaze, be ablaze; to burn with rage
V and VIII do.
لظى laẓan blazing fire, blaze, flame
لعب la‘aba and la‘iba a (la‘b) to slaver; to
slobber, drool (baby); -- la‘iba a (lu‘b,
li‘b, la‘ib, تلعاب tal‘āb) to play ( ب with
s.th.; على an instrument); to toy ( with); to
dally ( ب with); to trick, cheat, deceive,
dupe ( على s.o.) │ لعب الأوراق (aurāqa) to
play cards; لعب دورا (dauran) to play a part
or role; لعب الموسيقى to make music; لعب
بالشطرنج (šaṭranj) to play chess; لعبت به
الھموم he became the sport of sorrows; لعب
في عقله (‘aqlilhī) to turn s.o.’s head II to
make ( ھ s.th.) play, set ( ھ s.th.) going; to
wag ( ھ the tail) III to play ( ه with s.o.); to
888 have fun, play around, jest, dally,
trifle ( ه with s.o.) IV to make play, cause
to play ( ه s.o.) V to play, act playfully VI
to play ( ب with s.th.); to make fun ( ب of
s.o.), mock ( ب at s.o.); to pull s.o.’s ( (ب
leg; to playa trick; to act fraudulently
لعب la‘b, li‘b, la‘ib pl. العاب al‘āb play;
game, joke, jest; (un, amusement,
diversion, pastime, sport │ لعب القمار
gambling, gamble; الألعاب الاولمبية the
Olympic Games; ألعاب رياضية (riyāḍīya)
athletics, sports; ألعاب سحرية (siḥrīya)
legerdemain, sleight of hand, magic; العاب
القوى a. as-quwā athletics, specif., track
and
field; العاب نارية (nārīya) fireworks; ساحة
الألعاب athletic field; مدرس الأتعاب mudarris
al-a. athletic coach, athletics instructor
لعب la‘ib funny, amusing, merry, gay
لعبة la‘ba (n. un.) game; trick
لعبة lu‘ba pl. لعب lu‘ab plaything, toy;
doll; butt for mirth or derision, sport,
laughingstock
لعبة lu‘ba, لعاب la‘‘āb and لعيب li‘‘īb
very playful
لعاب lu‘āb saliva, spittle; slaver, drivel
│ لعاب الشمس l. aš-šams gossamer, air
threads; سال لعابه على his mouth watered for
…
لعابي lu‘ābī salivary; mucous, slimy
لعيبة lu‘aiba pl. -āt (little) doll
لعوب la‘ūb flighty, coquettish,
flirtatious (woman); playful, dallying,
trifling
العوبة ul‘ūba pl. الاعيب alā‘īb2 plaything,
toy; play, sport, dalliance; fun; prank;
trick
ملعب mal‘ab pl. ملاعب malā‘ib2
playground; athletic field, stadium;
playhouse, theater; scene; circus ring; pl.
ملاعب malā‘ib matches, contests, events
(in sports)
ملعبة mal‘aba plaything, toy
تلاعب talā‘ub game (e.g., of a
speculator, of a gambler), gamble; free
play │ مجال التلاعب (majāl) free play, free
scope, elbow-room; latitude, margin;
clearance
لاعب lā‘ib playing; player; sportsman;
athlete; gymnast │ لاعب الجنباز l. al-jumbāz
gymnast, athlete
ملعوب mal‘ūb pl. ملاعيب malā‘īb2
covered with spittle; slobbering, driveling,
drooling; prank, trick, ruse, artifice
ملاعب mulā‘ib fellow player; playmate,
playfellow; fraudulent
لعثم II tala‘tama to hesitate; to falter, stutter,
stammer
لعثمة la‘tama and لعثم tala‘tum
hesitation; stuttering, stutter
متلعثم mutala‘tim and متلعثم اللسان m. allisān
stammering, stuttering
لعج la‘aja a (la‘j) to hurt, be sore, burn III to
oppress, distress, agonize ( ه s.o.)
لعجة la‘ja pain
لاعج lā‘ij pl. لواعج lawā‘ij2 ardent,
burning (esp., love); pl. لواعج ardent love,
ardor (of love)
العس al‘as2, f. لعساء la‘sā’2 red-lipped
لعق la‘iqa a (la‘q, لعقة la‘qa, lu‘qa) to lick ( ھ
s.th.)
لعقة la‘qa spoonful
لعوق la‘ūq electuary
ملعقة mil‘aqa pl. ملاعق malā‘iq2 spoon │
ملعقة شاي teaspoon
لعل 1 la‘l garnet (min.)
لعل 2 la‘alla see عل 2
لعلع la‘la‘a to resound, reverberate,
clang, roar, boom II tala‘la‘a to shimmer,
glimmer, gleam, flicker; to be starved;
869 to be parched with thirst; to be
لعلع la‘la‘ pl. لعالع la‘āli‘2 vibration of
fata morgana
لعن la‘ana a (la‘n) to curse, damn, execrate ( ه
s.o.), utter imprecations ( ه against s.o.) III
to utter the oath of condemnation ( لعان
li‘ān, q.v.) VI to curse each other
لعن la‘n cursing, execration,
malediction
لعنة la‘na pl. la‘anāt, لعان li‘ān curse;
execration, imprecation │ لعنة لله عليه
God’s curse upon him!
لعنة lu‘na damned, cursed, confounded;
execrable, abominable
لعان li‘ān oath of condemnation; sworn
allegation of adultery committed by either
husband or wife (Isl. Law)
لعين la‘īn and ملعون mal‘ūn pl. ملاعين
malā‘īn2 cursed; confounded; damned;
outcast, execrable; detested, abhorred,
abominable; اللعين the Evil One, the Devil
متلاعن mutalā‘in cursing each other,
hostile, inimical
لعا لك la‘an laka call to one who has stumbled:
may you rise again!
لغوب lugūb, lagub exhaustion, lassitude,
fatigue, weariness; great pains, trouble,
toil
لاغب lāgib pl. لغب luggab languid,
fatigued, weary, tired
لغد lugd pl. الغاد algād, لغود lugūd and
لغدود lugdūd pl. لغاديد lagādīd2 flesh at the
throat and under the chin
لغز lagaza u (lagz) to speak in riddles; to
equivocate III and IV do.
لغز lugz pl. الغاز algāz riddle, puzzle;
enigma; conundrum; mystery, secret │ O
لغز الكلمات المتقاطعة l. al-kalimāt almutaqāṭi‘
a crossword puzzle
ملغز mulgaz puzzling, enigmatic,
cryptic, mysterious; dark, obscure,
ambiguous, equivocal
لغط lagaṭa a (lagṭ, لغاط ligāṭ) to be clamorous
and noisy; to raise a din; to shout, clamor
II and IV do.
لغط lagṭ, lagaṭ, pl. الغاط algāṭ noise, din;
clamor, shouting; lamentation ( عن over or
for s.th.) i uproar, turmoil, tumult
لغم 2 lagama to mine, plant with mines ( ھ s.th.)
لغم lugm, lagam pl. الغام algām mine
لغم lagm and الغام ilgām mining (e.g., of
a harbor, of a road, etc.)
لغم 2 IV to amalgamate, alloy with mercury
لغام lugām foam, froth
الغام ilgām amalgamation
لغمط lagmaṭa (eg.) to smear, sully, soil
لغا (لغو ) lagā u (lagw) to speak; to be null; -- لغا
lagā u (lagw) and لغي lagiya a ( لغا lagan,
لاغية lāgiya, ملغاة malgāh) to talk nonsense;
to make mistakes (in speaking) sV to
render ineffectual ( ھ s.th.); to declare null
and void or invalid, invalidate, nullify,
annul, abolish, abrogate, eliminate ( ھ
s.th.), do away ( ھ with s.th.); to cancel ( ھ
a project); to withdraw ( ھ permission, a
motion)
لغو lagw foolish talk; nonsense; null,
nugatory, ineffectual; mistake, blunder,
ungrammatical language
لغة luga pl. -āt language; dialect; idiom;
vernacular; lingo, jargon; word;
expression, term; اللغة classical Arabic │
لغة اجنبية (ajnabīya) foreign language; لغة
عامية (‘āmmīya) popular language; لغة الكناية
literary language; لغة المحادثة l. almuḥādata
colloquial language; لغة المھنة l.
al-mihna professional jargon, slang; لغة
المولد l. al-maulid mother 870 tongue; اھل
اللغة ahl al-l. philologists, lexicographers;
علم اللغة ‘ilm al-l. lexicography, philology,
linguistic science, linguistics
لغوة lagwa dialect, idiom, vernacular
لغوي lugawī linguistic; philologic(al);
lexicographic(al); philologist,
lexicographer, linguist; لغويات linguistic
matters, philologica
إلغاء ilgā’ abolishment, abolition,
abrogation, repeal, elimination,
cancellation, revocation, rescission;
annulment, nullification, quashing;
countermand
لاغ lāgin abrogated, repealed, annulled,
canceled, invalid, ineffective, null and
void
لاغية lāgiya grammatical mistake,
incorrect usage
ملغى mulgan abrogated, repealed,
annulled, canceled, invalid, void;
abolished; expired; suppressed; negligible
لف laffa u (laff) to wrap up, roll up, fold up ( ھ
s.th.); to wind, coil, spool, reel ( ھ s.th.); to
wind ( على ھ s.th. on; على ھ s.th. around),
twist, wrap, fold ( على ھ s.th. around); to
envelop ( ب or في ھ s.th. in or with), cover,
swathe, swaddle ( ھ s.th. ب or في in or
with), wrap, infold ( ب or في ھ s.th. in); to
connect ( ب ھ s.th. with), join, attach ( ب ٠
s.th. to); to grow densely, be overgrown,
form a tangled mass; to make a round of
calls ( على on), visit ( على people); (eg.) to
go around s.th. ( ھ ), go about s.th. ( ھ ) in a
roundabout way, make a detour, beat
about the bush │ لف لفه (laffahū) to do just
like s.o., be of the same kind as s.o.,
belong to the same sort as s.o. II to wrap
up or infold tightly V to wrap o.s. up ( في
in), cover o.s. ( في with) VIII do.; to wind,
twist, coil; to turn, make a turn
(automobile, etc.); to intertwine, grow in a
tangled mass; to gather, assemble, rally (
حول around); to clasp, enclose, encircle,
embrace ( ب s.th.)
لف laff winding, coiling; wrapping,
enfolding; rolling, folding; (eg.)
circumambience, circumvention, detour,
roundabout way, subterfuge, dodge,
excuses; pl. الفاف alfāf swaddling clothes,
diapers │ اللف والدوران (dawarān) detours
and evasions; لف ونشر (našr) folding and
unfolding; involution and evolution
(rhet.); من غير لف without much ado,
without ceremony
لف liff pl. الفاف alfāf densely growing
trees; pl. thicket, scrub, undergrowth,
brushwood
لفة laffa pl. -āt turn, rotation, revolution;
coil, twist, convolution, whorl, spire;
winding; roll, scroll; pack, packet,
package, bundle, bale; turban │ لفة بريدية
(barīdīya) postal package; لفات من الرق
(raqq) parchment scrolls
لفافة lifāfa pl. -āt, لفائف lafā’if wrapping,
covering, cover, envelope; wrapper, wrap;
altar cloth, cloth covering the paten and
chalice (Copt.-Chr.); bandage; swaddling
band; puttee; cigarette (also لفافة من التبغ
min at-tibg); pl. لفائف (fig.) guise (of s.th.)
لفيف lafīf gathered, assembled;
crowded, thronging; multitude, crowd,
swarm, body, cluster, group ( من of
people); mixed company │ لفيف الناس mob,
rabble, riffraff; اللفيف الأجنبي (ajnabī) the
Foreign Legion
لفيفة lafīfa bundle; package, pocket,
pack; cigarette
الف alaff2 f. لفاء laffā’2 stout, plump
(figure, body)
ملف milaff pl. -āt reel, spool; coil (el.);
winding; wrapping, covering, casing;
blanket, sleeping blanket; cover, wrapper,
jacket (of a book, etc.); (letter) envelope;
folder, portfolio; letter file; 871 dossier │
O ملف التأثير induction coil (el.); O ملف
ابتدائي (ibtidā’ī) primary coil (el.); O ملف
خانق choking coil, choke (el.)
ملفاف milfāf wrapping, covering, cover
تلفيف talfīf pl. تلافيف talāfīf2 winding;
coil, twist, convolution, whorl, spire; pl.
تلافيف expletive after في , e.g., في تلافيف
سويدائھا (suwaidā’ihā) in the depth of her
heart; في تلافيف الظلام (ẓalām) in the dark;
بين تلافيفه in it, inside it, around in it
التفاف iltifāf turn; bypassing,
outflanking, sank movement,
envelopment, surrounding
ملفوف malfūf wound, coiled; wrapped
up ( في in); rolled up, rolled together,
convolute; twisted, wound ( على around);
fastened, attached ( على to); swathed ( ب in
or with); plump, stout (body); (syr.)
cabbage
ملتف multaff winding, twisting, coiling;
wound, coiled; rolled up, rolled together,
convolute; spirally wound; intertwined,
interwoven, entwined; gathered,
assembled, grouped ( حول around);
clasping, enclosing, embracing, encircling
ب) s.th.)
لفت lafata i (laft) and IV to turn, bend,
tilt, incline, direct ( الى ھ s.th. to or
toward), focus ( الى ھ s.th. on); to turn
sway, avert ( عن ھ s.th. from) │ لفت نظره الى
(naẓarahū), الفت نظره الى to turn one’s eyes
or one’s attention to; to direct s.o.’s eyes
to, call s.o.’s attention to; لفت النظر to catch
the eye, attract attention; to be impressive,
stately, imposing; الفت النظر do.; لفت الناس to
attract, interest, or captivate people V to
turn, turn around, turn one’s face ( الى to);
to look around, glance around; to peer
around │ تلفت حوله (ḥaulahū) to look
around, glance around; تلفت يمنة ويسرة
(yamnatan wa-yasratan) he looked to the
right and left VIII to turn, turn around,
turn one’s face ( الى to); to wheel around,
turn around; to address o.s. ( الى to); to pay
attention, attend ( الى to), heed, observe,
bear in mind, consider, take into account,
take into consideration ( الى s.th.); to take
care ( الى of), care ( الى for) │ التفت حوله
(ḥaulahū) to look around, glance about X
to attract ( ھ the eye, attention); to claim,
arouse, awaken ( ھ the interest, the
attention, من of s.o.) │ استلفت نظره (or
انظاره ) to arouse or attract s.o.’s attention,
catch s.o.’s eye
لفت lift turnip (Brassica rapa L.; bot.)
لفتة lafta (n. un.) turnabout, about-face;
(pl. lalatāt) turn, turning; gesture;
sideglance, glance, a furtive, casual, or
quick, look
لفات lafāt and لفوت lafūt ill-tempered,
surly, sullen
الفت alfat2, f. لفتاء laftā’2, pl. لفت luft lefthanded
التفات iltifāt turn, inclination, turning ( الى
to, toward); attention, notice, heed; regard,
consideration; care, solicitude; sudden
transition (styl.) │ بدون الالتفات bi-dūn l-ilt.
inattentive(ly); بدون الالتفات الى
inconsiderate of, without consideration
for; عدم الالتفات ‘adam al-ilt. inattention;
نظر اليه بعين الالتفات (bi-‘ain l-ilt.) to give
s.th. sympathetic consideration
استلفاتة istilfāta (n. vic.) a turning ( الى to,
toward); turn of the face or eyes; sideglance,
glance
استلفات istilfāt stimulation of attention
لافتة lāfita sign (bearing an inscription)
ملفت mulfit: ملفت للنظر (naẓar) attracting
attention, striking, conspicuous
ملتفت multafit turning around, looking (
الى at); regardful; attentive; heedful,
careful; considerate
لفح lafaḥa a (lafḥ, لفحان lafaḥān) to burn,
scorch, sear ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); -- (lafḥ) to
872 strike lightly; to touch, brush ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., of the breath)
لفحة lafḥa pl. lafaḥāt fire, heat (esp., of
fever)
لفوح lafūḥ and لافح lāfiḥ pl. لوافح lawāfiḥ2
burning, scorching, searing
لفاح luffāḥ mandrake (Mandragora
officinarum; bot.)
لفظ lafaẓa i (lafz) to emit ( ب، ھ s.th.); to spit
out ( ب، ھ s.th.); to eject ( ب، ھ s.th.); to
throw ( ه s.o.) out ( من of); to speak,
enunciate, articulate; to pronounce, utter,
express, voice, say ( ب، ه s.th.) │ لفظ النفس
الأخير (nafas) to breathe one’s last, die,
expire; to be in the throes of death; لفظ
انفاسه (anfāsahū) to be in the throes of
death, breathe one’s last; لفظه لفظ النواة
(lafẓa n-nawāh) to spit s.th. out like a date
pit, brush s.th. aside, reject s.th., dismiss
s.th. V to pronounce, enunciate, articulate
ب) s.th.)
لفظ lafẓ pl. الفاظ alfāẓ sound-group,
phonetic complex; expression, term;
word; wording; formulation; articulation,
enunciation, pronunciation; لفظا verbatim,
literally │ لفظا ومعنى (ma‘nan) in letter and
spirit; أخطأ اللفظ (akṭa’a) to mispronounce
لفظي lafẓī of or pertaining to words,
verbal; literal; pronounced; oral
لفظة lafẓa pl. lafaẓāt word; utterance,
saying
لفيظ lafīẓ ejected, emitted; pronounced,
uttered
تلفظ talaffuẓ pronunciation, enunciation,
articulation
ملفوظ malfūẓ ejected, emitted;
pronounced, uttered
لفع lafa‘a a (laf‘): لفع الشيب رأسه l. š-šaibu
ra’sahū grey hair covered his bead II to
cover ( ھ s.th., ب with) │ لفع الشيب رأسه l. ššaibu
ra’sahū = I; V and VIII to wrap o.s.
up ( ب in)
ملفع milfa‘ head shawl, muffler
لفق II to invent, fabricate ( ھ s.th.); to concoct,
contrive, devise, think out ( ھ s.th.); to
falsify ( ھ s.th.); to trump up ( ھ s.th.); to
patch up, piece together ( الى a s.th. with)
تلفيق talfīq invention, fabrication,
concoction, fibbing; falsification
تلفيقة talfīqa pl. -āt invented story, fib,
yarn
ملفق mulaffaq invented, fabricated,
trumped up, fake, fictitious; concocted,
contrived, devised; patched up, pieced
together; embellished with lies
لفلف laflafa to wrap up, envelop, cover (a s.th.)
II talaflafa to wrap o.s. up ( في، ب in)
لفو IV to find ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) VI to put right, to
right, repair, correct ( ھ s.th.); to make
good ( ھ a deficiency), eliminate, remove (
ھ a danger); to remedy ( ھ s.th.); to redress
ھ) a loss, and the like), make up ( ھ for a
loss)
ملافاة mulāfāh correction, adjustment,
elimination (of a deficiency)
تلاف talāfin repair, correction;
elimination, removal (of a deficiency, of a
danger); remedy; redress, reparation
لقب II to call, surname ( ب ه s.o. by an agnomen
or title) V to be surnamed ( ب by an
agnomen or title)
لقب laqab pl. القاب alqāb agnomen;
nickname; title, honorific; last name,
surname, family name (as opposed to اسم
given name, first name) │ لقب البطولة title
of champion (in sports)
ملقب mulaqqab surnamed, nicknamed,
called ( ب by the laqab ...) 873
لقح laqaḥa a (laqḥ) and II to impregnate,
fecundate, pollinate ( ھ s.th.); to graft, bud
ھ) a tree); to inoculate, vaccinate ( ه s.o.)
VI to cross-pollinate
لقح laqḥ impregnation, fecundation,
pollination
لقاح laqāḥ seed, semen, sperm; pollen;
infective agent, virus; vaccine │ لقاح الجدري
l. al-judarī variolovaccine; O لقاح الوقاية
serum
تلقيح talqīḥ impregnation, fecundation,
pollination, grafting, budding; inoculation,
vaccination │ تلقيح الجدرى t. al-judarī
vaccination (against smallpox)
دقيق اللواقح daqīq al-lawāqiḥ2 pollen
ملقح mulaqqaḥ inoculated, vaccinated
لقس laqis: لقس النفس l. an-nafs annoyed,
cross
لقط laqaṭa u (laqṭ) to gather, collect,
pick up from the ground, glean ( ھ s.th.) II
= I V to gather, glean ( ھ s.th.); to pick up
ھ) s.th., also, e.g., with the ear) VIII = I;
to receive ( ھ radio waves, a radio
message; to take ( ھ a picture; phot.) │
التقط صورة (ṣūra) to make a picture
لقط laqaṭ that which ill picked up or
gathered, leftovers, gleanings
لقطة luqṭa that which ill picked up or
gleaned, gleanings; article or thing found;
(lucky) find; (eg.) bargain, pickup
لقاط luqāṭ and لقاطة luqāṭa that which is
picked up or gleaned; leftover ears of
grain, gleanings; offal, refuse
لقيط laqīṭ pl. لقطاء luqatā’2 picked up,
found; foundling
لقيطة laqīṭa (female) foundling
ملقط milqaṭ pl. ملاقط malāqiṭ2 (pair of)
tongs, pincers; (pair of) tweezers, pincette;
(pair of) pliers │ ملقط الجنين forceps; ملقط
النار fire tongs
التقاط iltiqāt gathering, collection,
gleaning; taking up, picking up; reception
(radio) │ جھاز الالتقاط jahāẓ al-ilt. receiver
(radio)
لاقط lāqiṭ receiving (radio set); gleaner;
gatherer │ O لاقط الصوت l. aṣ-ṣaut pickup
(of a phonograph); phonograph; O لاقطة
الألغام mine sweeper
ملتقط multaqiṭ finder
لقع laqa‘a a (laq‘) to throwaway, discard ( ھ
s.th.)
لقف laqifa a (laqf, لقفان laqatan) to seize
quickly, grab, snatch ( ھ s.th.); to catch ( ھ
s.th.); to snatch up, take over ( عن ھ s.th.
from s.o.) V and VIII do.; to seize ( ھ on),
rob, usurp ( ھ s.th.)
لقلق laqlaqa to clatter (stork); to babble,
chatter, prattle
لقلق laqlaq and لقلاق laqlāq pl. لقالق
laqāliq2 stork
لقلقة laqlaqa clatter (of a stork); babble,
chatter, prattle; (eg.) gossip
لقم 1 laqama u (laqm) to clog up, obstruct, block
ھ) s.th.); -- laqima a (/aqrn) to eat,
devour. gobble, swallow up ( ھ s.th.) II to
feed bit by bit ( ه s.o.); to load ( ھ a
weapon; syr.) │ لقم القھوة (qahwa) to stir
ground coffee into hot water IV to make ( ه
s.o.) swallow; to feed bit by bit ( ه s.o.)
VIII to devour, swallow up ( ھ s.th.) لقمة
luqma pl. لقم luqam bite; bit, mouthful;
little piece, morsel │ لقمة سائغة titbit,
choice morsel: جعله لقمة سائغة ل (ja‘alahū)
to make s.o. an easy prey of ...; لقمة القاضي
pastry of fine flour, fried in oil like
doughnuts and sprinkled with sugar or
honey
لقيمة luqaima pl. -āt snack, bit, morsel
ملقم mulaqqim pl. -ūn (syr.; mil.)
assistant gunner, loader, cannoneer no. 1
لقمي 2 laqmī or لاقمي (magr.) palm wine 874
لقمان 3 luqmān2 Lokman, a legendary sage and
author of numerous fables │ بقيت دار لقمان
على حالھا (baqiyat) everything has
remained as before
لقن laqina a ( لقانة laqāna, لقانية laqāniya) to
understand, grasp ( ھ s.th.); to gather,
infer, note ( ھ s.th.) II to teach ( ھ ه s.o.
s.th.), instruct ( ھ ه s.o. in); to dictate ( ھ ه
to s.o. s.th.); to instill, infuse, inculcate,
inspire ( ھ ه in s.o. s.th.), insinuate, suggest
ھ ه) to s.o. s.th.); to whisper ( ھ ه to s.o.
s.th.), prompt ( ه s.o.) V = I; to learn,
receive, get ( من ھ s.th. from), be informed
من ھ) of s.th. by)
لقانة laqāna and لقانية laqāniya quick
understanding, grasp
تلقين talqīn instruction, direction;
dictation; dictate; inspiration, insinuation,
suggestion; suborning of a witness (Isl.
Law)
ملقن mulaqqin prompter; inspirer; a
faqīh who instructs the deceased at his
grave what to tell the two angels of death
لقوة laqwa facial paralysis
لقي laqiya a ( لقاء liqā’, لقيان luqyān, لقي
luqy, لقية luqya, لقى luqan) to encounter (، ھ
ه s.o., s.th.), meet ( ھ، ه with s.o., with
s.th.); to meet ( ه s.o.); to come across s.o.
or s.th. ( ھ، ه ), light upon s.o. or s.th. ( ;(ھ، ه
to find ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to experience,
undergo, suffer, endure (III s.th.), meet
with s.th. ( ھ ); to fall to s.o.’s ( ه) lot or
share III to meet, come to meet ( ه s.o.); to
encounter ( ه s.o.), have an encounter ( ه
with); to come across s.o. or s.th. ( ,(ھ، ه
light upon s.o. or s.th. ( ھ، ه ); to
experience, undergo, suffer, endure ( ھ
s.th.). meet ( ھ with s.th.); to receive, get,
obtain, achieve ( ھ s.th.) │ لاقى آذانا صاغية
(ṣāgiyatan) to find willing ears IV to
throw, cast, fling ( ھ s.th.); to throw off,
throw down. drop ( ھ s.th.); to throw
away, discard ( ھ s.th.); to put or lay ( ھ
s.th.) before s.o. ( على ), submit ( على ھ s.th.
to s.o.), pose ( على ھ a question to s.o.); to
report ( على or الى ھ on s.th. to s.o.), set
forth ( على or الى ھ s.th. to s.o.); to recite,
play, sing ( ھ a song, a musical
composition); to present ( ھ s.th., e.g., a
broadcast); to give ( ھ a lecture), hold ( ھ a
class), make, deliver ( ھ a speech); to
extend ( ھ a greeting, الى to s.o.); to
impose, lay ( على ھ s.th. on s.o.), burden ( ھ
على with s.th. s.o.) │ القى باله الى، القى بالا ل
to pay attention to; القى بيانا عن (bayānan)
to make a statement about or on; القى البيض
(baiḍ) to lay eggs; القى بزمامه الى (bi-
ẓimāmihī) or القى مقاليد امره الى فلان (m.
amrihī) to lay one’s rate in s.o.’s hands,
entrust one’s fate to s.o.; القى بنفسه
(binafsihī) to throw o.s. into, plunge into;
القى بنفسه في احضانه (aḥḍānihī) to throw o.s.
into s.o.’s arms; القى بيده (bi-yadihī) to
surrender to s.o., give o.s. up to s.o.; القى
الحبل على الغارب (ḥabl) to give froe rein,
give a free hand, impose no restraint; القى
خطابا على to make a public address to; القى
الدرس (dars) to recite the lesson; القى الرعب
في قلبه (ru‘b, qalbih`i) to strike terror to
s.o.’s heart, frighten, alarm s.o.; القى السلاح
to lay down one’s arms, capitulate,
surrender; القى المع اليه (sam‘) to lend one’s
ear to s.o., listen to s.o.; القوا اليه اسماعھم
(asmā‘ahum) they lent him their ears, they
listened to him; القى عليه سؤالا (suālan) to
put a question to s.o., ask s.o. a question;
القى على عاتقه شيئا to impose s.th. on s.o.,
hold s.o. responsible for; القى علوما to teach
sciences; القى القبض على (qabḍ) to arrest
s.o.; القى القنابل على to drop bombs on s.th.,
bomb s.th.; القى عليه القول (qaul) to dictate to
s.o.; to direct, instruct s.o., give s.o.
instructions; القى عليھا كلمة الطلاق (kalimata
ṭ-ṭalāq) he pronounced the formula of
divorce against her; القى محاضرة
(muhāḍara) to give a lecture, hold a class;
القى المسؤولية عليه ٨٧٥ (mas’ūlīya) to place
the responsibility on s.o., saddle s.o. with
the responsibility V receive ( ھ, ه s.o.,
s.th.); to take, accept ( ھ s.th.); to get,
obtain ( ھ s.th.); to learn ( عن ھ of s.th.
from), be informed ( عن ھ of s.th. by); to
learn ( على or عن ھ s.th. from s.o.), take
lessons ( عن from s.o.), be taught, be
instructed, be coached ( عن by s.o.) │ تلقى
امرا (amran) to receive an order, have
orders (soldier); تلقى الأوامر to take orders
(com., and the like); تلقاه بالتسليم والقبول
(qabūl) to agree wholeheartedly to s.th.,
submit willingly to s.th.; تلقى دروسا في to
take lessons in (some field, ort, science,
eto.); تلقى العلوم في الجامعة to study at the
university VI to meet, join each other,
come together, get together VIII do.; to
encounter, meet ( ب s.o.) X to throw o.s.
down; to lie down, lie
لقى laqan pl. القاء alqā’ offal, discard
لقية luqya encounter, meeting; luqya,
laqīya s.th. found, a find
لقيا luqyā encounter, meeting
لقاية liqāya encounter, meeting; s.th.
found, a find
القية ulqiya riddle, conundrum
تلقاء tilqā’a (prep.) opposite; in front of
│ من تلقاء نفسه min tilqā’i nafsihī or من تلقاء
ذاته by o.s., of one’s own accord,
spontaneously, automatically
تلقائي tilqā’ī automatic; spontaneous;
تلقائيا spontaneously, automatically
ملقى malqan pl. ملاق malāqin meeting
place, rendezvous; junction, crossing,
intersection; road or street intersection,
crossroads
لقاء liqā’ encounter; meeting; get
together; reunion; liqā’a (prep.) in
exchange for, in return for, for, on │ الى
كفالة (kafāla) on bail; الى اللقاء good by! so
long! au revoir!
ملاقاة mulāqāh encounter, meeting, gettogether,
reunion; reception
القاء ilqā’ throwing, casting, throw, cast,
fling; delivery, diction; dictation;
recitation, recital │ علم الإلقاء ‘ilm al-i.
elocution
تلق talaqqin receipt, reception,
acceptance; acquisition (also of a skill, of
knowledge, eto.); learning (of an art, skill,
eto.); pursuit (of studies) │ تلقى العلوم في
studies at (e.g., at a university)
تلاق talāqin meeting, encounter
التقاء iltiqā’ meeting, reunion ( مع with)
ملق mulqin: ملقيات الألغام البحرية mulqiyāt
al-a. al-baḥrīya mine layers
ملى mulqan thrown, cast, discarded
ملتقى multaqan pl. ملتقيات multaqayāt
meeting place, rendezvous; gathering
point, collecting center; intersection,
junction, confluence, crossroads │ الى
الملتقى good-by! so long! au revoir!
لك 1 lakka u (lakk) to hit with the fist, to cuff,
buffet, pommel ( ه s.o.) VIII to be pressed
together, thickly set, crammed, jammed,
crowded; to crowd together, gather in a
mass; to make mistakes or blunders, speak
ungrammatically
لك 2 lakk pl. الكاك alkāk, لكوك lukūk lac, one
hundred thousand (specif., 100,000
rupees)
لك 3 lukk, lakk resin; lao; sealing wax
لكأ laka’a a ( لكء lak’) to strike, hit; -- لكئ laki’a
a ( لكأ laka’) to abide, remain, stay ( ب at a
place) V to be tardy, dilatory, slow, to
dawdle, tarry, hesitate ( في in s.th.); to
loiter, loaf, hang about │ تلكأ في الأداء
(adā’) to be in default, fail to meet one’s
financial obligations
لكأة luka’a hesitant, tardy, dilatory,
sluggish, slow; behindhand, in arrears,
defaulting 876
لكز lakaza u (lakz) to strike with the fist; to
kick ( ه s.o.), to thrust ( ه s.o.)
لكز lakiz miserly, stingy
لكاز likāz pin, nail; peg
لكيع lakī‘ pl. لكعاء luka‘ā’ moan, base,
ignominious, disgraceful, wicked,
depraved; silly, foolish
لكاعة lakā‘a meanness, baseness,
disgracefulness, wickedness, depravity
لكم lakama u (lakm) to strike with the fist, box,
punch III to engage in a fiat fight, box ( ه
with s.o.)
لكمة lakma pl. lakamāt blow with the
fist, punch
ملكمة milkama boxing glove
ملاكمة mulākama fist fight, boxing
matoh
ملاكم mulākim boxer, pugilist, prize
fighter
لكن 1 lakina a (lakan, لكن lukna, لكونة lukūna,
لكنونة luknūna) to speak incorrectly,
barbarously; to stammer
لكنة lukna stutter, stammer; incorrect
usage, ungrammatical language; incorrect
pronunciation
لكانة lakāna: لكانة في الكلام (kalām) speech
defect, faltering way of speaking
الكن alkan2, f. لكناء laknā’2, pl. لكن lukn
speaking incorrectly; stammering,
stuttering
لكن 2 lakan pl. الكان alkān basin, copper basin
لكن 3 lākin, lakinna see لاكن
لكي li-kai, لكيما li-kai-mā see ل li
لم 2 lam (particle, with foll. apoc.) not │ لم يكتب
lam yaktub he did not write; الم a-lam
not ... though? الم اقل لكم (aqul) haven’t I
told you, though? لم -- الا lam -- illā only,
nothing but, just, not till, not before
لم 2 lima = لما li-mā, see ل li
لم 3 lamma u (lamm) to gather, collect,
assemble ( ھ s.th.); to reunite ( ھ s.th.); to
arrange, settle, put in order ( ھ s.th.); to
repair ( ھ s.th.), pass. lumma to suffer from
or be stricken by a slight mental
derangement │ لم شعثه (ša‘atahū) to put
s.th. in order again, straighten s.th. out,
put s.th. right; to recover, pick up; to help
s.o. get back on his feet, لم شمل القطيع
(šamla l-q.) to round up the herd IV to
befall, overcome (fatigue, fear, weakness,
adversities, etc.; s.o.); to pay ( ب s.o.) a
short visit, call ( on s.o.), stop, stay ( ب at
s.o.’s house); to have sexual intercourse (
ب with s.o.); to broach ( ب a topic), .peak (
ب about). discuss ( ب s.th.), to give a
survey ( ب of), outline, state briefly ( ب
s.th.), to touch briefly ( ب on a subject), to
be acquainted or familiar (.... with s.th.),
to get to know ( ب s.th.), to familiarize o.s.,
acquaint o.s. ( ب with s.th.), to commit,
perpetrate ( ب a crime), to take, consume (
ب food, drink) VIII to gather, assemble,
rally; to unite; to visit (s.o.), call ( ه on)
لمة lamma pl. لمام limām collection;
gathering, assembly; visit, call;
misfortune, calamity, slight mental
derangement, touch of insanity
لمة limma pl. لمم limam curl, ringlet,
lock
لمة lumma traveling party; group, troop,
body (of people)
لمم lamam slight mental derangement
لماما limāman occasionally, from time
to time, rarely, seldom
لمام lammām wild thyme (bot.)
المام ilmām knowledge, cognizance ( ب
of s.th.); acquaintance, familiarity,
conversance ( ب with); (pl. -āt) survey,
outline, summary, resume
لامة lāmma evil eye 877
ملموم malmūm collected, gathered,
assembled; concentrated at one point;
slightly insane
ملم mulimm completely familiar,
conversant ( ب with); expert, connoisseur
│ ملم بالقراءة والكتابة literate
ملمة mulimma pl. -āt misfortune,
calamity, disaster
لما 1 li-mā see ل li
لما 2 lammd (conj.) when, as, after; since,
whereas; (particle; with foll. apoc.) not,
not yet
لمباجو (Engl.) lambāgō lumbago
لمبة lamba pl. -āt lamp; tube (radio)
لمج V to take a snack
لمجة lumja appetizer, hors d’oeuvre,
relish, snack
لمح lamaḥa a (lamḥ) to glance ( الى or ه at s.o.);
to see, sight, behold, notice ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.);
to become aware ( ان that); -- (lamḥ, لمحان
lamaḥān, تلماح talmāḥ) to flash, sparkle,
glisten, shimmer II to insinuate, intimate,
give to understand ( الى s.th.), hint ( الى at),
allude, refer ( الى to) III to cast a casual or
furtive glance ( ه at s.o.) IV to glance
casually or furtively ( الى or ه at s.o.)
لمح lamḥ quick look, glance; moment,
instant │ لمح البصر l. al-baṣar glance of the
eye; ، في لمح البصر، كلمح البصر، دون لمح البصر
في اقل من لمح البصر (aqalla) like lightning,
in a trice, instantly, in no time
لمحة lamḥa pl. lamaḥāt quick, casual
look, glance; wink; glow of light, light,
brightness, flash (of lightning) │ فيه لمحة
من ابيه (abīhi) he looks like his father
لماح lammāḥ shimmering, gleaming,
shining
ملامح malāmiḥ2 features, lineaments;
traits; outward appearance, looks │ فيه
ملامح من ابيه (abīhi) he looks like his father;
ملامح وظلال (ẓilāl) lights and shades (in
painting)
تلميح talmīḥ pl. تلاميح talāmīḥ2 allusion,
intimation, insinuation, hint, reference;
تلميحا by way of suggestion, indirectly
لمز lamaza u i (lamz) to give ( ه s.o.) a wink; to
speak ill ( ه of s.o.), carp ( ه at s.o.), find
fault ( ه with s.o.), criticize, blame,
censure, backbite, slander, defame ( ه s.o.)
لمزة lumaza and لماز lammāz faultfinder,
captious critic, caviler, carper
لمس 1 lamasa u i (lams) to touch, handle, feel
with the hand, finger ( ھ s.th.), pass one’s
hand ( ھ over s.th.); to seek ( ھ s.th.), look,
search, ask ( ھ for); to perceive, notice ( ھ
s.th., الى that), become aware ( ھ of s.th., ان
that) │ لا يلمس (yulmasu) intangible,
impalpable; لمس الحقائق to take thing, as
they are, face the facts III to be in touch or
contact ( ھ، ه with s.o., with s.th.); to
touch, feel, finger, palpate ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.);
to have sexual intercourse ( ھا with a
woman) V to feel out, finger, palpate ( ھ
s.th.); to fumble, grope about; to grope,
fumble ( ھ for s.th.); to look, search ( ھ
for); to ask ( ھ for) VI to touch each other,
be in mutual contact VIII to request ( ھ من
s.th. from s.o., ل for s.o.), ask ( من ھ for
s.th. s.o.), solicit ( ل ه s.th. for); to beg ( ھfor),
request urgently ( ھ s.th.); to seek ( ھ
s.th.), look, search ( ه، ھ for s.th., for s.o.)
لمس lams feeling, groping; touching,
touch │ حاسة اللمس ḥāssat al-l. sense of
touch
لمسى lamsī tactual, tactile, of or
pertaining to the sense of touch
لمسية lamsīya (tun.) date which has not
attained full ripeness
لمسة lamsa (n. vic.) touch; (pl. -āt)
retouch 878
لميس lamīs soft to the touch
ملمس malmas pl. ملامس malāmis2 place
of touch, spot touched, point of contact; O
feeler, tentacle (of insects); touch; contact
│ ناعم الملمس soft to the touch
ملمسي malmasī tactual, tactile
ملامسة mulāmasa touching, touch,
contact; feeling, fingering, palpation;
sexual intercourse
تلمس talammus search, quest
التماس iltimās request, solicitation;
application, petition
ملموس malmūs touched, felt; palpable,
tangible; ملموسات things perceptible to the
touch, tangible things
ملتمس multamas pl. -āt request, petition,
application
الماس 2 look up alphabetically
لمص lamaṣ u (lamṣ) to rail ( ه at s.o.); to make
faces ( ه at s.o.)
لمظ lamaẓa u (lamẓ) to lick one’s lips; to
smack one’s lips V do. │ تلمظ بذكره (bidikrihī)
to speak ill of s.o., backbite s.o.
لمع lama‘a (lam‘, لمعان lama‘ān) to gleam,
glitter, twinkle, flash, sparkle, glisten,
shimmer, shine │ لمع بسيفه (bi-saifihī) to
brandish the sword; لمع بيده (bi-yadihī) to
wave one’s hand; لمع في رأسه خاطر
(kāṭirun) a thought flashed through his
mind II to cause ( ھ s.th.) to shine, gleam,
or twinkle; to shine ( ھ s.th.), give
brightness ( ھ to s.th.); to polish ( ھ s.th.);
to burnish ( ھ s.th.) IV to wave (one’s
hand); to point out, give to understand,
intimate, insinuate ( الى s.th.), hint ( الى at),
allude ( الى to) VIII to flash, radiate, glow,
shine; to sparkle, glitter, gleam
لمع lam‘ and لمعان lama‘ān luster, sheen,
shine; shimmer, gleam, glow, brightness,
light
لمعة lum‘a pl. لمع luma‘, لماع limā‘
shimmer, gleam, glow, flash, sparkle,
glitter, brilliancy, radiance, beam; gloss,
luster, burnish, polish; some, a little
لماع lammā‘ bright, brilliant, lustrous,
sparkling, flashing, glistening, shining,
radiant; O glossy, glazed, burnished,
polished, satined, calendered (tech.) │ جلد
لماع (jild) patent leather
المع alma‘2 and المعي alma‘ī sagacious,
smart, shrewd, clever, bright, intelligent;
المع -- alma‘ more lustrous, shinier
المعية alma‘īya sagacity, smartness,
shrewdness, cleverness, brightness,
intelligence
تلميع talmī‘ polishing, polish
الماعة ilmā‘a allusion, hint
لامع lāmi‘ pl. لوامع lawāmi‘2 brilliant,
lustrous, shining, gleaming, shimmering
لامعة lāmi‘a fontanel (anat.); (pl. لوامع
lawāmi‘2) gloss, shine
متلمع mutalammi‘ radiant, brilliant,
shining, lustrous
لملم lamlama to gather, gather up ( ھ s.th.)
ململمة mulamlama trunk, proboscis (of
the elephant)
لن lan (conj.; with foll. subj.) not (referring to
the future)
جديد لنج (eg.) gad`id lang brand-new
لندرة landra London
لندن landan London
لنش (Engl.) lanš pl. -āt launch, small steamer,
motorboat
لنينغراد leningrād Leningrad
لھب lahiba a (lahb, lahab, لھاب luhāb,
لھيب lahīb, لھبان lahabān) to flame, burn,
blaze II and IV to kindle, light, set on fire,
ignite, inflame ( ھ s.th.); to excite, stir 879
up, provoke ( ھ s.th.) V to flame; to be
aflame, be ablaze, burn (also fig.: cheek,
anger, thirst, etc.) VIII = V; to catch fire,
flare up; to be inflamed (also med.)
لھب lahab, lahīb and لھاب luhāb flame,
blaze, flare
لھبان lahbān, f. لھبى lahbā, pl. لھاب lihāb
parched with thirst
الھاب ilhāb kindling, lighting, ignition,
inflammation
التھاب iltihāb burning; inflammation
(also med.); in compounds corresponding
to Engl. “-it is” │ التھاب الشعب ilt. aš-šu‘ab
bronchitis
التھابي iltihābī inflammatory;
inflammable
ملتھب multahib burning, flaming,
blazing, aflame, ablaze; inflamed; heated,
excited, glowing, aglow │ قطن ملتھب (quṭn)
guncotton
لاھوت look up alphabetically
لھث lahata a (laht, لھاث luhāt) to loll
one’s tongue with thirst or fatigue; to pant,
gasp, be out of breath; to breathe heavily
لھاث luhāt panting, pant, gasp │ لھاث
الموت l. al-maut death rattle, agony of
death
لھثان lahtān f. لھثى lahtā panting,
gasping, out of breath; thirsty
لھج lahija a (lahaj) to be devoted, dedicated ( ب
to s.th.), be attached ( ب to s.o., to s.th.), be
very fond ( ب of), be in love ( ب with); to
be bent. be intent, be keen ( ب on), be
eager ( ب for), be mad ( ب about, after); to
do ( ب s.th.) constantly or fervently│ لھج
بالثناء عليه (tanā’) to extol s.o. fervently; لھج
بذكره (bidikrihī) to speak constantly of s.o.,
mention s.o.’s name continually with
praise; لھج بشكره (bi-šukrihī) to launch
forth into profuse thanks or praises; لھج
بالضراعة (ḍarā‘a) to resort to humble pleas
IV causative: الھج لسانه بالشكر (lisānahū,
šukr) to elicit profuse thanks from s.o. XI
الھاج ilhājja to curdle, coagulate (milk)
لھجة lahja tip of the tongue; tongue;
manner of speaking; tone; dialect,
vernacular; language │ بلھجة العاتب in a
reproachful tone, reproachingly; شديد اللھجة
in violent language, sharply worded
لھج luhja appetizer, hors d’oeuvre
لھد lahada a (lahd) to overburden, over-exert ( ه
s.o.)
لھذم lahdam sharp, pointed
لھط lahaṭa a (lahṯ) to slap
لھف lahafa a (lahaf) to sigh ( على for s.th. lost);
to regret, deplore, lament ( على s.th.); to
grieve ( على for), fret, worry ( على shout) V
do.; to be eager, yearn ( على for, also ,(ل
pant ( على after, also (ل
لھف lahf regret, grief, sorrow │ يا لھف
yā lahfa and يا لھفا yā lahfā oh, what a pity!
too bad! alas! يا لھف (with foll. genit. of
pers.) oh, how unfortunate he is! يا لھفي
عليك (lahfī) oh, how sorry I feel for you!
لھفة lahfa sigh, lament; anxiety,
apprehension, concern, worry, sorrow,
grief; yearning, longing, hankering, desire,
impatience
لھفان lahfān2 f. لھفى lahfā, pl. لھافى
lahāfā, لھف luhuf sighing; regretful; sad,
sorry, worried, sorrowful, grieved;
longing, yearning
لھيف lahīf pl. لھاف lihāf regretful, sorry,
sad, worried, sorrowful, grieved
لاھف lāhif worried, troubled, sorrowful,
grieved, full of regret
ملھوف malhūf worried, troubled,
depressed; apprehensive, concerned,
anxious; 880 covetous, eager ( الى or على
for), desirous ( الى or على of); longing.
yearning
متلھف mutalahhif yearning, longing,
hankering; anxious, eager, impatient
لھق lahiqa a to be snow-white
لھلق lahlaqa to loll one’s tongue with thirst
لھم lahima a (lahm, laham), V and VIII to
devour, gobble, swallow up ( ه s.th.); to
consume, destroy ( ه s.th.; fire) IV to make
ه) s.o,) swallow ( ه s.th.); to inspire ( ه ھ s.o,
with) X to ask ( ه s.o.) for inspiration or
advice; to seek to find out ( ھ s.th.), try to
get ( ھ s.th.); to pray, turn ( ه ھ to God for)
لھم lahim and لھوم lahūm greedy,
covetous, voracious, gluttonous
الھام ilhām pl. -āt inspiration; instinct
ملھم mulham inspired
لھو) and لھي) لھا lahā u (lahw) to amuse o.s.,
distract o.s., divert o.s., pass or kill time (
ب with s.th,); to play, toy, dally, trifle; to
fritter away, trifle away, prattle away ( بوقته
bi-waqtihī one’s time); to enjoy o.s., have
fun, have a good time; to delight, take
pleasure ( الى or ب in); to enjoy, savor,
relish ( ب s.th.); -- ( لھي luhiy, لھيان lihyān)
to turn one’s attention ( عن from); to try to
forget, forget, give up, renounce ( عن s.th.),
become oblivious ( عن of); -- لھي lahiya a (
لھا lahan) to like, love ( ب s.th.), be very
fond ( ب of), be in love, be infatuated ( ب
with), be mad ( ب about, after); to turn
one’s attention ( عن from), become
oblivious ( عن of), forget, give up,
renounce ( عن s.th,); to pay no attention (
عن to), be heedless ( عن of) II to delight,
amuse, divert, distract ( ب ه s.o. with),
divert s.o.’s ( ه) attention ( عن from), make (
عن s.o.) oblivious ( عن of); to keep, divert (
عن s.o. from), take s.o.’s ( ه) mind away (
عن from) III to approach, be near ( ه s.o.)
IV = II; V and VI to amuse o.s., pass the
time ( ب with s.th,), take pleasure, delight (
ب in); to seek distraction ( ب عن in s.th.
from) VIII do.: to play, toy, trifle ( ب with
s.th.)
لھو lahw amusement, entertainment,
diversion, distraction, passtime, pleasure,
sport, fun, play │ دور اللھو dūr al-l. and
اماكن اللھو places of entertainment.
amusement centers
لھاة lahāh pl. لھوات lahawāt, لھيات
lahayāt, لھي luhiya, lihīy, لھا lahan, لھاء
lahā’ uvula
لھوى lahawī velar (adj.) الحرفان اللھويتان
al-ḥarfān al-lahawīyatān the velars q and
k
ملھاة malhāh object of delight; comedy
│ ملھاة عامية (‘āmmīya) popular farce
ملھى malhan pl. ملاه malāhin place of
entertainment, amusement center;
amusement, entertainment, fun, diversion,
distraction │ ضريبة الملاھي admissions tax,
entertainment tax
ملھى milhan pl. ملاه malāhin plaything
toy; pl. musical instruments, also آلات
الملاھي
تلھية talhiya distraction, diversion,
amusement
لاه lāhin (with عن ) heedless, inattentive,
inadvertent, oblivious, forgetful
مله mulhin amusing, entertaining,
diverting, pleasant
لو lau (conj.) if (as a rule, introducing
hypothetical conditional clauuses) │ لو ان
lau anna (introducing nominal clauses) if;
لولا laulā if not; لولانا if it weren’t (hadn’t
been) for us; فيما لو fī-mā lau in case that;
ولو wa-lau although, though; even if;
(optative particle) if only ...! would
that ...! I wish ...! لو يعلم I wish he knew! if
he only knew! 881
لوبيا lūbiyā bean (bot.) │ لوبيا بلدي (baladī) (eg.)
cowpea (Vigna Binenais Endl.; bot.); لوبيا
عافن (eg.) hyacinth bean, lablab (Dolichos
lablab L.; bot.)
لوبيا lūbyā Libya
لوبي lūbī Libyan
لات (لوت 1 ) (lāta: لات حين مناص l. hīnu manāṣin
it’s too late to escape
لوت 2 lūt (eg.) maigre (Sciaena aquila)
لاث (لوث ) lāta u (laut) and II to stain, tarnish,
soil, sully ( ھ s.th.); -- lawita a (lawat) to
be dilatory, tardy, slow; to hesitate, tarry,
linger V to be or get stained, blotted,
tarnished, soiled, sullied ( ب with) VIII to
be dilatory, tardy, slow; to be obscure,
confused, complicated ( على for s.o.)
لوثة lauta stain, blot, spot
لوثة lūta languor, lassitude, fatigue,
faintness; passion, weakness ( في for, also
with foll. genit.: for) │ فيه (به) لوثة he is a
little crazy, he has a bee in his bonnet
ملوث mulawat stained, blotted,
tarnished, soiled, sullied, unclean; stricken
with cholera, pestilence, etc.
ملتاث multāt mentally confused
لوج (Fr. loge) lōj pl. -āt, الواج alwāj (theater)
box, loge; (masonic, etc.) lodge
لاح (لوح ) lāḥa u (lauḥ) to appear, show, loom,
emerge, come in sight; to become visible (
ل to s.o.); to break, begin to show (dawn);
to shine, gleam, glint, flash, shimmer,
glimmer, sparkle; to seem, appear; to
wither, singe, parch, scorch; to tan ( ه s.o.;
sun) │ يلوح لي ان it seems to me that ...; على
ما يلوح as it seems, apparently II to make a
sign, beckon, wave ( ب ل or الى to s.o.
with); to signal; to allude ( ب to), hint ( ب
at), intimate, insinuate ( ب ل to s.o. s.th.),
give ( ب ل s.o. s.th.) to understand; to
flourish, brandish, swing, wave ( ب s.th.);
to turn grey ( ھ the head; of old age); to
burn, tan ( ه s.o.; sun); to plank, lay with
planks ( ھ the floor) │ لوح بيديه (biyadaihi)
to wave with the hands IV to appear,
show, come in sight; to shimmer,
glimmer, glint, flash, sparkle; to wave,
brandish, flourish, swing ( ھ s.th.)
لوح lauḥ pl. الواح alwāḥ, alwāḥ board,
blackboard; slate; tablet; slab; plate, sheet;
pane; plank, board; panel; small board,
signboard; shoulder blade, scapula │ لوح
اردواز (arduwāz) slab of slate, slate; O لوح
مجعد (muja‘‘ad) corrugated iron; لوح الجليد
block of ice; لوح حديد sheet iron; لوح زجاج
zujāj sheet of glass, pane; O لوح متحرك
(mutaḥarrik) spring-board (in sports); لوح
معدني (ma‘dinī) metal plate, metal sheet;
لوح النافذة windowpane
لوحة lauḥa pl. -āt, الواح alwāḥ board;
blackboard; slate; tablet; slab; plate, sheet;
pane; panel; plaque; plane, surface;
screen; placard, poster; picture, painting │
لوحة الاسم l. al-ism doorplate, name plate;
لوحة التوزيع switchboard (el., tel.); لوحة الداما
checkerboard; لوحة زيتية (zaitīya) oil
painting; لوحة سوداء (saudā’) blackboard;
bulletin board; لوحة الشطرنج l. aš-šaṭranj
chessboard; لوحة الكتابة slate; writing tablet;
blackboard
لواح lawwāḥ withering, singeing,
parching, scorching
لوح talwīḥ pl. -āt beckoning, waving,
flourishing, brandishing; sign, signal,
wink, wave; allusion; hint, intimation,
insinuation; metonymy; pl. hints,
references; remarks, annotations, marginal
notes
لائحة lā’iḥa pl. -āt لوائح lawā’iḥ2
program, project; bill, motion (esp., in
parliament); order, decree, edict;
ordinance; regulation, rule; pl. لوائح
outward appearance, looks, outward
sign│ لائحة قانونية، لائحة القانون 882 bill, draft
law; لائحة السفر l. as-safar timetable, train
schedule, railroad guide; لائحة الطعام l. aṯ-
ṯa‘ām (syr.) menu, bill of fare
ملوحة mulawwiḥa signal, semaphore
(railroad)
ملتاح multāḥ sun-tanned, sunburned
لوذ) ) lāda u (laud, لواذ liwād, lawād, luwād, لياذ
liyād) to take refuge, seek shelter ( ب with
s.o., in s.th.), have recourse, resort ( ب to);
to keep close ( ب to), observe religiously (
ب s.th.)
ملاذ malād refuge, protection; shelter;
asylum, sanctuary; protector
لائذ lā’id one seeking shelter or protection,
refugee
لوذع and لوذعي see لذع
لور lūr lyre
لورد (Engl.) lord pl. -āt lord
لورى (Engl.) lorry, truck
لوز II to stuff with almonds ( ھ s.th.); (eg.) to
form bolls (cotton)
لوز lauz almond(s) (coll.), (eg.) patch
(on a shoe) │ لوز القطن l. al-quṭn cotton
bolls; دودة اللوز dūdat al-l. boll weevil
لوزة lauza pl. -āt almond; اللوزتان the
tonsils (anat.) │ التھاب اللوزتين ilt. allauzatain
tonsillitis
لوزى lauzī almond-shaped, almond
(adj.)
لاس (لوس ) lāsa u (laus) to taste
لات (لوص ) lāṣa u (lauṣ) to peep, peer, pry
(through a chink in the door, or the like)
III do. ( ه for s.o.); to stare, gaze ( ھ or الى at
s.th.), to look firmly, unflinchingly ( ھ or
الى at s.th.); to dupe, cheat, deceive ( ه s.o.)
ملاوص mulāwiṣ sly, cunning, wily
لاط (لوط ) lāṯa u (lauṯ) to stick, cling, adhere
( to); to coat with clay, to plaster ( a wall)
لوط lūṯ Lot (Biblical name)
لوط lūṭī sodomite, pederast
لواط liwāṭ and لواطة liwāṭa sodomy,
pederasty
لاع (لوع ) lā‘a u (lau‘) to he or heoome restive,
impatient; to become ill j to seize
vehemently, overwhelm, torment, make
sick ( ه s.o.; love); to tan ( ه s.o.; sun) II to
torture, torment, agonize VIII to be
burning, inflamed, languishing (with love,
longing); to feel burning anxiety ( على for
s.o.)
لوعة lau‘a ardor of love, amorous
rapture, lovesickness; pain, grief, anguish,
anxiety, torment, torture, agony
التياع iltiyā‘ burning, enrapturedness,
burning anxiety. anguish; agony, pain,
suffering
ملاوع mulāwi‘ cunning, artful, wily,
crafty, sly
لوغاريتمات lūgāritmāt logarithms
لاف ( لوف 1 ) lāfa u (lauf) to eat, chew ( ھ s.th.)
لوف 2 lūf luffa, dishcloth gourd (Luffa
cylindrical Roem; bot.)
ملوق milwaq pl. ملاوق malāwiq2 spatula
لاك (لوك 1 ) lāka u (lauk) to chew ( ھ s.th.); to
talk constantly about s.th. ( ھ ), to bring
into discredit ( سمعته sum‘atahū s.o.’s
reputation) │ لاك الكلام (kalām) to be
inhibited in one’s speech, stammer,
express o.s. imperfectly, السؤال الذي تلوكه
الألسنة (alsina) the question which is on
everyone’s lips; ما تلوكه الألسن (alsun) what
people say, what is generally rumored 883
لائكي 2 and لائكية look up alphabetically
لوكانده (It. locanda) and لوكنده lōkanda pl. -āt
inn; hotel
لولب laulab pl. لوالب lawālib2 screw; spiral;
spiral spring, coil spring, extension spring;
spring; axle; (fig.) mainspring, pivot point
لولبي laulabī screw-shaped; spiral,
helical │ O لولبيات زھرية (zuharīya)
spiroohetes, syphilogenous bacteria; درج
لولبي (daraj) spiral staircase
لام (لمس 1 ) lāma u (laum, ملام malām, ملامة
malāma) to blame, censure, rebuke, chide,
scold, reproach ( في or على ه s.o. for) II to
censure sharply, reprove, reprimand ( ه
s.o.) IV = I; V to blame o.s. ; to tarry,
linger, take one'. time ( في or على in or with
s.th.), procrastinate, temporize, hedge VI
to blame each other VIII to be censured,
he blamed X to deserve blame, be
blameworthy, reprehensible
لوم laum and لومة lauma censure,
rebuke, reproof, blame, reproach
لومة luwama and لوام lawwām severe
censurer, stem critic; censorious
ملام malām and ملامة malāma pl. ملاوم
malāwim2 censure, rebuke, reproof, blame,
reproach
تلويم talwīm censure, rebuke, reproof
لائم lā’im pl. لوم luwwam, لوام lawwām,
ليم luyyam censurer, critic, accuser
لائمة lā’ima pl. لوائم lawā’im2 censure,
rebuke, reproof, blame, reproach
ملوم malūm, مليم malīm and ملام mulām
censured, blamed; blameworthy,
reprehensible
لومان lūmān penitentiary, penal servitude
لومانجي lūmānjī convict, inmate of a
penitentiary
لون II to variegate, dapple, make colorful ( ھ
s.th.); to color, tint, tinge, paint, daub ( ھ
s.th.); to make up, rouge ( ھ the face, etc.)
V to be colored or tinted; to color, change
color, become discolored; to he colorful,
variegated; to be fickle
لون laun pl. الوان alwān color; coloring,
tint, tinge, hue, shade; complexion; kind,
sort, specimen, species; dish, course; pl.
(with foll. genit.) all kinds of │ الوان الأطعمة
a. al-aṭ‘ima all kinds of food; مختلف الألوان
muktalif al-a. variegated, multicolored,
motley, varied, various; جلى الوانه jallā
alwānahu to bring out the different
aspects of s.th., point up s.th., make s.th.
stand out
لوني launī colorful, colored, color- (in
compounds), chromatic
تلوين talwīn coloring
ملون mulawwan colored, tinted,
colorful, many-colored, variegated,
kaleidoscopic
متلون mutalawwin colored, tinted;
many-colored, multicolored; iridescent,
opalescent, scintillating; changeable,
inconstant, unsteady; whimsical,
capricious, fickle
لونجي (eg.) lawingī and لاونجي lāwingī
attendant, bath attendant
لونجية lawingīya housekeeper, woman
attendant, servant, housemaid
لوندا (It. lavanda) lawandā lavender │ ماء اللوندا
lavender water
لوى lawā i ( لي layy, لوي lawīy) to turn ( ھ s.th.);
to crook, curve ( ھ s.th.); to bend, flex,
bend up, down, back or over ( ھ s.th.); to
twist, contort, wrench, warp ( ھ s.th.); to
distort, pervert ( ھ s.th.); to turn ( ھ the
head), turn away, avert ( ھ the face); to
turn around, turn ( على to s.o., to s.th.), face
على) s.o., s.th.); to 884 think back ( على on),
recall ( على s.th.); to care, bother ( على
about), pay attention or heed ( على to) │
لوى فيه اللسان (lisān) to speak ill of s.o.,
backbite s.o.; لا يلوي على شيء not to care
about anything, be utterly reckless; -- ( لي
layy, ليان layyān) to conceal, keep secret (
عن ھ s.th. from s.o.); -- lawiya a ( لوى
lawan) to be crooked, curved, bent; to
writhe, twist; to wind, coil II to bend,
bow, incline, tilt, twist, wrench, contort,
turn, crook, curve ( ھ s.th.); to pervert,
distort, complicate ( ھ s.th.) IV to turn,
twist, bend, crook, curve ( ب or ھ s.th.); to
avert ( عن ھ s.th. from); to wave ( بيده biyadihī
one’s hand); to hoist ( ھ a flag); to
take away, put away, remove ( ب s.th.) │
الوى عنان الشيء to avert, prevent, restrain
s.th. ( عن from), check, curb s.th. V to be
twisted, winding, tortuous, sinuous, bent,
crooked; to be turned, be twisted; to turn,
twist, wind, meander, coil; to writhe,
wriggle, squirm; to display shrewdness
and cunning VIII to be curved, crooked,
bent; to be turned, be twisted; to twist,
warp, get contorted, get bent out of shape;
to turn off, turn away; to turn one’s back
(or on s.th.); to be or become difficult,
involved, intricate, complicated ( على for
s.o.)
لي layy bending, twist(ing), turn(ing) │
لي الشيشة (eg.) the flexible tube of the
narghile; لا يعرف الحي من اللي (ya‘rifu l-
ḥayya) he doesn’t know enough to come
in out of the rain, he wouldn't know a
snake from a garden hose
لية Iayya pl. لوى liwan bend, fold,
flexure, twist, tortuosity, sinuosity, turn,
curve
لوى lawan pl. الواء alwā’ gripes, colic;
agony, pain, hardship │ قاسى الألواء واللأواء
(la’wā’) to die a thousand deaths
لوى liwan pl. الواء alwā’, الوية alwiya
curvature
لواء liwā’ pl. الوية alwiya, الويات alwiyāt
banner, flag, standard; brigade (mil.;
U.A.R., Leb., Ir.); major general (mil.;
U.A.R.); rear admiral (Eg.); province,
district (Ir.; the country is subdivided into
امير اللواء 14 │ لواء brigadier general (Ir.);
لواء جوي (jawwī) air-force brigade; عقد لواء
شيء (liwā’a š.) to found, start, originate,
produce, cause, arouse, provoke s.th.;
البارحة المعقود لواؤھا للأميرال ... (liwā’uhā) the
admiral’s flagship ...; (عقد له لواء المجد (النصر
‘uqida lahū l. ul-majd (un-naṣr) approx.:
he was awarded the laurel of fame (of
victory)
لواء lawwā’ wryneck (zool.)
ملوى milwan pl. ملاو malāwin spanner,
wrench; O peg (of stringed instruments)
التواء iltiwā’ curvedness, curvature;
bend, twist, tortuosity, sinuosity, curve;
crookedness, wryness; perverseness,
absurdity │ التواء الأرض ilt. al-arḍ
unevenness of the terrain
التواءة iltiwā’a (n. vic.) pl. -āt a bending,
flexing, twist (e.g., of the body in
dancing)
لاو lāwin pl. لواة luwāh turning, twisting
│ غير لاو على reckless of, without regard
for
ملوي malwī crooked, curved, bent;
twisted, warped, contorted; winding,
meandering, tortuous, sinuous; perverted,
wrong, absurd
ملتو multawin = ملوى
ملتوى multawan pl. -āt turn (of the
road), curve; curvature
لي 1 and لية see لوى
لياء 2 liyyā’ mackerel shark, porbeagle (zool.)
ليبريا lībaryā Liberia 885
ليبيا lībiyā Libya; ليبي lībī Libyan
ليت laita and يا ليت yā laita (particle, with foll.
noun in acc. or personal suffix) would
God! if only ...! │ ليتني مت لأجلك laitanī
muttu li-ajlika would God I had died for
you! ليته كان ھنا I wish he were here! if only
he were here! يا ليت كان يذھب (yadhabu) I
wish he had gone! ليت شعري (ši‘rī) I wish I
knew ...!
ليترجية līturjīya pl. -āt liturgy
ليتوانيا lītuwānīya Lithuania
ليتواني lītuwānī Lithuanian
ليث lait pl. ليوث luyūt lion
لياذ see لوذ
ليرا līrā and ليرة līra pl. -āt pound (as a
monetary unit) │ ليرة انكليزية (ingilīzīya)
pound sterling
ليس 1 laisa (without imperf.) not to be (with ب
or acc. s.th. or s.o.); not to exist; (=
intensified لا) not │ ليس الا (illā)
terminating a sentence: only, and no more,
and nothing else; ليس – سوى (siwā) nothing
but, only, merely; ليس على شيء من الحقيقة
there is not a grain of truth in it; ليس – فقط
بل -- (faqaṭ, bal) not only -- but also; ليس ل
not to have, not to possess; ليس لنا شيء we
don’t have anything; ليس له ان he has no
right to ..., he mustn’t ...; ليس من not to
belong to …, have nothing to do with ...;
اليس كذلك a-laisa ka-dālik? Isn’t it so?;
(with ب and participle) to be unable to,
لست بفاعل lastu bi-fā‘ilin I can’t do it
ليس 2 layisa a (layas) to be valiant, brave,
courageous
اليس alyas2, f. ليساء laisā’2, pl. ليس līs
valiant, brave, courageous
ليسانس (Fr. licence) līsans the academic degree
of a licentiate
ليف II to rub with palm fibers ( ھ s.th.) V to
form fibers, become fibrous
ليف līf (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. الياف alyāf
fibers, fibrils, bast │ ليف ھندي (hindī) coco
fibers, coir; اليف الكتان a. al-kattān flax
fibers
ليفة līfa (n. un.) fiber, fibril; tuft of palm
fibers used as a brush │ ليفة الاستحمام bath
ھ sponge, luffa
ليفي līfī and ليفاني līfānī fibered, fibrous
تليف talayyuf fibration, fibrillation;
cirrhosis (med.)
ليق) لاق) lāqa i (laiq) to befit, become ( ب s.o.),
be proper, seemly ( ب for s.o.), be suitable
ب) to s.o.), be worthy ( ب of s.o.); to be
suited, appropriate, fit ( ب for s.th.); to fit
(garment)
ليقة līqa pl. ليق liyaq tuft of cotton or
silk threads which is inserted in an
inkwell; putty; clay; mortar
لياقة liyāqa propriety, seemliness,
suitableness; decorum, decency;
capability, skill; efficiency, competence;
worthiness, merit, desert; correct
behavior, blameless conduct, good
manners │ مخل باللياقة (mukill improper,
unseemly, unbecoming
اليق alyaq2 more suitable, more
appropriate, more proper, fitter ( ب for)
لائق lā’iq suitable, appropriate, proper,
befitting, becoming, seemly; suited,
adapted, fit; worthy, deserving
ليل lail (usually m.) nighttime, night (as
opposed to نھار daytime); pl. □ ليالي layālī
(syr.) a certain vocal style; ليلا lailan at
night │ ليل نھار laila nahāra day and night
ليلة laila pl. -āt, ليال layālin, ليائل layā’il2
night (u opposed to يوم ); evening; soirée;
الليلة al-lailata tonight I بين ليلة وضحاھا 886
(wa-ḍuḥāhā) overnight; ليلة امس lailata
amsi last night; yesterday evening; ليلة
خيرية kairīya) charity soirée, benefit
performance; ليلة الدخلة l. ad-dukla wedding
night; ليلة راقصة soirée dansante, evening
dance; ليلة زھرةا glamorous evening party;
ليلة شادية (šādiya) soirée of vocal music; ليلة
ليلاء (lailā’2) dark night; في ليلة ليلاء in the
dark of night, under cover of the night; ليلة
القدر l. al-qadr or ليلة القضاء l. al-qaḍā’ the
night in which, according to sura 97, the
Koran was revealed, celebrated between
the 26th and 27th of Ramadan; ليلة المعراج l.
al-mi‘rāj the night of the 27th of Rajab in
which the Prophet made his journey
through the seven heavens; ليلة نصف شعبان
l. niṣf aš-ša‘bān the night between the 14th
and 16th of Shaban, when, according to
popular belief, the heavenly tree of life is
shaken, shedding the leaves of those who
will die next year; ليلة النقطة l. an-nuqṭa the
night of June 17th (the 11th day of the
Coptic month Ba’ūna) when, according to
popular belief, a miraculous drop falls
from heaven, thus causing the annual rise
of the Nile
ليلتئذ lailata’idin (in) that night; (on) that
evening
ليلي lailī nocturnal, nightly; of night,
night- (in compounds); evening (adj.)
ليلى lailā a woman’s name │ كل يبكي
يغني) على ليلاه ) kullun yabkī (yugannī) ‘alā
lailāhu everyone sings his own tune, does
as he pleases, follows his own fancy; كل
يدعي وصلا بليلاه (yadda‘ī waṣlan)
everybody claims to be the chosen one,
every-one brags in his own way
ليلاء see ليلة
ليلك (Engl.) lailak lilac
ليمان līmān pl. -āt harbor, port; penitentiary
ليمون laimūn, līmūn (n. un. ة) pl. -āt lemon │
ليمون حامض lime; شراب الليمون šarāb al-l.
lemonade
لان (لين 1 ) lāna i (līn, ليان layān) to be or become
soft, tender, gentle, mild, pliable, flexible,
supple; to yield, give way; to soften,
relent, calm down; to become milder,
friendlier │ لا يلين inflexible, unbending;
لانت قناته (qanātuhū) to show o.s.
compliant, yield, relent, give in II and IV
to soften, relax, ( ھ s.th.); to placate,
soothe, allay, mitigate, assuage, temper,
moderate ( ھ s.th.) ill to be gentle, kind,
friendly ( ه to s.o.); to treat with kindness
and leniency ( ه s.o.)
لين līn softness; tenderness; tender
treatment; gentleness; flexibility,
pliableness, suppleness; yieldingness,
compliance, tractability; pliancy,
smoothness, diarrhea │ لين العظام softening
of the bones, osteomalicia (med.); لين القيادة
tractability, docility; حروف اللين the “soft”
letters ا، و، ي
لين layyin pl. -ūn, اليناء alyinā’2 and lain
pl. -ūn soft; flabby, feeble; tender; gentle;
flexible, pliable, yielding; pliant, supple,
resilient, elastic, tractable │ لين العريكة l.
al-‘arīka mild-mannered, gentle-hearted;
لين القياد tractable, manageable, docile,
obedient; بطنه لين (baṭnuhū) he suffers
from diarrhea
ليونة luyūna softness; tenderness;
gentleness; flexibility, pliability,
suppleness │ ليونة الجانب sociability,
companionableness, compliance,
yieldingness, tractability
ملاينة mulāyana friendliness, kindness
ملين mulayyin softening, emollient;
dissolvent, diluent; aperient, cathartic,
laxative; ملينات laxatives
ليان 2 see لوى ٨٨٧
م
ش . م . م . (= شركة مسئولية محدودة ) Inc., Ltd.
م ma for ما what? after prepositions: الى م ilā
ma whereto? Where? which way?
whither? بم bi-ma with what? Wherewith?
لم li-ma why? wherefore? حتى م ḥattā ma
how far? to which point?
ما mā 1. (interrogative pronoun) what │ لما limā
why? wherefore? for what reason? ماذا
mā-dā what (on earth)? لماذا li-mādā why
(on earth)? ما لك what’s the matter with
you? what is it? ما لي، ما لك etc., (with foll.
verb) why? wherefore? what ... for? why
should I, should you, etc.? ما انت وذاك mā
anta wa-dāka what’s that to you? what
has this to do with you? what do you
know about that? ما اجمله mā ajmalahū
how handsome he is! ما افضل عمر mā
afḍala ‘umara! how excellent Omar is! --
2. (relative pronoun) that which, what;
something which; whatever, all that ... │
ما شاء لله see شاء؛ كثيرا ما katīran mā not
seldom, as often as not, very often; بما فيه
bi-mā fīhi including ..., ... inclusive; ما كان
من امضاء المعاھدة (imḍā’i l-mu’āhada) the
fact that the agreement has been signed,
the agreement having been signed; -- 3.
(indefinite pronoun) foll. an indefinite
noun: some, a certain │ لأمر ما li-amrin
mā because of something or other, for
some reason or other; يوما ما yauman mā
some day, sometime in the future; -- 4.
(negation) not │ ما ان (in) not
(intensified); ما ان -- حتى mā an – ḥattā no
sooner had he ... than ..., he had hardly …
when ...; وما ھي الا ان wa-mā hiya illā an or
وما ھو الا ان (with foll. verb in perfect)
before long he ..., presently ...; then,
thereupon; وما ھي الا ان -- حتى wa-mā hiva
illā an – ḥattā no sooner had he ... than he
had hardly when ...; -- 5. (conjunction) as
long as │ ما دمت حيا mā dumtu ḥayyan as
long I live; ما لم mā lam so long as ... not,
unless; -- 6. whenever; as far as, to the
extent or degree that │ ما واتتني الفرص
(wātatnī l-furaṣ) (whenever opportunities
came my way, i.e.) whenever I had a
chance
ما بين mā-bain antechamber, anteroom
(of the Turkish Sultan); chief chamberlain’s
office (in Ottoman Turkey)
ماء and مائي see موه
ماتينيه (Fr. matinée) mātīnēh matinee
ماجريات see جري
ماجستير mājistēr master, schoolmaster
ماخور mākūr pl. مواخير mawākīr2 house of ill
repute, brothel
مار mār Mar, lord (Chr., preceding the names
of saints), saint
مارس mars March (month)
مارستان māristān lunatic asylum
مارش marš march (mus.)
مارشال mārišāl marshal, field marshal │ مارشال
جوي (jawwī) air marshal (formerly, a rank
reserved exclusively for the King; Eg.)
مارشالية mārišālīya marshalcy, rank or
position of a marshal
مارك mark pl. -āt mark (monetary unit)
ماركسي marksī Marxist
ماركسية marksīya Marxism
ماركة marka pl. -āt mark, sign, token │
ماركة تجارية (tijārīya) trade-mark 888
ماروني mārūnī pl. موارنة mawārina Maronite
(adj. and n.)
مازوت māzūt mazut (residue in oil distillation,
used as a fuel), heavy oil
ماس mās and ماسة māsa (for الماس ) diamond
ماسي māsī diamond (used attributively)
ماسورة māsūra pl. مواسير mawāsīr2 pipe, tube;
hose; pipestem; water pipe, water main;
gun barrel; conduit, conduit pipe; pipeline
(esp., for oil)
ماسون (Fr. maçon) māsōn Freemason
ماسوني māsōnī freemasonic, masonic
ماسونية māsōnīya Freemasonry
ماشك māšik pl. مواشك mawāšik2 tongs, fire
tongs
مئق ma’iqa a ( مأق ma’aq) to sob
مأق ma’q pl. مآق ma’āqin inner corner
of the eye
مأقة ma’qa sobbing, sob
موق mūq pl. آماق āmāq inner corner of
the eye
ماكياج (Fr. maquillage) mākiyāiii face painting,
make-up
ماكينة mākīna pl. -āt, مكائن makā’in2 machine
مالطة malṭa Malta
مالطي malṭī Maltese (adj. and n.)
مالنخوليا mālinkōliyā or ماليخاليا mālīkōliyā
melancholia
مأمأ ma’ma’a to bleat (sheep)
مأن ma’ana a (ma’n) to sustain, supply with
provisions, provision, victual ( ه s.o.)
مأنة ma’na pl. ma’anāt, مؤون mu’ūn
navel, umbilicus; umbilical region
مؤنة mu’na and مؤونة ma’ūna pl. مؤن
mu’an provisions, food.; store, stock;
supply; burden, encumbrance,
inconvenience; trouble, pains, effort │ مؤن
حربية (ḥarbīya) war material
مئني see مائة below
مانجو mangō mango, mango tree (bot.)
مانجوست mangost mongoose, ichneumon
(zool.)
المانش (Fr. la Manche) al-mānš the English
Channel
مانوليا mānūliyā magnolia (bot.)
مانوي mānawī Manichaean
مانوية mānawīya Manichaeism,
doctrines of Manes
مانيفاتورة mānīfātūra manufactured goods, dry
goods, textiles
مانيفستو mānīfistō manifest, list of a ship’s
cargo
مانيكان mānīkān, (also مانوكان mānūkān) pl. -āt
mannequin, fashion model
ماھية māhīya pl. -āt quality, quiddity, essence,
nature; salary, income; pay (mil.)
مايسترو (It. maestro) māyistrō maestro,
conductor
مائة or مئة mi’a pl. مئون mi’ūn, مئات mi’āt
hundred │ في المائة per cent
مئوي mi’awī and مئيني mi’īnī centesimal,
centigrade; percentile, percentual │ عيد
مئوي (‘īd) 100th anniversary, centennial;
نسبة مئوية or نسبة مئينية (nisba) percentage;
درجة مئوية (daraja) centigrade
(thermometer)
مايو 1 māyū May
مايو 2 (Fr. maillot) māyō and مايوه māyōh tights
مت matta u (matt) to spread, extend, stretch ( ھ
s.th.); to seek to establish a link ( الى to s.o.,
ب by marriage), enter into relations ( الى
with); to be related, become 889 related
by marriage ( الى to), marry into the family
of ( الى ); to belong ( الى to); to be associated,
be connected ( الى with) │ بصلة الى (bi-
ṣilatin) to have close ties with s.o., be
related (by marriage) to s.o.; to be
connected with s.th., have to do with s.th.;
مت له باقرب الصلة (bi-aqrabi ṣ-ṣila) to be
most intimately connected with s.o.
ماتة mātta close ties; family ties, kinship
متح mataḥa a (matḥ) to draw from a well ( ھ
water)
متر mitr pl. امتار amtār meter (measure of
length)
متري mitrī metric(al)
متراليوز (Ft. mitrailleuse) mitrāliyōz machine
gun
متع mata‘a a (mat‘, متعة mut‘a) to carry away,
take away ( ب s.th.); -- ( متوع mutū‘) to be
strong, firm, solid │ متع النھار (nahār) it
was broad daylight, the sun was high II to
make ( ه s.o.) enjoy ( ب s.th.); to furnish,
equip, supply ( ب ه s.o. with); to give as
compensation ( ھ ھا to a divorced woman
s.th.) │ متعه لله God grant him enjoyment
throughout his life; متع البصر (baṣara) to
gratify the eye IV to make ( ه s.o.) enjoy (
ب s.th.); to have the usufruct ( ب of s.th.) V
and X to enjoy, savor, relish ( ب s.th.)
متعة mut‘a pl. متع muta‘ enjoyment,
pleasure, delight, gratification; recreation;
compensation paid to a divorced woman
(Isl. Law); (also نكاح المتعة ) muta,
temporary marriage. usufruct marriage
contracted for a specified time and
exclusively for the purpose of sexual
pleasure (Isl. Law) │ اماكن المتعة recreation
centers
متاع matā‘ pl. امتعة amti‘a enjoyment,
pleasure, delight, gratification; object of
delight; necessities of life; chattel,
possession, property; goods, wares,
commodities, merchandise; furniture;
implements, utensils, household effects;
baggage, luggage, equipment, gear; useful
article, article of everyday use; things,
objects, stuff, odds and ends │ متاع العين m.
al-‘ain delight of the eyes; سقط المتاع saqaṭ
al-m. scrap, waste, discard, refuse; الأمتعة
الشخصية (šakṣīya) personal belongings; متاع
المرأة m. al-mar’a cunnus (anat.)
امتع amta‘ more enjoyable, more
delightful; recreative, recreational
امتاع imtā‘ pleasure, delight,
gratification (which s.th. affords)
تمتع tamattu‘ enjoyment │ اسھم تمتع
ashum t. participating certificates, shares
entitling the bolder to participation in the
net profit without the right to vote
استمتاع istimtā‘ enjoyment; love of
pleasure, epicureanism
ماتع māti‘ long
ممتع mumatti‘ pleasant, delicious,
enjoyable, delightful, gratifying
ممتع mumatta‘ enjoying ( ب s.th.), in
position ( ب of)
ممتع mumti‘ pleasant, delicious,
enjoyable, delightful, gratifying;
interesting
متن matuna u ( متانة matāna) to be firm, strong,
solid II to make firm or strong ( ھ s.th.); to
strengthen, consolidate, fortify ( ھ s.th.)
متن matn pl. متون mutūn, متان mitān half,
or side, of the back; back (esp., of
animals, but also fig.); main thing, main
part; body (e.g., of a document or journal,
aside from footnotes, annotations, etc.),
text (of a tradition, as distinguished from
the isnād; of a book, as distinguished from
the commentary; also, in general,
linguistic or literary text); middle of the
road, roadway, pavement; surface; desk of
a ship │ على متن aboard (a ship or
airplane); على متن البحر 890 (m. il-baḥr) by
sea, sea-borne; على متن الھواء (m. il-hawā’)
through the air, air-borne
متن matn and متن firm, strong, solid
متانة matāna firmness, strength, solidity,
hardiness; will power, strength of will,
determination, backbone, firmness of
character, fortitude; succinctness,
conciseness of style
تمتين tamtīn strengthening,
consolidation
متى matā s. (interrogative particle) when? at
what time? │ الى متى and حتى متى till when?
how long? -- 2. (conjunction) when,
whenever │ متى ما whenever
مثاث matāt cream, cosmetic
مثل matala u ( مثول mutūl) to resemble ( ه s.o.),
be or look like s.o. ( ه), boar a likeness ( ه
to); to imitate, copy ( ه s.o.); to compare,
liken ( ب ه s.o. to); to represent, mean,
signify ( ھ s.th.), stand for ( ھ ); to stand
erect ( بين يديه baina yadaihī before s.o. in
audience), appear before s.o.; to present
o.s. to s.o.; to present itself to the eye, be
on view; to plant o.s., stand; to step forth,
come forward, enter, appear, make one’s
appearance (esp. of an actor, on the stage)
│ مثل بين يدي الملك (b. yadayyi l-malik) to
have an audience with the king, be
received in audience by the king; -- u
(matl) to maim, mutilate ( ب s.o.); -- u
(matl, مثلة mutla) to make an example ( ب
of s.o.); -- matula u ( مثول mutūl) to stand,
appear ( بين يديه baina yadaihi before s.o. in
audience) II to make ( ھ s.th.) like s.th.
else ( ب), make ( ھ s.th.) similar. analogous
ب) to); to assimilate (biol.); to give or
quote as an example ( ب ل s.th. of, also ھ
s.th. على of), exemplify ( ل ب with s.th.
s.th.), use as a simile ( ب ھ s.th. for); to
compare, liken ( ب ھ, ه s.o. s.th. to); to
punish severely, treat harshly ( ب s.o.); to
maim, mutilate ( ب s.o.); to represent
pictorially or graphically, show ( ھ, ه s.o.,
s.th.), picture, depict, describe ( ھ, ه s.o.,
s.th.); to portray, paint ( ه s.o.), sculpture a
bust or statue ( ه of s.o.); to represent ( ه
s.o., ھ s.th.); to act (on stage or screen),
appear as an actor; to play, act ( دورا
dauran a part or role), star ( دورا in a role);
to stage, perform ( ھ a play); to form,
constitute (chem.) │ مثل به اشنع تمثيل (ašna‘
t.) to make a dreadful example of s.o.,
punish s.o. with utmost cruelty III to
resemble ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.), be or look like
s.o. or s.th. ( ھ, ه ), be similar, bear a
likeness ( ھ, ه to); to correspond, be
analogous ( ھ, ه to s.o., to s.th.); to
compare, liken ( ب ه s.o. to) V to make o.s.
similar, assimilate o.s. ( ب to s.o.); to
become similar ( ب to), become like s.o. or
s.th. ( ب), follow ( ب s.o. s.th.), take after
s.o. or s.th. ( ب); to take on the shape of
s.o. ( ب); to assimilate, absorb ( ھ s.th.); to
do likewise, imitate, copy ( ب s.o., s.th.); to
imagine, fancy ( ب s.th., with ه and verb;
s.o. to do s.th.); to get an idea ( ھ of); to
give or quote as an example, use as a
simile ( ب s.th.); to quote, cite ( ب a verse);
to present itself, be represented, be visible,
find visual expression ( في in); to embody,
personify, (im)personate, typify ( ھ s.th.);
to stand erect, appear ( بين يديه baina
yadaihi before s.o.) VI to resemble each
other, be alike, go together, agree, match;
to recover ( من from) │ الى الشفاء or تماثل
للشفاء (šifā’) to be on the way to recovery
VIII to take as a model or an example,
imitate, copy, follow ( ھ s.th.); to submit,
subject o.s. ( ل to s.o., to s.th.); to obey ( ھ
an order)
مثل mitl pl. امثال amtāl s.th. similar, s.th.
of the same kind; resemblance, similarity,
similitude, likeness; image; equivalent;
891 (with foll. genit. or suffix) s.o. like ...,
one like ...; s.th. like ...; مثل mitla (prep.)
and كمثل ka-mitli similar to, like, just as;
one like; s.th. like; the same as; (just) as
much as │ ھم مثله hum mitluhū they are
like him, they are of his kind; بالمثل in the
same manner, likewise, equally, also, too;
مثل ما mitla mā just as, as well as; بمثل ما
bi-mitl mā in the same manner as; اجر المثل
ajr al-m. adequate payment or wages; عامله
بالمثل (‘āmalahū) to repay s.o. like for like,
treat s.o. in like manner; مبدأ المعاملة بالمثل
(mabda’ al-mu‘āmala) principle of
reciprocity; مقابلة المثل بالمثل (muqābalat alm.)
retaliation, reprisal; امثاله amtāluhū
people like him, people of his kind; امثال
ابي بكر people like Abū Bakr; الى ثلاثة امثاله
up to three times as much
مثلما mitlamā (conj.) as
مثلي mitlī replaceable; fungible (Isl.
Law)
مثلى mutlā see امثل amtal
مثل matal pl. امثال amtāl likeness;
metaphor, simile, parable; proverb, adage;
example; lesson, similar case; ideal,
model; مثلا matalan for example, for
instance, e.g. │ مثل كمثل he is comparable
to ..., he is like ...; مثل اعلى (asmā) or مثل
اعلى (a‘lā) ideal; ضرب الأمثال see ؛ ضرب
الأمثال السائرة proverbs; على رأي المثل (ra’yi lm.)
as the proverb says
مثال mitāl pl. امثلة amtila, مثل mutul s.th.
equal; s.th. similar; simile, parable,
allegory; example; pattern, standard;
exemplary punishment; model; image,
picture │ على مثال ... in the manner of ...;
after the pattern or model of ...; مثال اعلى
(a‘lā) pl. مثل عليا (‘ulyā) ideal; مثل عالية
(‘āliya) ideals
مثالي mitālī parabolic; allegoric; typical,
representative; model; exemplary; ideal │
مثال النزعة m. n-naz‘a idealist
مثال mattāl pl. -ūn sculptor
مثالة exemplariness, perfection,
superiority; (pl. -āt, مثائل matā’il2) lesson,
task, assignment
مثيل matīl pl. مثل mutul like, similar,
analogous; equal, match │ مثيله f. مثيلتھا of
his (its) kind, of her kind; لا مثيل له
(matīla), ليس له مثيل، لم يسبق له مثيل (yasbiq)
incomparable, matchless, unrivaled,
unparalleled
مثول mutūl standing erect; appearance;
presentation; audience
امثولة umtūla pl. -āt, اماثيل amātīl2
example; deterrent example, warning,
lesson; proverb; assignment, lesson
امثل amtal2, f. مثلى mutlā, pl. اماثل amātil2
closer to perfection, coming nearer the
ideal; ideal; model, exemplary, perfect │
السبيل المثلى ل the ideal way to ...
تمثال timtāl pl. تماثيل tamātīl2 sculptured
image; statue │ تمثال نصفي (niṣfī) bust
تمثيل tamtīl pl. تماثيل tamātīl2 quotation
of examples, exemplification; likening,
comparison; assimilation; portrayal,
picturing, depiction, description;
representation; diplomatic representation;
dramatic representation, acting, playing
(of an actor); performance, show;
dramatic art; exemplary punishment │
تمثيل تجاري (tijārī) commercial agency;
تمثيل فلان (in motion-picture
announcements) starring so-and-so; بدل
التمثيل badal at-t. allowance for
representation, allowance for professional
expenditure, expense allowance; دار التمثيل
theater, playhouse, opera house; فن التمثيل
fann at-t. dramatic art, theater; sculpture;
على سبيل التمثيل for the purpose of
illustration
تمثيلي tamtīlī of or pertaining to the
theater or stage, theatrical, histrionic;
dramatic │ ملعب تمثيلي (mal‘ab) theater,
playhouse
تمثيلية tamtīlīya: تمثيلية غنائية (ginā’īya)
opera 892
مماثلة mumātala resemblance, similarity,
similitude, likeness, correspondence;
analogy; exact equivalence (Isl. Law)
تمثل tamattul assimilation (biol.)
تماثل tamātul matching, agreement,
correspondence, resemblance, similarity,
similitude, likeness, recovery,
convalescence
امتثال imtitāl obedience, compliance,
consent
ماثل mātil standing, standing forth;
placed, set down; displayed, on display;
emerging, arising, cropping up, appearing,
presenting itself │ ماثل امام عينيه (amāma
‘ainaihi) present before s.o.’s eyes; ماثل
للعيان (li-l-‘iyān) visible, conspicuous,
evident, obvious; ماثل في حضرته (ḥaḍratihī)
in front of s.o., in s.o.’s presence
ماثلة mātila lamp, chandelier
ممثل mumattil representing,
representative, representational; -- (pl.
-ūn) representative (also, e.g., diplomatic),
deputy, agent; performer, player, stage
player, actor; comedian │ ممثل تجاري
(tijārī) commercial agent
ممثلة mumattlila pl. -āt actress
ممثلية mumattilīya representation,
agency │ ممثلية سياسية (siyāsīya) diplomatic
representation
ممثل mumattal depicted, portrayed;
represented; assimilated (biol.)
مماثل mumātil resembling, similar, like,
comparable; corresponding, analogous
متماثل mutamātil resembling each other,
similar, of the same kind, homogeneous;
mutually corresponding, homologous;
identical; assimilating, assimilative
ممتثل mumtatil obedient, submissive,
compliant
مثانة matāna pl. -āt (urinary) bladder
مج majja u (mail) to spit out, disgorge, eject,
emit, discharge ( ھ s.th.); to reject,
dismiss, discard ( ھ s.th.) II to become
ripe, ripen, mellow
مجاج mujāj and مجاجة mujāja spittle,
saliva; juice
مجد majada u (majd) and majuda u ( مجادة
majāda) to be glorious, illustrious, exalted
II and IV to praise, extol, laud, glorify,
celebrate V to be extolled, be glorified, be
lauded, be praised; to bout, glory
مجد majd pl. امجاد amjād glory;
splendor, magnificence, grandeur;
nobility, honor, distinction
مجدي majdī laudable, praiseworthy,
glorious
مجيد majīd glorious, illustrious;
celebrated, famous; glorified. exalted;
praiseworthy, laudable, admirable,
excellent, splendid; noble │ الكتاب المجيد the
Koran
مجيدي majīdī medjidie, a Turkish silver
coin of 20 piasters coined under Sultan
Abdul-Medjid; (of money) Turkish
امجاد amjād (pl. of مجيد ) people of rank,
distinguished people
امجد amjad2 pl. اماجد amājid2 more
glorious, more illustrious; more
distinguished
تمجيد tamjīd praise, glorification,
exaltation, idolization
مجر 1 majara u (majr) to be thirsty, feel thirsty,
to thirst
مجر majr numerous (army)
ماجور mājūr pl. مواجير mawājīr2 (eg.)
round earthen trough or tub used for
making dough; tall, bulging earthen vessel
with a wide mouth
المجر 2 al-majar the Hungarians; Hungary
مجري majarī Hungarian 893
مجر 3 majar a small weight 18 قيراط = ٣.٦١ g
(Eg.)
ماجريات see جرى
مجريط majrīṭ2 Madrid
مجوس look up alphabetically
مجلة majla pl. مجال mijāl, (coll.) مجل majl
blister; see also under جل jalla
ماجل mājil pl. مواجل mawājil2 (tun.)
cistern
ممجمج mumajmaj indistinct, scribbled, illegible
مجن 1 majana u (mujn, مجون mujūn, مجانة
majāna) to joke, jest; to scoff, mock, jeer
III to jeer, scoff, gibe ( ه s.o.), mock, poke
fun ( ه at s.o.), joke, jest ( ه with s.o.), make
fun ( ه of s.o.), play wild jokes ( ه on s.o.) V
to make insolent jokes VI to mock at each
other
مجانة majāna buffoonery, clowning; (pl.
-āt prank; antic
مجان majjān, impudent, insolent,
unrestrained, wanton, shameless; jester;
prankster, wag, buffoon; free, free or
charge, gratuitous; مجانا majjānan or بالمجان
bi-l-majān free of charge, for nothing,
gratis
مجاني majjānī free, free of charges,
gratuitous
مجانية majjānīya gratuitousness,
exemption from fees, remission of fees
مجون mujūn buffoonery, clowning;
shamelessness, impudence
مجوني mujūnī brazen sarcast, cynic
ماجن mājin pl. مجان mujjān impudent,
shameless, brazen, insolent, saucy; joker,
jester, wag, buffoon
ماجن 2 mājin pl. مواجن mawājin ماجل =) 2 ) (tun.)
cistern
مجنيزيوم magnīzīyom magnesium
مجوس majūs Magi, adherents of Mazdaism
مجوسي majūsī Magian; Magus, adherent
of Mazdaism
مجوسية majūsīyya Mazdaism
مح maḥḥ worn off, threadbare, shabby
مح muḥḥ the best, choicest part, pith,
gist, quintessence; egg yolk
محص maḥaṣa a (maḥṣ) to render clear, clarify,
purify ( ھ s.th.) II do.; to rectify, put right (
ھ s.th.); to put to the test ( ھ s.th.); to test,
examine closely ( ھ s.th.) IV to reappear,
re-emerge, come out again V do.; to be
clarified. be purified VII to he clarified, he
purified
محيص maḥīṣ shiny, flashing (sword)
تمحيس tamḥīṣ pl. -āt clarification;
testing, thorough examination
محض maḥaḍa a (maḥḍ) to he sincere ( ھ ه
toward s.o. in), show or manifest sincerely
ھ ه) to s.o. s.th.; e.g., love, affection); --
maḥuḍa u ( محوضة muḥūḍa) to be of pure
descent; to be pure, genuine, unmixed,
unadulterated IV to be sincere ( ھ ه toward
s.o. in) V to devote o.s. exclusively ( ل to
s.th.), he solely dedicated ( ل to s.th.)
محض maḥḍ of pure descent, pureblood;
pure, unmixed, unadulterated; genuine;
sheer, downright, outright (e.g., lie,
nonsense, etc.); محضا maḥḍan only,
merely, exclusively, solely │ بمحض اختياره
bi-maḥḍi kt. entirely of his own accord;
لمحض صالحھا li-maḥḍi ṣāliḥihā solely in
her own interest, only for her own good
امحوضة umḥūḍa sincere advice
محق maḥaqa a (maḥq) to efface, blot out,
strike out, erase ( ھ s.th.); to eradicate,
exterminate, annihilate, destroy ( ھ s.th.)
IV to wane, become invisible (moon); to
894 perish V, VII ( انمحق or امحق
immaḥaqa) and VIII to be or become
effaced; to be annihilated, be destroyed,
perish
محق maḥq effacement, obliteration;
eradication, extermination, annihilation,
destruction
محاق maḥāq, muḥāq, miḥāq waning of
the moon
محك maḥuka a (maḥk) and maḥika a (maḥak)
to be quarrelsome, contentious,
cantankerous, quarrel, wrangle, bicker; to
dispute stubbornly III to pick a quarrel,
quarrel, wrangle, have an argument ( ه with
s.o.) IV and V = I
محك maḥik quarrelsome, contentious,
cantankerous, disputatious, bickering;
quarrelsome person, bickerer; wrangler
مماحكة mumaḥaka quarrelsomeness,
disputatiousness, petulance; quarrel, row,
wrangle, dispute; (pl. -āt) chicanery;
bickering, wrangling
ماحك māḥik and مماحك mumāḥik
quarrelsome, contentious, cantankerous,
disputatious; quarrelsome person,
bickerer, wrangler
محل maḥala a, maḥila a (maḥl, محول muḥūl)
and maḥula u ( محالة maḥāla) to be barren
(land, year); -- maḥāla, maḥila a and
maḥula u ( محال miḥāl) to plot, scheme,
intrigue ( ب against s.o.) IV to be barren
and arid; to render barren ( ھ the soil); to
be overdue, be withheld, fail to set in
(rains) V to seek to attain by cunning or
through intrigues ( ھ s.th.), strive
cunningly ( ھ for); to seek a pretext; to
propagandize or advertise ( ل s.th.) artfully
or with unfair means) │ تمحل العذر (‘udr) to
use a pretext, make an excuse
محل maḥl barrenness, aridity, drought;
dearth, famine; cunning, craft, deceit; (see
also under حل ḥalla)
محالة maḥāla pl. محال maḥāl pulley,
block and tackle; (see also (حول
محال muḥāl slyness, cunning, craft,
insidiousness
ماحل māḥil barren, sterile; bare, bleak
ممحل mumḥil barren, sterile
محن maḥana a (maḥn) and VIII to try, try out,
test, put to the test, subject to a test ( ه s.o.,
ھ s.th.); to afflict, subject to a trial or trials
ه) s.o.); to examine ( ه s.o.)
محنة miḥna pl. محن miḥan severe trial,
ordeal, tribulation; affliction; hardship,
distress, suffering, misfortune
امتحان imtiḥān pl. -āt test, experiment;
examination │ امتحان الدخول entrance
examination; امتحان نھائي (nihā’ī) final
examination
ممتحن mumtaḥin tester; examiner
ممتحن mumtaḥan examined; tried,
tested; examinee, candidate
محا (محو ) maḥā u (maḥw) to wipe off, rub out,
scratch out, erase, strike out ( ھ s.th.); to
efface, obliterate, blot out ( ھ s.th.); to
wipe out, eradicate, exterminate,
extinguish ( ھ s.th.); to eliminate, abolish (
ھ s.th.) │ لا يمحى lā yumḥā ineffaceable,
indelible II to wipe out, extinguish,
exterminate, extirpate ( ھ s.th.) V, VII (
انمحى and امحى immaḥā) and VIII to be effa
ؤed, obliterated, extinguished, wiped out,
exterminated; to disappear, vanish
محو maḥw effacement, obliteration,
blotting out; erasure, deletion;
elimination; abolition, abolishment,
annulment
O ممحاة mimḥāh and محاية maḥḥāya
eraser
امحاء immiḥā’ extinction, extermination,
extirpation
ماحية māḥiya eraser 895
مخ mukk pl. مخاخ mikāk, مخاخة mikāka
brain; marrow, medulla; core, essence;
purest and choicest part
مخي mukkī brain- (in compounds),
cerebral
المخا al-mukā Mocha (seaport in SW Yemen)
مخر 1 makara a (makr, مخور mukūr) to plow; to
move, out, shear, cleave ( ھ through s.th.);
(of a ship) to plow, traverse ( ھ the sea)
ماخر mākir plowing the sea (ship)
ماخرة mākira pl. مواخر mawākr2 ship
ماخور 2 mākūr pl. مواخير mawākīr brothel
مخق makraqa to brag, tell fibs; to swindle,
cheat
مخض makaḍa a u i (makḍ) to chum ( ھ milk);
to shake violently ( ھ s.th.); -- makiḍa a (
مخاض makāḍ, mikāḍ) to be parturient, be
in labor V = I makiḍa; to bear, produce,
bring forth, effect, bring about ( عن s.th.);
to be churned (milk)
مخاض makāḍ labor pains
مخيض makīḍ buttermilk
مخاضة makkāḍa and ممخضة mimkaḍa pl.
مماخض mamākiḍ churn
مخط makaṭa a u (makṭ, مخوط mukūṭ) and V to
blow one’s nose
مخاط mukāṭ nasal mucus, snot │ مخاط
الشمس m. aš-šams and مخاط الشيطان m. aššaiṭā
gossamer
مخاطي mukāṭī snotty; mucous; slimy,
ropy
مخيط mukaiṭ (eg.) sebésten (Cordia
myxa L.; bot.)
مخطر II tamakṭara to walk with a graceful,
swinging gait
مخل 1 mukl pl. امخال amkāl, مخول mukūl lever,
pinch bar, crowbar
2 □ مخلة mikla (= مخلاة ) pl. مخل mikal, مخالي
makālī nosebag
مخمض makmaḍa to rinse the mouth
مد madda u (madd) to extend, distend, expand,
dilate ( ھ s.th.); to stretch, stretch out ( ھ
s.th.), crane ( ھ the neck); to draw out,
protract ( ھ s.th.); to spread out ( ھ s.th.); to
layout ( ھ s.th.), lay ( ھ tracks, pipeline); to
spread ( ھ a net); to lengthen, elongate,
prolong ( ھ s.th.); to grant a respite or
delay; to rise (flood, river); to help, aid,
assist ( ه s.o.), support ( ب ه s.o. by or with),
supply, provide ( ب ه s.o. with); to
reinforce ( ھ an army); to fertilize, manure
ھ) the soil) │ مد عمره (‘umrahū) to prolong
s.o.’s life (of God); مد البصر الى (baṣara) to
turn one’s eyes, direct one’s glance to; مد
جذرا في الأرض (jidran, arḍ) to strike roots
(tree); مد الحبالة له to lay a snare for s.o.; مد
رجله بقدر كسائه (rijlahū bi-qadri kisā’ihī) to
cut one’s coat according to one’s cloth,
make the beet of it, adjust o.s. to the
circumstances; مد رجليه بقدر لحافه (rijlaihi
bi-gadri likāfihī) do.; مد سمعه (sam‘ahū) to
prick up one’s ears; مد المائدة to set the
table; مد في المشي (mašy) to take long
strides; مد المواسير to lay pipe; مد اليه يده
(yadahū) to extend one’s hand to s.o. II to
extend, distend, expand, dilate ( ھ s.th.); to
stretch out ( ھ s.th.); to spread, spread out (
ھ s.th.); to lengthen, elongate, protract,
prolong ( ھ s.th.); to discharge pus,
suppurate, fester III to delay, defer,
procrastinate; to put off from day to day ( ه
s.o.) IV to help, aid, assist ( ه s.o.), support
ب ه) s.o. with), provide, supply, furnish ( ب
ھ، ه s.o., s.th. with); to lend, impart ( ب ه to
s.th. s.th.); to reinforce (. an army); to
postpone, delay, grant a respite; to
suppurate, fester │ امد بأجله (bi-ajalihī) to
grant s.o. another respite in this life (of
God) V to be spread, spread out, extended,
stretched out; to extend, stretch, spread;
896 to lengthen, expend, distend, dilate; to
stretch o.s., stretch out, sprawl (on a bed,
end the like) VIII to be extended,
distended, stretched; to be laid (wires,
pipeline); to extend or reach ( الى to s.th.),
stretch, spread ( الى to s.th., over a
distance); to lengthen, become drawn out,
become protracted or prolonged; to be
long; to develop, grow ( الى into) X to take,
get, draw, derive, borrow ( من ھ s.th.
from), provide o.s. with ( ھ ); to ask for
help ( ه s.o.)
مد madd pl. مدود mudūd extension;
distension, dilation, expansion; stretching;
spreading; lengthening, elongation,
prolongation, protraction; drawing out of
the voice over long vowels (in Koran
recitation); rising, rise (of water, of the
flood); supply ( ب with) │ مد البصر m. albaṣar
range of vision; madda l-b. as far as
the eye can see; مد النظر m. an-naẓar
farsightedness, foresight; حروف المد the
“literae productionis” ا و ي (gram.)
مدة madda sign over alif ( آ) denoting
initial long a (’ā)
مد mudd pl. امداد amdād, مداد midād
mudd, a dry measure (Pal. = 18 l, Tangier
= 46.6 l)
مدة midda pus, purulent matter
مدة mudda pl. مدد mudad period (of
time), space of time, interval; while;
duration; limited or appointed time, term;
مدة muddata within, in the course of,
during │ في مدة ... within, in the course of,
during; مدة من الزمان (zaman) period (of
time), space of time, interval, while;
muddatan min az-z. for a while, for some
time
مدد madad pl. امداد amdād help, aid,
assistance, support, backing,
reinforcement; pl. resources; auxiliaries
مداد midād ink; lamp oil; fertilizer,
manure, dung; pattern, style │ سجله بمداد
الفخر sajjalahū bi-m. il-fakr to inscribe s.th.
with golden letters; على مداد واحد after the
same pattern
مديد madīd pl. مدد mudud extended,
outstretched, stretched, elongated; long,
prolonged, protracted; tall, big; slender,
high, towering; المديد name of a poetical
meter │ زمان مديد (zamān) or مدة مديدة
(muda) long time; عمر مديد (‘umr) greet
age; مديد البصر m. al-baṣar farsighted,
farseeing
مداد maddād a creeping plant
امدة amidda warp of a fabric
تمديد tamdīd pl. -āt lengthening,
elongation, prolongation, extension
امداد imdād help, aid, assistance,
support, sustentation, maintenance,
provisioning; supply (mil.); pl. -āt
auxiliaries, reinforcements, supplies
تمدد tamaddud extension, spreading,
expansion; stretching, distention, dilation,
dilatation, widening
امتداد imtidād stretching, stretch,
extension, extensity; extensibility,
dispensability; expansibility; widening,
distention, dilation, dilatation,
lengthening, elongation, prolongation;
expanse; length; size, extent, spread,
compass, range, scope │ على امتداد along,
alongside of
استمداد istimdād procurement of support,
bringing up of reinforcements; supply
(mil.)
ماد mādd stretching, expanding,
extending, spreading; trailing, creeping
(plant)
مادة mādda pl. مواد mawādd2 stuff,
matter; material possession; substance;
material; component, constituent,
ingredient; fundamental constituent,
radical, chemical element, base; subject,
theme, topic; school subject, field of
study; discipline, subject matter, 897
curricular subject; article, paragraph (e.g.,
of a law, treaty or contract); stipulation,
contractual term j pl. material, materials;
agents, elements │ مادة اصلية (aṣlīya) root
of a word; مواد اولية (awwalīya) primary
elements; raw materials; مواد تجارية
(tijārīya) articles of commerce,
commodities; مواد التجميل cosmetics; مواد
جنائية (jinā’īya) criminal cases (jur.); مواد
حربية (ḥarbīya) war material; مواد خام raw
materials; مواد الصباغة dyestuffs, dyes; مواد
صلبة (ṣulba) solid constituents, solids (e.g.,
of milk); O مواد مصنوعة manufactured
goods, ready-made goods; O مواد التطيب
medicaments, drugs; مواد الإعاشة m. ali‘
āša, مواد المعيش m. al-ma‘īš food-stuffs,
food; مواد غذائية (gidā’īya) foodstuffs,
victuals, food, nutritive substances;
fodder; مواد اللغة m. al-luga vocabulary of a
language; O مواد مضادة للحيويات (muḍādda
li-l-ḥayawīyāt antibiotics; مواد ملتھبة
(multahiba) combustible materials,
inflammable matter; fuel; مواد مدنية
(madanīya) civil cases (jur.); مواد النسيج
textiles
مادي māddī material; corporeal,
physical; materialistic; (pl. -ūn)
materialist; objective (as opposed to
(شخصي
مادية māddīya materialism │ الماديات
والمعنويات (ma‘nawīyāt) material and ideal
things
ممدود mamdūd extended; outstretched;
elongated; prolonged, protracted, drawn
out; extensive, great, large; provided with
madda (gram.)
ممدد mumaddad spread, outspread,
outstretched; stretched out, sprawling,
lying; extended, elongated, long
ممتد mumtadd extended, outstretched;
spread, outspread, laid out; extending,
stretching, spreading; extensive, wide,
large, comprehensive
مستمد mustamadd taken, derived ( من
from)
مداليه madāliya pl. مداليات madāliyāt medal
مداليون madaliyōn medallion, locket, pendant
مدح madaḥa a (madḥ, مدحة midḥa) to praise,
commend, laud, extol ( ه s.o.); to eulogize,
celebrate in poems ( ھه s.o.) II do. V to be
commended, be praised, be lauded; to
boast ( ب of s.th.), glory ( ب in), pride o.s. (
ب on), be proud ( ب of) VIII = I
مدح madḥ commendation, laudation,
praise; extolment, glorification;
panegyrical litsrature; acclaim │ المدح في
لله the glorification of God
مديح madīḥ pl. مدائح madā’iḥ2 praise,
laudation, commendation; panegyrical
poem, panegyric; eulogy, encomium,
tribute
امدوحة umdūḥa pl. اماديح amādīḥ2 praise,
laudation, commendation; panegyrical
poem; eulogy, encomium, tribute
تمدح tamadduḥ extolment, glorification;
self-praise, vainglory, ostentation,
swaggering
مادح mādiḥ and مداح maddāḥ panegyrist,
encomiast, eulogist
مدر 1 madar (coll.; n. un. ة) clods of earth or
mud, loam, clay │ اھل الوبر والمدر ahl alwabar
wa-l-m. the tent-dwellers and the
city-dwellers, the nomads and the
sedentary population
مدن madara clod of earth or mud; small
hump of the ground
مدراء 2 mudarā’2 pl. of مدير mudir, see دور
مدراس madrās2 Madras (state and city in S
India)
مدريد madrīd2 Madrid
مدلن (Engl.) midlin middling, of
medium quality (com.)
مدن II to found or build cities; to civilize,
urbanize, humanize, refine V تمدن ٨٩٨
tamaddana to be or become civilized;
تمدين tamadyana do.; to enjoy the
comforts; of civilization, the amenities of
life
مدينة madīna pl. مدن mudun, مدائن
madā’in2 town, city │ مدينة النبي or المدينة
(usually followed by the epithet المنورة almunawwara)
Medina (city in W Saudi
Arabia); مدينة السلام m. as-salām Baghdad
(capital of Iraq); مدينة الكاب Cape Town;
المدن الكبرى (kubrā) the big cities
مدني madanī urban, urbanized, citydwelling,
town-dwelling; civilized,
refined, polished; civilian (as opposed to
military), civil, civic; secular; town
dweller, townsman, city dweller, urbanite,
citizen, civilian; of Medina, Medinan (adj.
and n.) │ دعوى مدنية (da‘wā) civil action,
civil suit, civil proceeding (jur.); الطيران
المدني (ṭayarān) civil aeronautics; قانون مدني
civil law
مدنية madanīya civilization
تمدين tamdīn civilizing, civilization,
advancement in social culture,
humanization, refining, raising of moral
standards
تمديني tamdīnī civilizing, civilizatory,
civilizational
تمدن tamaddun and تمدين tamadyun
civilization; refinement of social culture
تمدني tamaddunī civilized
متمدن mutamaddin civilized;
sophisticated, refined, educated
متمدين mutamadyin civilized, provided
with the comforts of civilization
مدى III to grant a respite or delay ( ه to s.o.) IV
do. VI to persist, persevere ( في or ب or على
in), keep, stick, adhere ( في or ب or على to);
to continue ( في s.th.), keep or go on ( في
doing s.th.); to go far, go to extremes ( في
in); to continue, last, draw out
مدى madan extension, expanse, stretch,
spread, compass, range, scope, space,
latitude, reach; distance, interval,
interspace; extent, degree, measure, scale,
proportion; utmost point, extreme, limit;
space of time, duration, period; (prep.) مدى
mad4 for the duration of, during, in a
(given) period of, in the course of │ مدى
البصر m. l-baṣar range or field of vision,
visual range; مدى الحياة m. l-ḥayāh lifetime;
for life; المدى الحيوي (ḥayawī) lebensraum;
مدى الدوران m. d-dawarān continually,
constantly, perpetually; مدى الصوت m. ṣ-
ṣaut roach of the voice, calling distance;
مدى العمر m. l-‘umr lifetime; مدى m. layyām
throughout the days, continually;
الى مدى بعيد at a great distance; على مدى عشر
امتار (‘ašri amtār) at a distance of 10
meters; بعيد المدى far-reaching, مدفع بعيد المدى
(midfa‘) long-range gun; في المدى الأخير
after all, when all’s said and done, in the
last analysis
مدية madya, mudya, midya pl. مدى
mudan, midan, مديات mudyāt, mudayāt
butcher’s knife; knife
مدوي madawī, mudawī, midawī cutler
تماد tamādin: مع التمادي، مع طول التمادي in
the long run
مديل (Fr. modèle) modēl pl. -āt model
مدين II tamadyana see مدن
مذ mud since (= منذ mundu)
مذر madira a (madar) to be addle (egg),
become rotten II to scatter, disperse,
spread or sprinkle about ( ھ s.th.) V = I
شذر مذر šadara madara scattered here
and there
مذر madir spoiled, rotten, putrid
مذق madaqa u (madq) to mix with water,
dilute
مذق madq watered wine 899
مذيق madīq diluted, mixed with water,
watered, watery
مذاق madāq and مماذق mumādaq
insincere, hypocritical
مذل madila a (madl, مذال madāl) to reveal,
disclooe ( ب s.th. secret)
مذھب II tamadhaba see ذھب
مر 1 marra u (marr, مرور murūr, ممر mamarr)
to pass ( ب or على s.o., s.th. or by s.o., by
s.th.), go, walk, saunter, or stroll by or
past ( ب، على ); to march past s.o. ( امام ), pass
in review ( امام before s.o.; mil.); to pass,
elapse, go by, run out (time); to come, go,
walk, or pass along s.th. ( ب or على ), skirt (
ب or على s.th.); to pass, go, walk, move,
march, travel ( ب or من or على through),
cross, traverse ( من a place, a country, a
room); to flow through, run through; to fly
through; to lead, run, out ( في through an
area; border), pass ( في over), cross ( في an
area); to go or pass ( ب through a stage or
phase), undergo ( ب a state or phase); to
cross ( على a border, s. line, mountains,
etc.); to fly ( فوق over an area; airplane); to
depart, go away, leave; to continue ( يفعل to
do s.th.), keep, or go on, doing s.th. │ مر
ذكره (dikruhū) it has been discussed, it has
been mentioned above; كما مر بنا as it has
passed before us, as we have already
mentioned; مر بالامتحان to pass the
examination; مر بسلام (bi-salām) to turn
out well, go off without mishap; مر عليه
ببصره (bi-baṣarihī) to scan s.th., peruse
s.th. hastily; مر مر البرق (marra l-barq) to
pass swiftly, flash past, flit past; مر مر
الكرام (marra l-k.) to pass as if nothing had
happened, brush past; مر به (عليه) مر الكرام
to overlook s.th. generously, pass over
s.th. with dignity, treat s.th. with disdain II
to let pass ( ھ s.th.); to convey, carry or
take through ( ھ s.th.); to pass ( ھ the ball,
in soccer) │ مرر سفينة في القناة (qanāh) to
pass or take a ship through the canal IV to
let ( ه s.o.) go by or past s.o. or s.th. ( على or
ب); to let ( ه s.o.) pass ( على or ب s.th.); to
make ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) go through s.th. ( على
or ب), lead, take or send ( ه s.o.) through (
على or ب), pass,stick ( على or ب ھ s.th.
through); to insert ( على or ب ھ s.th. in) │
امر نظره على (naẓarahū) to pass one’s
glance over, let one’s eyes wander over X
to last, endure, continue, go on; to remain,
stay; to continue ( على or في s.th., يفعل to do
s.th.), persist, persevere ( على or في in s.th.),
keep ( على or في to s.th., يفعل doing s.th.), go
on ( يفعل doing s.th.), stick, adhere ( على or
في to s.th.)
مر marr passing, going by; passage,
transit; transition; crossing; progression,
process, lapse, course (of time); iron
shovel, spade; rope │ على مر الزمان (m. izzamān)
in the course of time
مرة marra pl. -āt, مرار mirār time, turn;
مرة marratan once; مرتين marrataini twice;
ماتة marrātin repeatedly; several times,
quite often; مرارا mirāran several times,
more than once, quite often; at times, now
and then, occasionally, sometimes │ مرة ما
marratan mā or ذات مرة dāta marratin
once, one time, one day; مرة اخرى
marratan ukrā or مرة جديدة (jadīdatan)
once again, once more, anew, مرة بعد مرة or
مرة عن مرة time and again, again and again;
المرة تلو المرة (tilwa) time after time, time
and again; مرة واحدة (wāḥidatan) at once, at
one time; eventually, finally, at last; اكثر
من مرة (aktara) more than once, several
times; بالمرة at all, absolutely, entirely;
(with neg.) not at all, never, by no means;
غير مرة gaira marratin or غير ما مرة
repeatedly, several times, more than once;
كم مرة kam marratan how often? how
many times? للمرة السادسة for the sixth
times; لآخر مرة li-ākiri marratin or للمرة
الأخيرة for the time; لأول مرة li-awali
marratin for the first time; مرارا عديدة
(‘adīdatan) frequently, often; مرارا وتكرارا
٩٠٠ (wa-takrāan) time and again, again
and again
مرور murūr passing; parade, march past
امام) ); passage, march, journey, or trip
through ( ب، من، على ), transit; flowing
through, flow; crossing, traversal; flying
over ( فوق ); uninterrupted sequence; traffic
(street, tourist, shipping); progression,
process, course, lapse (of time); (eg.)
inspection │ مرور الزمان m. az-zamān
expiration of the deadline; تذكرة المرور
tadkirat al-m. permit, pass, laissez-passer;
passport; حركة المرور ḥarakat al-m.
through traffic; شرطة المرور šurṭat al-m
traffic police, highway patrol; نظام المرور
traffic regulations
ممر mamarr passing, going by;
elapsing; lapse, expiration (of time);
transition; crossing; access, approach; (pl.
-āt) aisle, passage, passageway, corridor;
ford; (mountain) pass │ ممر سفلي (suflī)
underpass; على ممر العصور in the course of
centuries
امرار imrār passing through, insertion
استمرار istimrār duration, permanence,
continuity, continuance, continuation,
continued existence, survival; persistence
│ باستمرار continually, constantly; دواما
واستمرارا (dawāman) constantly,
continuously, incessantly, without
interruption; قوة الاستمرار qūwat al-ist.
inertia, vis inertiae
مار mārr passing; going, walking,
riding, etc., past or by; (pl. -ūn, مارة
mārra) passer-by, pedestrian, walker,
stroller │ المار ذكره (dikruhū) the abovementioned,
what has already been
discussed
مستمر mustamirr lasting, permanent,
enduring, constant, continual,
uninterrupted, unceasing, incessant;
continuous, unbroken │ تيار مستمر (tayyār)
direct current (el.); موجات مستمرة (maujāt)
continuous waves (phys.)
مر 2 marra u a ( مرارة marāra) to be or become
bitter II to make bitter, embitter ( ھ s.th.)
IV to be or become bitter; to make bitter (
ھ s.th.) VI to fight, contend, dispute (with
each other) X to think bitter, find bitter ( ھ
s.th.)
مر murr pl. امرار amrār bitter; severe;
sharp; painful; bitterness; myrrh │ مر
الصحاري m. aṣ-ṣaḥārī colocynth (bot.)
مرة mirra pl. مرر mirar gall. bile; (pl.
امرار amrār) strength, power
مرارة marāra pl. مرائر marā’ir2
bitterness; gall, gall bladder; innermost,
heart │ انشقت مرارته غيظا (inšaqqat, gaiẓan)
he burst with anger
مرير marīr pl. مرائر marā’ir2 strong,
firm, stubborn, tenacious, dogged,
persistent, deep-seated, deep, profound
(esp., of feelings)
مريرة marīra pl. مرائر marā’ir2 firmness;
detention, resoluteness; vigor, energy,
tenacity, doggedness; steadiness,
constancy
امر amarr2 firmer, stronger; bitterer │
الأمران the two bitter things (i.e., poverty
and old age); قاسى الأمرين qāsā l-amarrain
to go through the worst, be exposed to
greatest hardships
ممرور mamrūr bilious; foolish, crazy;
fool
مرأ mara’a, مرئ mari’a a and مرؤ maru’a u (
مراءة marā’a) to be wholesome, healthful,
palatable (food); -- مرؤ maru’a u ( مروءة
murū’a) to be manly; -- مرؤ maru’a u (
مراءة marā’a) to be healthy and salubrious
(climate) X to find wholesome and tasty (
ھ food); to enjoy, savor, relish ( ھ s.th.); to
be able to digest ( ھ s.th.; also fig.); to take
to s.th. ( ھ ), take a liking ( ب to), derive
pleasure ( ھ from)
امرء, امرأ imra’ and امرؤ imru’ (with
definite article المرء al-mar’) a man; 901
person, human being; المرء frequently for
Engl. “one”, as يظن المرء (yaẓunnu) one
would think
امرأة imra’a (with def. article المرأة almar’a)
pl. see نسو , woman, wife │ المرأة
المسلسلة (musalsala) Andromeda (astron.)
مروءة murū’a and مروة murūwa the ideal
of manhood, comprising all knightly
virtues, esp., manliness, valor, chivalry,
generosity, sense of honor
مريء marī’ manly, virile; healthful,
salubrious, healthy, wholesome │ ھنيئا مريئا
(hanī’an) approx.: may it do you much
good! I hope you will enjoy it (i.e, food)!
مريء marī’ pl. امرئة amri’a, مروء murū’
esophagus, gullet
مراكش marrākuš2, marrākiš2 Marrakech (city in
W Morocco); Morocco
مراكشي marrākušī, marrākišī Moroccan
(adj. and n.)
مرث marata u (mart) to suck, bite ( ھ one’s
fingers); to soften, crush, squash, mash ( ھ
s.th.); to macerate, soak (in water; ھ s.th.)
مرج 1 marj pl. مروج murūj grass-covered
steppe; pasture land; meadow
ھرج ومروج harj wa-marj confusion,
jumble, tumult, hubbub
مرج maraj disorder, confusion, jumble
مرجان 2 marjān, murjān (coll.; n. un. ة) small
pearls; corals │ سمك مرج samak m.
goldfish
مرجاني marjānī coralline, coral, coralli-
(in compounds), corallike, coral-red │
جزيرة مرجانية atoll; شعاب مرجانية coral reefs
مرجح marjaḥa to rock II tamarjaḥa to swing
back and forth, pendulate, dangle; to be in
suspense, be pending, be in abeyance
مرح mariḥa a (maraḥ) to be gay, merry,
cheerful, in high spirits, hilarious,
exuberant, lively; to be glad, happy,
delighted; to rejoice, exult │ سرح مرح
(sariḥa) to do as one likes, proceed
arbitrarily
مرح maraḥ joy, cheerfulness, gaiety,
glee, mirth, hilarity, merriment, liveliness
مرح mariḥ pl. مرحى marḥā, مراحى
marāḥā joyful, gay, happy, merry,
cheerful, lively, romping, hilarious,
exuberant
مراح mirāḥ jollity, hilarity, exuberance
مريح marīḥ joyful, gay, happy, merry,
cheerful, lively, romping, hilarious,
exuberant
مرحى marḥā well done! bravo! │ مرحى
ب bravo to ...
ممراح mimrāḥ of cheerful disposition,
gay-tempered, blithe; gay, jovial person
مرحب marḥaba to welcome ( ه s.o.)
مرخ marak a (mark) to oil, anoint,rub,
embrocate ( ھ the body) II do. V to rub
one’s skin with a liniment, oil o.s., anoint
o.s.
مرخ marik soft; slack, flabby, flaccid
مروخ marūk liniment; salve, unguent,
ointment
مريخ mirrīk Mars (astron.)
مرد marada u ( مرود murūd) and maruda ( مرادة
marāda, مرود murūda) to be refractory,
recalcitrant, rebellious; to revolt, rebel (
على against) II to strip ( ھ a branch) of its
leaves; to plaster, mortar, face ( ھ a
building) V to be refractory, recalcitrant,
to revolt, rebel ( على agaist); to be insolent,
arrogant, overbearing
مردى murdī pl. مرادى marādīy (punting)
pole, boat hook 902
مراد marād, marrād pl. مراريد marārīd2
nape, neck
مريد ma.rid pl. مرداء muradā’ refractory,
recalcitrant, rebellious
تمراد timrād pl. تماريد tamārīd2 dovecot
امرر amrad2, f. مرداء mardā’2, pl. مرد
mard beardless; leafless (tree); dry,
withered
تمرد tamarrud refractoriness,
recalcitrance, disobedience,
insubordination; uprising, insurrection,
mutiny, revolt, rebellion
مارد mārid pl. -ūn, مردة marada, مراد
murrād refractory, recalcitrant, defiant;
rebel, insurgent; demon, evil spirit, devil;
giant
متمرد mutamarrid refractory,
recalcitrant, disobedient, insubordinate,
mutinous, rebellious
مردقوش mardaqūš marjoram
مرزبان marzubān pl. مرازبة marāziba
vicegerent, provincial governor, satrap (in
ancient Persia)
مرزجوش marzajūš, مرزنجوش marzanjūš مردقوش
مرس marasa u (mars) to soak (in water),
macerate ( ھ s.th.) III to exercise, pursue,
practice ( ھ s.th., esp., a profession); (intr.)
to practice, have or operate a practice; to
carry out, execute ( ب an action); to apply
o.s. (0 to s.th.), go in for ( ھ ); to try V to
rub o.s. ( ب with, against); to have trouble,
be at odds ( ب with); to exercise ( ب an
office), pursue, practice ( ب a profession);
to work ( ب with), be in practical contact,
have actually to do ( ب with s.th.); to have
to cope or struggle ( ب with s.th.) VI to
fight, struggle, contend with each other
مرس mars game which is won by
getting all the tricks
مرس maris pl. امراس amrās seasoned,
practiced, experienced, veteran
مرسة marasa pl. امراس amrās rope,
cord, line; cable, hawser
مراس mirās and مراسة marāsa strength,
power │ سھل المراس sahl al-m. tractable,
manageable, docile, compliant; شديد المراس
or صعب المراس (ṣa’b al-m. intractable,
unruly, refractory; صعوبة المراس
intractability, unruliness, refractoriness,
recalcitrance
مريسة marīsa a kind of beer
مريسي marīsī hot south wind (eg.)
ممارسة mumārasa pursuit, exercise,
practicing (of a profession); execution,
implementation; practical application;
practice; experience, routine; negotiation
تمرس tamarrus practicing, practice ( ب
of an activity, of a profession)
مرسيليا marsīliyā Marseille (seaport in SE
France)
مرسين marsīn myrtle (myrtus; bot.)
مرش maraša u (marš) to scratch ( ھ s.th.)
مرشال maršāl (field) marshal
مرص murṣ Morse (code)
مرض mariḍa a (maraḍ) to be or become lick;
to fall ill, be taken ill II to make ill or sick
ه) s.o.); to nurse, tend ( ه a sick person) IV
to make ill or sick ( ه s.o.) V to be infirm,
ailing, sickly, weak VI to feign illness,
malinger
مرض maraḍ pl. امراض amrāḍ disease,
malady, ailment; illness, sickness │ مرض
البياض الدقيقي m. al-bayāḍī ad-daqīqī
mildew; مرض عصبي (‘aṣabī) nervous
disease, neuropathy; مرض عقلي (‘aqlī)
mental disease; مرض فحمي (faḥmī) blight,
blast (of grain); مرض فرنجي (firanjī)
syphilis; مرض معد (mu‘din) contagious
disease; امراض باطنية (bāṭinīya) internal
diseases; امراض سرية ٩٠٣ (sirrīya)
venereal diseases; امراض صدرية (ṣadrīya)
diseases of the chest, pulmonary diseases
مرض murḍin see رضي
مرضى maraḍī relating to disease,
morbid, pathological, patho- (in
compounds)
مريض marīḍ pl. مرضى marḍā, مراضى
marāḍā sick, ill, ailing; diseased; unwell,
indisposed; sick person, patient │ مريض
نفسي (nafsī) psychopath
ممراض mimrāḍ sickly, in poor health,
ailing
تمريض tamrīḍ sick-nursing
ممرض mumarriḍ (male) sick nurse,
hospital attendant; ambulance man, firstaid
man; doctor’s assistant
ممرضة mumarriḍa sick nurse, nurse (f.)
متمرض mutamarriḍ sickly, in poor
health, ailing
مرط marṭa u (marṭ) to tear out, pull out, pluck
out ( ھ hair) II do. V to fall out (hair)
مريط marīṭ and امرط amraṭ, f. مرطاء
marṭā’, pl. مرط murṭ hairless
مرع mara‘a a (mar‘) to rub over, anoint ( ھ
s.th.)
مرع mar‘ pl. امرع amru’, امراع amrā‘
pasture
مرعة mur‘a grease, oil
مريع marī‘ fertile, productive (soil)
ممراع mimrā‘ thriving, flourishing,
prosperous (city)
مرغ II to roll (in the dust) ( ھ s.th.); to rub over
ھ) s.th.); to rub ( ھ s.th.) IV to soil, sully,
make dirty ( ھ s.th.) V to roll, wallow
(esp., in the dust); to waver irresolutely
مرغرين margarīn margarine
مرفين murfīn morphine
مرق maraqa u ( مروق murūq) to pierce,
penetrate ( من s.th. or s.o.; esp., of an
arrow), go or pass through ( من ); to dart,
rush, shoot, or fly past, pass swiftly; to
hurry away, scamper away; to stray (e.g.,
of an arrow); to digress, deviate; to
renege, renounce (esp. من الدين the true
faith) │ مرق السھم (sahmu) (lit.: the arrow
hal passed through, i.e.) the matter is
finished, done with. settled II to sing
مرق maraq and مرقة maraqa broth,
bouillon; gravy
مروق murūq straying, deviation;
apostasy, defection, desertion, disloyalty
مروقي murūqī (tun.) nickname of
professional Koran reciters in Tunis; (tun.)
pallbearer
مارق māriq pl. مراق murrāq, مرقة
maraqa straying; apostate, renegade,
defector, turncoat, deserter; heretic
ممارق mumāriq insolent, impudent
مركز II tamarkaza to concentrate ( في on, at,
in); to settle, establish o.s. gain a footing,
take root; to consolidate one’s position; to
gravitate (to)
مركز، مركزية etc., see ركز
مركيز look up alphabetically
تمركز tamarkuz concentration;
consolidation (of a position)
مراكش marrākuš2, marrākiš2 Marrakech (city in
W Morocco); Morocco
مراكشي marrākišī, marrākišī Moroccan
(adj. and n.)
مركيز markīz marquis
مرمتون (Fr. marmiton) marmatōn and مرمطون
pl. -āt kitchen boy, scullery boy
مرمر 1 marmara to be or become bitter; to
become angry II tamarmara to murmur,
mumble; to grumble 904
مرمر 2 marmar marble
مرمري marmarī marble (adj.)
مرمط marmaṭa (eg.) to spoil, damage ( ھ s.th.)
مرمطون see مرمتون
مرميس mirmīs rhinoceros
مرن 1 marana u ( مرانة marāna, مرون murūn,
مرونة murūna) to be pliant, flexible,
ductile, elastic; -- ( مرون murūn, مرانة
marāna) to be or become accustomed, get
used ( على to) II to train, drill ( ه s.o.); to
accustom, condition, season, inure ( على ه
s.o. to), make ( ه s.o.) get used ( على to); V
to become accustomed, get used ( على to);
to exercise, practice ( على s.th.), train ( على
in), be practiced, trained, experienced ( على
in); to be drilled, drill
مرن marin pliant, pliable, flexible,
bending; elastic; plastic; supple, limber,
lithe; ductile, extensible; yielding,
compliant
مرانة marāna and مرونة murūna pliancy,
pliability, flexibility; elasticity; ductility;
plasticity; agility, nimbleness; resilience
تمرين tamrīn pl. -āt, تمارين tamārīn2
exercise, practice, training; military
training, drill; practical experience;
expertness, skill; preparatory training,
(period of) probation, apprenticeship,
traineeship │ تمرين ابتدائي (ibtidā’ī) basic
training; تمارين جندية jundīya) or تمرينات
عسكرية (‘askarīya) military exercises,
maneuvers; O تمرين الزيادة coaching,
tutoring; extra drill (mil.); تمرينات رياضية
(riyāḍīya) gymnastic exercises; تحت التمرين
undergoing preparatory training, engaged
on probation (official, employee)
مران mirān expertness, skill; exercise,
practice, drill, training; habituation, habit;
accustomedness; practical experience;
routine
تمرن tamarrun exercise, practice,
training
ممرن mumarrin trainer, coach;
instructor; drill sergeant
ممرن mumarran practiced, seasoned,
experienced, trained, skilled ( على in);
accustomed, used ( على to)
متمرن mutamarrin practiced, seasoned,
experienced, trained, skilled ( على in);
accustomed, used ( على to); probationer,
undergoing probation, probationary
ماروني 2 pl. موارنة look up alphabetically
مرو 1 marw Merv (present-day Mary, town in
Turkmen S.S.R.)
مروي marwī, marawī native of Merv
مرو 2 marw (coll.; n. un. ة) pebble; flint
مروة 2 see مروءة
مرى 2 III to wrangle, argue, dispute ( ه with s.o.;
to resist, oppose ( ه s.o.); to contest ( في
s.th.) VIII to doubt ( في s.th.)
مرية murya, mirya doubt, quarrel,
wrangle, argument, dispute
مراء mirā’ quarrel, wrangle, argument,
dispute; doubt │ بلا مراء (bi-lā) or لا مراء
(mirā’a) incontestable, indisputable,
unquestionable, undisputed, uncontested;
لا مراء في ان it is an incontrovertible fact
that ..., unquestionably …
مرايا 2 pl. مرآة see رأى
مريم maryam2 Mary, Maria
مريمية maryamīya sage (bot.)
مز mazza u (mau) to suck
مز muzz sourish, acidulous
مزة mazza pl. -āt and مازة māzza (eg.)
relishes, appetizers (taken with drink)
مزج mazaja u (mazj, مزاج mizāj) to mix,
mingle, blend ( بين different things, ب ه ٩٠٥
s.th. with) III to form a mixture or
compound, be mixed, be blended, mix,
mingle, blend, combine ( ھ with s.th.); to
adapt o.s. ( ه to s.o.), humor ( ه s.o.) VI to
intermix:, intermingle, interblend, be
intermixed, be intermingled VIII to be
mixed, be mingled, be blended, mix,
mingle, blend ( ب with)
مزج mazj mixing, blending
مزاج mizāj pl. امزجة amzija mixture,
medley, blend; temperament, temper,
nature, disposition; frame of mind, mood,
humor, vein; physical constitution;
condition, (state of) health │ مزاج دموي
(damawī) sanguine temperament; مزاج
سودوي (saudawī) melancholic
temperament; مزاج صفراوي (ṣafrāwī)
choleric (or bilious) temperament; مزاج
بلغمي (balgamī) phlegmatic temperament;
المزاج العام (‘āmm) popular taste; مزاج لطيف
delicate nature, weakly constitution; محرور
المزاج hot-tempered; منحرف المزاج munḥarif
al-m. unwell, indisposed, out of sorts; ھذا
لا يوافق مزاجي (yuwājiqu) this is not to my
taste
مزيج mazīj compounded, blended ( من
of); mixture, medley, blend ( من of);
combination, compound, alloy
تمازج tamāzuj intermixing,
intermingling, interblending. intermixture
امتزاج imlizāj mixture, blend
مزح mazaḥa a (mazḥ) to joke, jest,
make fun III to joke, make fun ( ه witb s.o.)
مزح mazḥ, مزاح muzāḥ, mizāḥ and مزاحة
muzāḥa joking, joke, jest, fun
مزاح mazzāḥ and مازح māziḥ joker,
jester, buffoon, wag
مزر mizr a kind of beer
مزع maza‘a a (maz‘) to run, bound, tear along,
gallop along; to tear apart ( ھ s.th.); to tear,
rip ( من ھ s.th. off) II to pick, pluck ( ه wool
or cotton); to tear to pieces ( ھ s.th.)
مزعة muz‘a, miz‘a pl. مزع muza‘, miza‘
piece, bit, bite; flock of wool
مزق mazaqa i (mazq) to tear, rend, rip apart ( ھ
s.th.) II to tear, rend, rip apart ( ھ s.th.); to
tear up, tear to pieces, shred ( ھ s.th.) V to
get torn, be rent; to be in shreds, get torn
to pieces; to burst open, tear, break, snap
مزق mazq tearing, tearing up, rending;
tear, rent, rupture
مزقة mizqa pl. مزق mizaq piece torn off,
shred
تمزيق tamzīq tearing, rending,
shredding, fragmentation
مزمز mazmaza to sip
مزن muzn (coll.; n. un. ة, pl. مزن muzan) rain
clouds
مزية mazīya pl. مزايا mazāya and مازية māziya
pl. -āt advantage; privilege, prerogative;
excellence, superiority; merit, virtue
مس massa a (mass, مسيس masīs) to feel, finger,
handle, palpate ( ه s.o., III s.th.); to touch ( ه
s.o., ھ s.th.); to violate ( ھ s.th. sacred),
infringe ( ھ upon); to cohabit ( ھ with a
woman); to hit, befall ( ه s.o.; damage,
calamity) │ مسه بأذى (bi-adan) or مسه بسوء
(bi-sū’in) to harm, wrong, hurt s.o.; مس
بسوء الشيء to be injurious, damaging to
s.th., hurt, impair, prejudice s.th.; مست
الحاجة الى (ḥājatu) circumstances require ...,
(it) is necessary, urgently needed; مس لغما
(lugman) to hit a mine III to touch ( ه s.o.);
to be in touch, be in contact ( ه with s.o.)
VI to touch each other, be in mutual
contact
مس mass touching, touch; contact;
misfortune, calamity; attack, fit (of a
disease) j insanity, madness, frenzy,
possession │ مس الحمى m. al-ḥummā attack
of 906 fever; اصابه مس من الجنون (aṣābahū)
he has gone crazy
مسة massa (n. vic.) touch
مساس masās touching, feeling,
handling, fingering, palpation; violation (
عن of), infringement, encroachments ( ب
e.g., upon a right); connection, relation,
contact │ له مساس ب it is connected
with ..., it touches upon ..., it concerns; فيما
له مساس ب concerning ..., regarding ...
مسيس masīs touching, touch │ عند مسيس
should the necessity arise, if (or when)
necessary; ھو في مسيس الحاجة الى he is in
urgent need of ...
مماسة mumāssa touching, tangency;
adjacency, contiguity; contact
تماس tamāss (mutual) contact
ماس māss tangent; touching, ( ب s.th.,
also fig., upon s.th.); adjacent, adjoining,
contiguous; urgent, pressing, important │
حاجة ماسة urgent need, exigency; الحاجة ماسة
اليه it is urgently needed; ماس كھربائي
(kahrabā’) short circuit
ممسوس mamsūs touched; palpable,
tangible; mentally deranged, insane
مماس mumāss tangent (math.)
مسترده (It. mostarda) mustarda mustard
مستكه mistika = مصطكاء
مستلة (It. mastello) mastilla pl. -āt tub
مسح 2 masaḥa a (masḥ) to stroke with the hand
ھ) s.th.); to wipe off, wipe away ( ھ s.th.);
to rub off ( ھ s.th.); to wash, wash off ( ھ
s.th.); to wipe out, blot out, erase ( ھ s.th.);
to clean, polish ( ھ s.th.); to smooth,
smooth with a plane, to plane ( ھ s.th.); to
rub ( ب ه s.o. with); to anoint ( ب ه s.o.
with); to deprive, dispossess ( من ه s.o. of),
take away, withdraw ( من ه from s.o. s.th.);
-- (masḥ, مساحة misāḥa) to survey ( ھ land,
estate, etc.), make a cadastral survey ( ھ
of) 0 to wipe off ( ھ s.th.); to rub, anoint ( ه
s.o.); to cajole, coax, wheedle, persuade ( ه
s.o.); to Christianize ( ه s.o.) III to cajole,
coax, wheedle, persuade ( ه s.o.) V to wipe
o.s., wash o.s.; to provoke ( ب s.o.), pick a
quarrel ( ب with)
مسح masḥ wiping, wiping off; cleaning;
robbing, embrocation; anointing,
anointment, (extreme) unction; land
survey
مسح misḥ pl. مسوح musūḥ coarse woolen
fabric, haircloth, sacking; pl. hair shirt,
monastic garb, monk’s frock │ لبست المسوح
labisat il-musūḥa to take the veil, become
a nun
مسحة masḥa (n. vic.) a rubbing,
embrocation; anointing, anointment;
unction; tinge, shade, air, appearance,
veneer (fig.); trace. touch (of s.th.) │ مسحة
الأرض extreme unction; مسح المريض بالمسحة
to administer extreme unction to a sick
person
مساح massāḥ land surveyor; bootblack,
shoeblack, shoeshine
مساحة misāḥa pl. -āt plane, surface;
area; acreage; floor space; surface extent;
terrain sector (mil.); surveying, survey;
geodesy; cadastre │ مساحة الأراضي m. alarāḍī
land surface; area, acreage; مساحة
مائية (mā’īya) area of water; مصلحة المساحة
maṣlaḥa al-m. survey department, land
registry office
مسيح masīḥ pl. مسحاء musaḥā’ مسحى , 2
anointed; wiped, clean, smooth; المسيح the
Messiah, Christ
مسيحي masīḥī Christian, Messianic; (pl.
-āt) a Christian │ الدين المسيحي (dīn) the
Christian faith, Christianity
المسيحية al-masīḥīya Christendom;
Christianity, the Christian faith
ممسح mimsāḥ and ممسحة mimsaḥa pl.
مماسح mamāsīḥ2 dust cloth, dish rag, floor
rag; doormat; scraper 907
ماسح masḥ bootblack, shoeblack,
shoeshine
ممسوح mamsūḥ wiped, wiped off, wiped
clean; cleaned; smoothed, planed;
polished; smooth; anointed; abraded, worn
(coin) │ ممسوح من المعنى (ma‘nā) senseless,
meaningless, inane
تمساح 3 timsāḥ pl. تماسيح tamāsīḥ crocodile
(zool.)
مسخ masaka a (mask) to transform ( من – الى ه
s.o. from -- into), transmute, convert ( ھ
s.th.); to falsify, distort ( ھ s.th.); to mar,
spoil ( ھ s.th.)
مسخ mask transformation,
metamorphosis; transmutation,
conversion; falsification, distortion,
misrepresentation; metempsychosis
مسخ mask, misk pl. مسوخ musūk
transformed into an animal; misshapen,
deformed, disfigured; ugly, misshapen
midget; freak, monstrosity; monster
مسخة maska (eg.) buffoon, harlequin,
clown
مسيخ transformed; disfigured, defaced,
deformed, ugly; tasteless, insipid, stale
ممسوخ mamsūk transformed; marred,
spoiled; disfigured, defaced, deformed,
ugly
مسخر maskara to ridicule, mock, deride
ه) s.o.) II tamaskara to make fun ( على of),
laugh ( على at)
مسد II to massage ( اعضاءه a‘ḍā’ahū s.o.’s
limbs)
مسد masad (coll.) pl. مساد misād, امساد
amsād palm fibers, raffia
تمسيد tamsīd massage
ماسورة 1 look up alphabetically
مسرى 2 masrā the 12th month of the Coptic
calendar
مسطرة (It. mostra) masṭara pl. مساطر masāṭir2
sample, specimen; see also سطر
مسقط masqaṭ Masqat (seaport and capital of
Oman)
مسك 12 masaka u i (mask) to grab, grasp, clutch,
clasp, seize ( ب or ھ s.th.), take hold ب or
ھ of); to hold, hold fast ( ب or ھ s.th.); to
stick, cling, cleave, adhere, hang on ( ب to)
│ مسك الحسابات (ḥisābāt) to keep the books,
keep the accounts; مسك (daffata l-u.) to be
at the helm, be in charge; مسك لسانه
(lisānanahū) to keep one’s tongue in
check II to scent with musk ( ھ s.th.); to
have ( ه s.o.) seize or hold IV to seize, grip,
grasp, clasp, clutch, hold ( ب or ھ s.th.); to
hold fast, grab ( ب or ھ, ه s.o., s.th., من ه
s.o. by his hair, and the like); to hold back,
keep, detain, restrain ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th., عن
from); to withhold, not to expend ( ھ s.th.);
to refrain, abstain, keep, desist ( عن from),
forbear, cease, stop ( عن doing s.th.), keep
away, remain aloof ( عن from); to keep,
retain ( على نفسه ھ s.th. for o.s.) │ امسك عليك
(amsik) keep ...! امسك نفسه واقفا waqifan) to
hold o.s. upright; امسك بيده (bi-yadihī) to
take s.o. by the hand; امسك يده (yadahū) to
take s.o.’s hand; امسكت عن الصدور to stop
publication, fold up (newspaper); امسك
لسانه (lisānahū) to keep one’s tongue in
check; امسك البطن (baṭna) to constipate
(med.) V to hold on, hold fast ( ب to),
clutch ( ب s.th.); to stick, cling, cleave ( ب
to); to hang on ( ب to), persist ( ب in); to
keep, adhere ( ب to s.th.); to rise (prices),
harden, firm up (quotations) │ تمسك باھدافه
(bi-ahdābihī) to be most devoted to s.o.,
be at s.o.’s beck and call, be under s.o.’s
thumb; تمسك بأھداب الشيء to adhere, cling to
s.th.; تمسك برأيه (bi-ra’yihī) to stick to
one’s opinion VI to hold together, be
firmly connected, be interlocked; to
compose o.s., pull o.s. together; to remain
undaunted, remain calm, be 908
composed; to stay on one’s feet; to be in
full possession of one’s strength; to
refrain, abstain, keep ( عن from) X to keep,
stick, cling, adhere ( ب to); to grab, seize (
ب s.th.); to refrain, abstain, keep ( عن from)
مسك mask seizure, grip, hold; detention
│ مسك الدفاتر bookkeeping; مسك الحسابات m.
al-ḥisābāt keeping of accounts,
accountancy
مسك maska pl. masakāt grip, hold
مسك misk (m. and f.) musk │ مسك الجن
m. al-jinn a variety of goosefoot
(Chenopodium Botrys; bot.); مسك الختام m.
al-kitām lit.: the concluding musk (i.e.,
with which, originally, a letter was finally
perfumed), the best following in the end,
the crowning touch
مسكة miska a little, a touch, a glimpse, a
whiff ( من of)
مسك musuk and مسكة musaka grasping,
greedy, avaricious
مسكة muska pl. مسك musak handle; hold;
grip; handhold, support │ مسكة الأمل m. alamal
that to which hope clings
مسكة muska, musuka and مساكة masāka,
misaka avarice
مسكان muskān earnest money, pledge
مساك misāk dam, weir; hem, border
مسيك masīk tenacious; avaricious,
miserly; watertight, waterproof
امساك imsāk seizure; restraint, detention,
check; stop, cessation; abstinence;
avarice; constipation (med.); time of the
day which marks the beginning of the
Ramadan fast
امساكية imsākīya calendar of fasting
during the month of Ramadan
تمسك tamassuk adherence; devotedness,
devotion, attachment; written
commitment, IOU; firming-up, or
consolidation, of the market, hardening of
quotations │ قانون التمسك legal moratorium,
moratory law (jur.)
تماسك tamāsuk holding together,
cohesiveness; coherence; cohesion
(phys.); firmness, solidity; tenacity
استمساك istimsāk adherence, loyalty ( ب
to)
ممسك mumassak musky, musk-scented,
perfumed
ممسك mumsik holding, clutching,
grabbing; checking, restraining.
withholding; economical, thrifty;
grasping, greedy, avaricious
متمسك mutamassik holding fast, hanging
on, clinging, adhering; tenacious; firm,
solid
متماسك mutamāsik holding together,
coherent, cohesive, hanging together,
firmly connected, interlocked; continuous,
uninterrupted; firm, solid; tenacious
مستمسك mustamsik composed, calm
(mind)
مسكاتي 2 muskātī muscatel (wine)
مسكن II tamaskana to become poor, be reduced
to poverty; to pretend to be poor; to feign
poverty or humility; to be submissive,
servile, slavish, fawning
مسكنة maskana poverty, misery;
humbleness, humility, submissiveness
مسكين miskīn pl. -ūn, مساكين masākīn2
poor, miserable; beggar; humble,
submissive, servile
مسو II to wish ( ه s.o.) a good evening │ مساك لله
بالخير massāka llāhu bi-l-kair good
evening! III see صبح III; IV to enter into
evening; to be or become in the evening;
to be, become │ يفعله اذا اصبح ويفعله اذا امسى
(aṣbaḥa) he does so in the morning and in
the evening 909
مساء masā’ pl. امساء amsā’, امسيات
amsīyāt evening; masā’an in the evening
│ مساء امس masā’a amsi yesterday
evening, last night; مساء الخير m. al-kair or
مساؤكم بالخير good evening! صباح مساء
ṣabāḥa masa’a mornings and evenings, in
the morning and in the evening
مسائي masā’ī evening (adj.) │ الأخبار
المسائية the evening news
امسية umsīya pl. اماسي amāsīy evening
مسورة = ماسورة look up alphabetically
مسي masā i (masy) to make lean, cause to lose
flesh, emaciate ( ھ livestock; of the heat)
مسيو (Fr. Monsieur) misyū Mr.; sir
مش mašša u (mašš) to suck the marrow ( ھ
from a bone); to macerate, soak in water (
ھ s.th.)
مش mišš whey
مشوش mašūš napkin
مشيج māšīj gamete, germ cell
مشح mašaḥa a (mašḥ) to administer extreme
unction ( ه to s.o.)
مشحة mašḥa extreme unction
مشط mašaṭa u i (mašṭ) to comb II do. V and
VIII to comb one’s hair
مشط mušṭ pl. amšāṭ, مشاط mišāṭ comb;
rake; bridge (of stringed instruments); O
(mil.) cartridge clip │ مشط الرجل m. ar-ril
metatarsus, instep (anat.); مشط اليد m. alyad
metacarpus (anat.)
مشطي mušṭī toothed, indented, jagged,
dentate; comblike, pectinate
تمشيط tamšīṭ combing, carding (of wool)
ماشط māšiṭ barber, hairdresser
ماشطة māšiṭa lady’s maid; (woman)
hairdresser
ممشط mumallal combed, carded (wool)
مشق mašaqa u (mašq) to draw out, stretch,
extend ( ھ s.th.); to comb ( ھ s.th.); to tear,
tear up, shred ( ھ s.th.); to whip, lash ( ھ
s.o.) V to be or get tom or shredded VIII
to snatch away, whip away ( من ھ s.th.
from s.o.); to draw, unsheathe ( ھ the
sword)
مشق mašq pl. امشاق amšāq model,
pattern (esp., one to be copied in writing)
مشق mišq slender, slim, svelte
مشقة mišqa pl. مشق mišaq flock of wool
or cotton; rag, clout, shred; scrap of
carding wool; scrap of hemp, oakum
مشيق mašīq slender, slim, svelte
مشاق mušāq scrap of flax or hemp;
oakum, tow
مشاقة mušāqa scrap of flax or hemp;
oakum, tow │ مشاقة حرير floss
امتشاق imtišāq slenderness
ممشوق mamšūq slender, slim, svelte │
ممشوق كالحسام (ka-1-ḥusām) slender as a
wand
ماشك look up alphabetically
مشلوز mišlauz sweet-kerneled apricot
مشمش mišmiš (coll.; n. un. ة) apricot; apricot
tree │ مشمش كلابي (kilābī) bitter-kerneled
apricot; مشمش لوزي ( حموي ) (lauzī, ḥamawi)
sweet-kerneled apricot
مشملا mušmullā, mišmilla medlar (bot.)
مشملة mušmula, mišmila medlar (bot.)
المشھد al-mašhad Meshed (city in NE Iran)
مشو) and مشي) مشى mašā i (mašy) to go
on foot, walk; to go; to pace, stride; to
move along, proceed; to march │ مشى
بالنميمة to scatter slanderous rumors II to let
or make ( ه s.o.) go or walk; to adapt,
adjust, fit, accommodate ( مع ھ s.th. to) III
to keep pace, keep in step ( ه with s.o.); to
go along, keep up, keep abreast ( ھ، ه with
s.o., with s.th.), keep to s.o.’s ( ه) ٩١٠ side;
to be likeminded ( في ه with s.o. in s.th.), be
guided by the same consideration or
principles ( في ه as s.o. in s.th.), act in
unison ( في ه with s.o. in s.th.) IV = II; to
have an aperient effect ( ه on s.o.; med.) V
to go on foot, walk; to take a walk, to
stroll, promenade; to walk slowly, saunter;
to pass, move along, stride along; to keep
step, keep up, keep abreast, go along,
agree, harmonize, be compatible, be
-consistent, be in accordance, be in
keeping ( مع with), fit, suit ( مع s.th.), be
appropriate, correspond, come up ( مع to
s.th.); to proceed ( على in accordance with a
principle or method); to follow, observe (
على a principle) │ تمشى في اوصاله approx.:
to perfuse s.o.’s limbs (of a sensation);
تمشى جيئة وذھابا (jī’atan wa-dahāban) to
walk back and forth, pace up and down
مشو mašw a laxative, aperient
مشى mašy going, walking; walk
مشية mišya manner of walking, gait,
pace, step, bearing, carriage
مشاء mašā’ pl. -ūn good walker; walker
(athlet.)
مشاية mašāya pl. -āt long, narrow
carpet, runner; O baby walker, gocart;
hallway, corridor; footpath, path(way)
ممشى mamšā pl. مماش mamāšin hallway,
corridor, passageway, passage; aisle;
footpath, path(way), alley; promenade;
crossing, overpass, bridge; bridge of a
ship; runner, small rug
تمشيا مع tamaššiyan ma‘a (or على ) in
conformity with, in accordance with,
according to
ماش māšin pl. مشاة mušāh going,
walking; pedestrian; foot soldier,
infantryman; المشاة the infantry; ماشيا
māšiyan on foot
ماشية māšiya pl. مواش mawāšin
livestock, cattle
مص maṣṣa (1st pers. perf. masistu) a and (1st
pers. perf. maṣaṣtu) u (maṣṣ) to suck, suck
up, soak up, suck in, absorb ( ھ s.th.); to
sip, lap, lap up, lick up ( ھ s.th.); to suck
out ( ھ s.th.) V to sip gradually, drink in
small sips ( ھ s.th.) VIII to suck, suck up,
suck in ( ھ s.th.); to sip, lap, lap up, lick up
ھ) s.th.); to soak up, absorb, swallow up (
ھ s.th.)
مص maṣṣ sucking, suction, suck,
sucking up, soaking up, soak, soakage,
absorption │ قصب المص qaṣab al-m. sugar
cane
مصة maṣṣa (n. vic.) sucking, suck,
suction; sip
مصاص maṣāṣ one who sucks, sucker;
cupper; bloodsucker, extortioner, usurer
مصاصة muṣāṣa that which one sucks,
s.th. to suck │ مصاصة القصب m. al-qaṣab
sugar-cane refuse
مصاصة maṣṣāṣa screech owl; vampire
مصيص maṣīṣ moist, damp (ground)
مصيص miṣīṣ string, twine, packthread
ممص mimaṣṣ suction pipe, sucker; O
siphon
امتصاص imtiṣāṣ sucking, suck, suction;
sucking up, soaking up, soak, soakage,
absorption │ قوة الامتصاص qūwat al-imt.
suction
ممصوص mamṣūṣ soaked up; drained,
exhausted; emaciated, very lean, skinny
ممتص mumtaṣ soaking up, absorbing;
absorbent, absorptive
مصر II to found, build, settle, civilize, colonize
ھ) a place); to Egyptianize, make
Egyptian ( ھ s.th.) V to become a
populated, civilized area, become a big
city, a metropolis; to Egyptianize, adopt
Egyptian ways; to become an Egyptian
مصر miṣr pl. امصار amṣār big city;
metropolis, capital; -- miṣr2, (colloq.) 911
maṣr Egypt; Cairo │ مصر القاھرة Cairo;
مصر الجديدة Heliopolis (section of modern
Cairo)
مصري miṣrī Egyptian; Cairene; (pl.
-ūn) an Egyptian; a Cairene, a native of
Cairo
مصرية miṣrīya Egyptianism, Egyptian
national character; (pl. -āt) Egyptian
woman or girl
مصير pl. امصرة amṣira, مصران muṣrān,
مصارين maṣārīn2 gut; pl. bowels,
intestines, guts, tripe; see also under صير
تمصير tamṣīr settling, settlement,
colonization, civilization; Egyptianization
متمصر mutamaṣṣir Egyptianized,
naturalized in Egypt
مصطكاء maṣṭakā’, muṣṭakā’ and مصطكى
maṣṭakā mastic, resin of the mastic tree
(Pistacia lenticus); liquor distilled from
mastic │ شجرة المصطكاء šajarat al-m.
mastic tree (Pistacia lenticus; bot.)
مصل maṣala u to curdle (milk); to strain, filter
ھ) s.th.)
مصل maṣl whey; (pl. مصول muṣūl)
serum (med.) │ علم المصول ‘ilm al-m.
serology
مصلي maṣlī serous (med.)
مصمص maṣmaṣa to suck( ھ s.th.); to suck up,
soak up, absorb ( ھ s.th.); to sip and turn
around in the mouth ( ھ a liquid) II
tamaṣmaṣa to sip and turn around in the
mouth ( ھ a liquid)
مض maḍḍa u (maḍḍ, مضيض maḍīḍ) to
hurt, pain ( ه s.o.); to burn, sting ( ه s.o.); to
torment, harass, trouble, molest ( ب ه s.o.
with); -- (1st pen. perf. maḍiḍtu) a ( مضض
maḍaḍ, مضيض maḍīḍ, مضاضة maḍāḍa) to
be in pain, feel pain, suffer; to be
distressed, worried, troubled IV to cause
pain ( ه to s.o.), hurt ( ه s.o.); to torment,
torture, agonize ( ه s.o.)
مض maḍḍ pain, torment, torture,
anguish, agony; painful, burning, stinging,
smarting
مضض maḍaḍ pain, suffering, torment,
torture, anguish, agony, affliction,
distress; sour milk │ على مضض
unwillingly, reluctantly, grudgingly
مضاض muḍāḍ brackish water, brine,
salt water
مضاضة maḍāḍa agony, torture
ممض mumiḍḍ agonizing, tormenting
مضر maḍara, maḍura u and maḍira a (maḍr,
maḍar, مضور muḍūr) to turn sour (milk)
مضر maḍir and ماضر māḍir sour (milk)
لغة مضر lugat muḍara the language of
Mudar, the Arabic language
مضغ maḍaga a u (maḍg) to chew ( ھ
s.th.) │ مضغ الكلام (kalām) to slur, speak
indistinctly
مضغ maḍg chewing, mastication
مضغة muḍga pl. مضغ muḍag s.th. to be
chewed; bite, bit, morsel; small chunk of
meat; O embryo; O chewing gum │ مضغة
طيبة (ṭayyiba) titbit; جعله مضغة في الأفواه
(ja‘alahū muḍgatan) to make s.o. the talk
of the town, send tongues wagging about
s.o.
مضاغة muḍāga s.th. chewed, chew,
quid
مضمض maḍmaḍa to rinse
مضى maḍā i (muḍīy) to go away, leave, depart;
to make off, decamp, abscond; with ب; to
take s.th. away, remove s.th.; to pass,
elapse, go by, expire, run out (time); to
advance, progress ( في in); to proceed ( في
in or with s.th., also ب), continue ( في , also
ب, s.th., to do s.th.), go on ( في doing s.th.);
to pursue, practice, exercise ( في s.th., also
في مھنة fī mihnatin a profession); to
penetrate deeper, enter deeper, go deeper (
في into s.th.); to 912 bring to an end, wind
up, terminate, conclude, accomplish, carry
out, execute, perform ( على s.th.); (with
imperf.) to set out to do s.th., proceed to
do s.th.; -- ( مضاء maḍā’) to be sharp, cut
(sword) │ مضى سبيله (sabīlahū) to pass
away, die; مضى لسبيله (li-sabīlihī) do.; مضى
على البيع (bai‘) to conclude a bargain; مضى
على ذلك شھور (šuhūrun) months have
passed since then; مضى في كلامه (kalāmihī)
to go on talking; مضى ما مضى let bygones
be bygones! no more of that! فيما مضى (fīmā)
or فيما مضى من الزمان (zamān) formerly,
previously, heretofore, once, before, in the
past; لم يمض غير قليل حتى lam yamḍi gairu
qalīlin ḥlattā it did not take long until ...,
before long ...; من سنة مضت min sanatin
maḍat one year ago; ومضى فقال and he
went on to say, and he added II to make
pass, cause to go by; to spend, pass ( ھ
time, في with s.th.) IV to spend, p (. time);
to carry out, execute, perform,
accomplish, conclude, terminate, wind up,
bring to an end ( ھ s.th.); to pass, put
behind o.s. ( ھ examination); to undersign,
sign ( ھ s.th.) │ امضي امره على (amrahu) to
throw one’s full support behind s.th.,
endorse s.th. wholeheartedly
مضي muḍīy departure, leave; passing;
lapse, elapsing, expiration (of a period of
time); continuation ( في of s.th.); deeper
penetration, deeper insight ( في into);
carrying out, execution, pursuit ( في of an
intention, of a plan) │ مضي m. al-mudda
lapse of time, superannuation; التمسك بمضي
المدة (tamassuk) usucapion, prescription
(jur.); على مضي الزمن (m. iz-zaman)
lastingly, for long, permanently; المضي في
الحرب (ḥarb) the continuation of the war
مضاء maḍā’ sharpness, keenness;
penetration, sagacity, acute discernment;
energy │ مضاء المدة strength of purpose,
resolution, determination, energy, go
امضى amḍā sharper, more incisive,
more effective
تمضية tamḍiya execution, performance,
accomplishment, completion; spending,
passing (of time) │ تمضية الوقت t. al.waqt
pastime
إمضاء imḍā’ realization, execution,
accomplishment, completion; signing,
signature │ صاحب الإمضاء the undersigned
ماض māḍin pl. مواض mawāḍin sharp,
keen, cutting; acute, penetrating, incisive,
effective; energetic; past, bygone; الماضي
the past; past tense, perfect, preterit
(gram.) │ ماضي العزيمة resolute,
determined; الشھر الماضي (šahr) last month
ممض mumḍin signer, signatory
ممضى mumḍan undersigned, signed
مط maṭṭa u (maṭṭ) to expand by pulling,
stretch, draw out ( ھ s.th.); to draw tight,
tighten, tauten ( ھ s.th.) II to expand,
stretch ( ھ s.th.); to scold, revile, abuse ( ه
s.o.) V to expand; to stretch; to distend,
widen, spread, lengthen; to be capable of
extension or lengthening, be expandable,
stretchable, elastic; to be rubberlike
مط maṭṭ expansion, extension,
stretching, distention, lengthening,
drawing out
مطاط maṭṭāṭ expandable, extensible,
stretchable, elastic; dilatory; rubbery,
rubberlike; rubber; caoutchouc
تمطط tamaṭṭu􀀀 expandability,
extensibility, elasticity
مطر maṭara u to rain ( مطرت السماء
maṭarat is-samā’ it rained); to shower
with rain ( ه s.o.; of the sky); to pour out ( ب
ه over s.o. s.th.), shower, douse ( ب ه s.o.
with); to do, render ( ه s.o., بخير bi-kairin a
good turn, a favor); to run swiftly (horse),
speed away IV to rain (of the sky); to
cause ( ھ s.th.) to rain ( على upon); to
shower ( ب ه s.o. with 913 or ھ على upon
s.o. s.th.), heap ( ب ه or ھ على upon s.o.
s.th.) │ امطر عليه وابلا (wābilan) or امطره
بوابل منه (bi-wābilin) he showered him with
a hail of (e.g., stones), with a rain of (e.g.,
blows), with a flood of (e.g., abuses,
threats), etc. X to ask for rain; to ask ( من
or ه s.o.) a favor; to wish ( ھ for s.th.),
desire ( ھ s.th.); to invoke, call down ( ھ
على upon s.o. s.th.)
مطر maṭar pl. امطار amṭār rain │ محطة
لرصد الأمطر maḥaṭṭa li-raṣd al·a. pluviometrical
station
مطرة mṭra, maṭara pl. -āt downpour,
rain shower
مطر maṭir and مطير maṭīr rainy,
abounding in rain
ممطر mimṭar and ممطرة mimṭara pl.
مماطر mamāṭir2 raincoat
ماطر māṭir, rainy, abounding in rain
ممطر mumṭir rainy, abounding in rain │
مواسم ممطرة rainy seasons, periods of rain
مطرن maṭrana to raise to the rank of
metropolitan or archbishop, consecrate as
metropolitan or archbishop ( ه s.o.) II
tamaṭrana to be instated or consecrated as
metropolitan (Chr.)
مطران muṭrān, maṭrān, miṭrān pl. مطارنة
maṭārina, مطارين maṭārīn2 metropolitan,
archbishop (Chr.)
مطرنة maṭrana dignity or office of a
metropolitan, metropolitanate,
archiepiscopate (Chr.)
مطرنية maṭranīya, مطرانية muṭrānīya pl.
-āt diocese of a metropolitan,
archbishopric, archdiocese (Chr.)
مطق V to smack one’s lips
مطل maṭala u (maṭl) to draw out, lengthen,
extend, stretch ( ھ s.th.); to stretch ( ھ a
rope); to hammer, forge, shape by
hammering ( ھ iron); to postpone, defer,
delay; to put off ( ب ه s.o. with) III to tarry,
temporize, take one’s time; to put off ( ب ه
s.o. with)
مطول maṭūl deferring, delaying,
procrastinating, tardy, dilatory, slow
مطيلة maṭīla pl. مطائل maṭā’il2 wrought
iron
مماطلة mumāṭala postponement,
deferment, procrastination, delay
مطا (مطو ) maṭā u (maṭw) to quicken one’s
pace, hurry, walk fast IV to mount ( ھ an
animal); to ride ( ھ on an animal) V to
stretch o.s., loll; to stretch ( ب s.th., one’s
body, one’s limbs); to walk, proudly, strut,
swagger VIII to mount ( ھ an animal); to
board ( ھ a vehicle), get in ( ھ ), get aboard
ھ) ); to ride ( ھ on an animal, in a vehicle)
مطوة maṭwa hour, time, moment
مطية maṭīya pl. مطايا maṭāyā, مطي maṭīy
mount, riding animal; expedient, means to
an end, instrument, tool
مع ma’a (prep.) with, simultaneously
with, together with, accompanied by, in
the company of; in the estimation, eyes, or
opinion of; in spite of, despite; toward, in
relation to; معا ma’an together; at the same
time, simultaneously; with one another │
مع ان although; ومع ان – إلا ان wa-ma‘a
anna -- illā anna although -- nevertheless,
to be sure -- but ..., it is true -- but ; مع ذلك
or مع ھذا in spite of it, nevertheless,
notwithstanding, still; مع كل ھذا in spite of
all that; مع كونه غنيا (kaunihī ganīyan)
although he is rich, for all his being rich,
rich as he is; ليس مع الحكومة (laisa) he is not
for the government, he doesn’t side with
the government; مع الحائط along the wall;
كان معه it was with him, he had it with him;
ما معكم what do you have with you? what
have you brought along? what’s 914 up
your sleeves? الست معي في ان (alasta) don’t
you also think that ...? wouldn’t you share
my view that استعمل وسائل القسوة معه
ista‘mala wasā’il l-qaswati ma‘ahū he
brought harsh measures to bear on him
معية ma‘īya company; escort; suite,
retinue, entourage, attendants │ بمعية ( في
معية) فلان in the company of so-and-so;
بمعية ھذا herein enclosed, herewith
معج V to wind, meander
مع pass. mu‘ida to have a gastric ailment,
suffer from dyspepsia, have a
stomachache
معدة ma‘ida, mi‘da pl. معد mi’ad
stomach
معدى ma‘dī, mi‘dī of or pertaining to the
stomach, gastric, stomachic │ امراض معدية
gastric diseases; حمى معدية (ḥummā) gastric
fever
ممعود mam‘ūd suffering from a gastric
disease, dyspeptic
معر ma‘ira a (ma‘ar) to fall out (hair) IV to
become poor, impoverished, be reduced to
poverty V = I
معار ma‘ār (eg.) braggart, braggadocio,
swaggerer
معز ma‘z, ma‘az (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. امعز am‘uz,
معيز ma‘īz goat
ماعز mā‘iz pl. مواعز mawā‘iz2 goat
معاز ma‘‘āz goatherd
معس ma‘asa a (ma‘s) to rub ( ھ s.th.); to
squash, crush ( ھ s.th.)
معض ma‘aḍa a (ma‘ḍ) and VIII to be annoyed
على) by), be angry ( من at), resent ( من s.th.)
امتعاض imti‘āḍ anger, resentment,
annoyance, displeasure; excitement,
agitation
ممتعض mumta‘iḍ annoyed, vexed,
angry; upset, excited
معط ma‘aṭa a (ma‘ṭ) to tear out, pull out, pluck
out ( ھ hair, feathers)
معط ma‘iṭ and امعط am‘aṭ2, f. معطاء
ma‘ṭā‘, pl. معط mu‘ṭ hairless, bald
معك ma‘aka a (ma‘k) to rub ( ھ s.th.)
معكرونه ma‘karūna macaroni
معمعة 1 ma‘ma‘a pl. معامع ma‘āmi‘2 confusion,
jumble, mess, tohubohu; tumult, uproar;
turmoil; pl. wars, battles
معمعان ma‘ma‘ān raging, roar (of a
storm), turmoil, thick (of a battle), height,
climax (of heat and cold) │ معمعان الصيف
m. aṣ-ṣaif high summer; معمعان الشتاء
deepest winter
معمعي 2 IV to apply o.s. assiduously, devote all
one’s efforts ( في to s.th.); to be keen,
intent ( في on), be eager ( في for); to
examine closely, study carefully,
scrutinize ( في s.th.); to go to extremes ( في
in s.th.), overdo, carry too far ( في s.th.) │
امعن النظر في (naẓara) to fix one’s eyes on
s.th., regard s.th. attentively, examine s.th.
closely, scrutinize s.th. V to become
engrossed or absorbed, bury o.s. ( في in),
regard attentively, examine carefully ( في s.
th.), look closely ( في at s.o., at s.th.),
scrutinize ( في s.o., s.th.)
ماعون mā‘ūn pl. مواعين mawā‘īn
implement, utensil, instrument; vessel,
receptacle, container; (coll.) implements,
utensils, gear; (syr.) ream of paper
ماعونة mā‘ūna pl. -āt, مواعين mawā‘īn2
(eg.) lighter, barge
امعان im‘ān and امعان النظر i. an-naẓar
close examination, careful study, scrutiny
في) of s.th.); امعان devotion ( في to s.th.),
care, carefulness, assiduity, diligence,
attentiveness, attention 915
تمعن tama‘‘un close examination,
careful study, scrutiny; care, carefulness │
بتمعن carefully
معا (معو ) ma‘ā u ( معاء ma‘ā’) to mew, miaow,
(cat)
معى 1 mi‘an, ma‘y and معاء mi‘ā’ pl. امعاء
am‘ā’, امعية am‘īya gut; intestines, bowels,
entrails │ الأمعاء الدقيقة the small intestine;
المعى الغليظ the large intestine
معوي mi‘awī of or pertaining to the
intestines, intestinal; enteric │ الحمى المعوية
(ḥummā) typhoid fever, enteric fever,
abdominal typhus
معية 2 ma‘īya see مع
مغاث mugāt (eg.) root of Glossostemon
Bruguieri (bot.)
مغر magar and مغرة mugra reddish, russet
color
امغر amgar2 reddish brown, russet
مغربة magraba (mor.) Moroccanization
مغص magṣa to cause gripes; pass. mugiṣa
(mag.) to have gripes or colic, suffer from
colic
مغص magṣ, magaṣ and مغيص magīṣ,
gripes; colic │ مغص كلوى (kulwī) renal
colic
ممغوص mamgūṣ, suffering from colic;
having gripes
مغط magaṭa a (magṭ) to stretch, extend,
expand, draw, out II do.
متمغط mutamaggiṭ stretchable, elastic
(rubber); tough, viscous, ropy, sticky
مغطس magṭasa to magnetize, make magnetic,
subject to magnetic induction ( ھ s.th.) II
tamagṭasa to be magnetized, become
magnetic
مغطسة magṭasa magnetism
ممغطس mumagṭas magnetized,
magnetic
خشب المغنة kašab al-mugna, خشب المغنى k. almugnā
mahogany (wood)
مغنط magnaṭa to magnetize, subject to
magnetic induction ( ھ s.th.)
مغنطيس mignaṭīs, magnaṭīs magnet │ O
مغنطيس كھربائي (kahrabā’ī) electromagnet
مغناطيس mignāṭīs, magnāṭīs. magnet;
magnetism
مغنطيسي mignaṭīsī magnetic; hypnotic
مغنطيسية mignāṭīsīya and مغناطيسية
magnetism
مغنيسيا magnīsiyā magneoio
المغول al-mugūl the Mongols; the Moguls │ بلاد
المغول Mongolia
مغولي mugūlī Mongolian
مقت maqata u (maqt) to detest, abhor, loathe,
hate ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); -- maquta u ( مقاتة
maqāta) to be abominable, detestable,
loathsme, hated, odious II maqata; to
make ( ه s.o.) hateful ( الى to s.o.), make s.o.
الى) ) loathe ( ه s.o.)
مقت maqt hate, hatred, detestation,
loathing, aversion, disgust ; hateful,
odious
مقيت maqīt and ممقوت mamqūt hated,
detested; hateful, odious; detestable,
abominable, loathsome, repugnant,
disgusting
مقدونس maqdūnis parsley
مقدوني maqdūnī Macedonian (adj. and n.)
مقع maqa’a a (maq’) to drink avidly, toss
down ( ھ s.th.) VIII pass. umtuqi’a to turn
pale
ممقتع mumtaqa’ pale, pallid, wan,
sallow
مقل maqala u (maql) to look ( ه at s.o.), eye,
regard ( ه s.o.)
مقلة muqla pl. مقل muqal eye; eyeball │
مقلة العين m. al-’ain eyeball 916
□ مقانق maqāniq (= نقانق ) small mutton
sausages (syr.)
مكة makka2 (usually followed by the epithet
المكرمة al-mukarrama) Mecca
مكي makkī Meccan (adj. and n.)
مكوك makkūk pl. مكاكيك makākik2
drinking cup; shuttle
ماكوك mākūk pl. مواكيك mawākik2
drinking cup; shuttle
مكث makata u (makt, مكوث mukūt) to remain,
abide, stay, live, dwell, reside ( ب in a
place)
مكث makt and مكوث mukūt remaining,
staying, lingering, abiding; stay, sojourn
مكوجي see كوى
مكدام (Engl.) makadām macadam
مكدوني makdūnī Macedonian (adj. and n.)
مكدونيا makdūniyā Macedonia
مكر makara u (makr) to deceive, delude, cheat,
dupe, gull, double-cross ( ب s.o.) III to try
to deceive ( ه s.o.)
مكر makr cunning, craftiness, slyness,
wiliness, double-dealing, deception,
trickery
مكرة makra ruse, artifice, stratagem,
wile, trick, dodge
مكار makkār and مكور makūr cunning,
sly, crafty, wily, shrewd, artful; sly, crafty
person, impostor, swindler
ماكر mākir pl. مكرة makara sly, cunning,
wily
مكروب mikrūb pl. -āt, مكاريب makārīb2 microbe
مكررونه makarūna macaroni
مكس makasa i (mail) and II to collect taxes III
to haggle, bargain ( ه with s.o.)
مكس maks pl. مكوس mukūs tax, specif.,
excise or sales tax; toll, custom, duty,
impost; market dues │ دار المكوس customhouse
مكاس makkās tax collector
المكسيك al-maksīk Mexico
المكى Mukalla (seaport in Aden Protectorate,
chief town of Hadhramaut)
مكن 1 makuna u ( مكانة makāna) to be or
become strong; to become influential, gain
influence, have influence ( عند with s.o.),
have power II to make strong or firm,
consolidate, strengthen, cement, establish
firmly, deepen ( ھ s.th.); to lend weight ( ھ
to s.th.); to put down or set down firmly (
ھ s.th.), give ( ھ s.th.) a firm stance; to put
ه) s.o.) in a position ( من to do s.th.), give ( ه
s.o.) the possibility ( من to do s.th.), enable
من ه) s.o. to do s.th.), make possible ( من ه
for s.o. s.th.); to place ( من s.th.) in s.o.’s ( (ه
hands; to furnish. provide ( من ه s.o. with);
to give or lend a firm position ( ل to s.o. to
s.th.); to give power ( في ل to s.o. over) IV
to enable ( من ه s.o. to do s.th.); to be
possible, feasible ( ه for s.o.) │ يمكنه
yumkinuhū he can ( ان do s.th.); يمكن ان it is
possible that ...; it may be that ...,
possibly ..., perhaps ..., maybe …; اكثر ما
يمكن (aktara) as much as possible; لا يمكن it
is impossible V to have or gain influence,
weight, or prestige ( عند with s.o.), have or
gain power; to be native, indigenous,
resident; to gain ground; to spread; to be
consolidated, firmly established; to
consolidate, strengthen, gain in strength;
to seize ( من on s.th.), possess o.s., take
possession ( من of s.th.); to have command
or mastery ( من of s.th.), command, muter (
من s.th.); to be in a position, be able ( من to
do s.th.), be capable ( من of), have the
power ( من to do s.th.) X to consolidate,
strengthen, deepen, become firmly
established, establish itself; to seize ( من on
s.th.), possess o.s., take possession ( من of);
to have 917 command or mastery ( من of
s.th.), command, master ( من s.th.); to be
able ( من to do s.th.), be capable ( من of)
مكنة mukna, makina power, ability,
capacity, capability, faculty; possibility;
strength, firmness, solidity, intensity,
force, vigor
مكان pl. امكنة, اماكن and مكانة see كون
مكين makīn pl. مكناء mukanā’2 strong,
firm, solid; firmly established,
unshakable; deep-seated, deep-rooted,
deeply ingrained, inveterate (feeling);
influential, distinguished, of note, of rank,
respected; powerful, potent
امكن amkan2 see متمكن
تمكين tamkīn strengthening,
consolidation, cementation; deepening,
intensification; fixation, establishment;
enabling, enablement, capacitation; livery
of seizing, investiture (Isl. Law)
امكان imkān power, capacity, capability;
faculty, ability; possibility │ بقدر الإمكان biqadri
l-i. or على قدر الإمكان as much as
possible, as far as possible; عدم الإمكان
‘adam al-i. impossibility; عند الإمكان when
(if) possible, possibly; في امكانه ان it is in
his power, he is in a position to ...; ھو في
الإمكان it is in the realm of possibility; ليس
في الإمكان it is impossible, unthinkable,
inconceivable
امكانية imkānīya pl. -āt possibility; O
potential (phys.)
تمكن tamakkun power, authority,
control, mastery, command; ability,
capability,
faculty; restraint, self-control, selfpossession
(also (تمكن من النفس
ماكن mākin strong, firm, solid, lasting,
enduring
ممكن mumkin possible; thinkable,
conceivable │ غير ممكن impossible; من
المكن ان possibly, perhaps, maybe
ممكنات mumkināt possibilities
متمكن mutamakkin an adept, a
proficient, a master; strengthened,
cemented; firmly established, firmly
fixed; consolidated; deep-rooted, deepseated,
deeply ingrained, inveterate;
lasting, enduring; declinable (gram.) │
متمكن امكن (amkan2) declinable with
nunnation, triptote (gram.); متمكن غير امكن
(gairu amkana) declinable in two cases,
diptote (gram.); غير متمكن indeclinable
(gram.); متمكن في جلسته (jalsatihī) firmly
seated
مكنة 2 makina and ماكينة mākīna pl. -āt and مكائن
makā’in2 machine
مكنى makanī mechanical
مكوجي see كوى
مل 2 malla (1st pers. perf. maliltu) a ( ملل malal,
ملال malāl, ملالة malāla) to be or become
weary, tired, bored, impatient; to tire,
become tired ( ھ of s.th.), become fed-up (
ھ with) │ لا يمل indefatigable, untiring,
unflagging IV to be tiresome, irksome,
wearisome, boring, tedious, vexatious; to
vex, annoy, irritate ( على or ه s.o.); (= (املى
to dictate ( على ه s.th. to s.o.) V to be
wearied, fed-up; to be bored; to be
restless, fidgety; to embrace a religion ( ملة
millatan) VIII to embrace a religion ( ملة
millatan)
مل mall weary, tired, fed-up; bored
ملة malla hot ashes, live embers
ملة milla pl. ملل milal religious
community; religion, creed, faith,
confession, denomination
ملى millī religious, confessional,
denominational │ مجلس ملي (majlis) court
of justice of a religious minority (in Egypt
abolished since 1956)
ملة mulla pl. ملل mulal basting stitch,
tacking stitch; spring mattress
ملل malal and ملال malāl tiredness,
boredom, ennui; listlessness, weariness;
annoyance, irritation, vexation 918
ملال mulāl morbid unrest, restlessness
fidgetiness, feverishness
ملالة malāla weariness, boredom;
impatience; ennui, tedium
ملول malūl tired, wearied, bored; weary,
fed-up, disgusted
ملى mullā bread baked in hot ashes
مملول mamlūl offensive, disgusting
ممل mumill tiresome, tedious, boring,
wearisome, irksome, loathsome,
disagreeable
مل 2 mill pl. -āt (formerly) the smallest
monetary unit in Palestine and Jordan,
1/1000 of a Palestinian pound
ملأ mala’a a ( ملء mal’, ملأة mal’a, mil’a) to
fill, fill up ( ب or من or ھ ھ s.th. with); to
fill out ( ھ a form, a blank); to take up, fill,
occupy ( ھ space); to fill ( ھ a vacancy) │
ملأ الدھر (dahra) his (its) fame spread far
and wide; ملأ الساعة (sā‘ata) to wind up a
watch or clock; ملأ شدقيه بالھواء (šidqaihi bil-
hawā’) to puff one’s cheek.; ملأ العين
(‘aina) to satisfy completely, please; ملأ
الفضاء بالشكوى (faḍā’a bi-š-šakwā) to fill the
air with complaints, voice loud laments;
ملأ فاه ب (fāhu) to talk big about ..., shoot
off one’s mouth about ...; -- ملئ mali’a to
be or become filled, filled up, full, replete
III to help, assist, support, back up ( على ه
s.o. in), side ( ه with s.o.); to make
common cause, join forces ( على ه with s.o.
against) IV to fill ( ھ s.th., also a vacancy)
V to till, become full; to be filled ( ھ or من
with), be full ( ھ or من of) VIII to fill,
become full; to be filled (glass; pass.); to
be filled ( ھ، من or ب with s.th., ھ also with
a feeling), be full ( ھ، من or ب of, ھ also of
a feeling); to fill ( ھ s.th.); to fill up ( ھ
s.th.); to imbue, fill ( ه s.o., ھ with a
feeling)
ملء mal’ filling (also, e.g., of
vacancies); filling out
ملء mil’ pl. املاء amlā’ filling, quantity
which fills s.th., fill; quantity contained in
s.th. │ ملء اھابه الكبرياء m. ihābihī lkibriyā’u
he is all pride and arrogance; ملء
بطنه m. baṭnihī as much as one can eat,
one’s fill; ملء القدح m. qadaḥin a cupful;
ملء اليد m. al-yad a handful; ملء كسائه m.
kisā’ihī corpulent fat; بملء الفم bi-m. il-fam
in a loud voice; بملء فيه bi-mil’i fīhi with a
ring of deep conviction (with verbs like
“say”, “declare”, “exclaim”, etc.); loudly,
at the top of one’s voice or one’s lungs
(with verbs like “shout”, “cry”, etc.); ضحك
بملء (ملء) شدقيه ḍaḥika bi-mil’i (or mil’a)
šidqaihj to grin from ear to ear; قال بصوت
ملؤه الشفقة (bi-ṣautin mil’uhū ā-šafaqatu) he
said in a voice full of mercy ...; لي ملء
الحرية في (m. ul-ḥurrīya) I have complete
freedom to ..., I am completely at liberty
to ...; ملء (mauqilan mil'uhil
I-ilium) he ....umed a posture that w...
all determination; انت ملء حياتي (ḥayātī)
you are all my life; ينام ملء جفنيه (mil’a
jafnaihi) he is sound asleep, he sleeps the
sleep of the just
ملأ mala’ pl. املاء amlā’ crowd,
gathering, assembly, congregation;
audience; (general) public; council of
elders, notables, grandees │ على الملأ
publicly, in public; على ملأ العالم (m.
il-‘ālam) for everyone to see, before all
the world; الملأ الأعلى (a‘lā) the heavenly
host, the angels
ملاءة mulā’a, □ ملاية milāya pl. -āt wrap
worn by Egyptian women; sheet, bed
sheet
مليء، مليئ malī’ full ( ب of), filled,
replete ( ب with); bulging, swelling ( ب
with); plump; stout, fat, corpulent, obese;
rich, abounding ( ب in); well-to-do,
wealthy; solvent │ مليء البدن m. al-badan
stout, fat, corpulent 919
ملآن mal’ān, f. مللأى mal’ā or ملآنة pl.
ملاء milā’ full, filled, replete; plump, fat
ممالأة mumāla’a partiality, bias;
collaboration (pol.)
املاء imlā’ filling (also, e.g., of a
vacancy)
امتلاء imtilā’ repletion, fullness; full,
round form, plumpness; bulkiness;
fatness, stoutness, corpulence
مملوء mamlū’ filled, filled up; imbued;
loaded
ممالئ mumāli’ partial, biased,
prejudiced; collaborator (pol.)
ممتلئ mumtali’ full, filled, filled up,
replete │ ممتلئ الجسم m. al-jism stout, fat,
corpulent
ملاريا malāriyā malaria
ملايو malāyū, جزر الملايو juzur al-m. the
Malayan Archipelago
ملج malaja u (malj) to suck ( ھ the mother’s
breast) VIII to suck
مالج mālaj pl. موالج mawālij2 trowel
ملح malaḥa u a and maluḥa u ( ملوح mulūḥ,
ملوحة mulāḥa, ملاحة malāḥa) to be or
become salt(y); -- maluḥa u ( ملاحة malāḥa,
ملوحة mulūḥa) to be beautiful, handsome,
pretty, comely, nice, elegant II to salt,
season with salt ( ھ s.th.); to salt away, salt
down, preserve with salt, com, cure ( ھ
s.th.) IV to be salt(y) X to find ( ھ s.th.)
beautiful, pretty, nice, or witty
ملح milḥ m. and f., pl. املاح amlāḥ, ملاح
milāḥ salt; gunpowder; witticism,
wittiness, wit, esprit │ ملح انكليزي bitter
salt, Epsom salt; ملح البارود m. al-bārūd
saltpeter; gunpowder; ملح النشادر m. annušādir
sal ammoniac, ammonium
chloride; املاح معدنية (ma‘dinīya) mineral
salts
ملحي milhī salt, salty, saline
ملحة milḥa bond, obligation,
commitment, covenant
ملحة mulḥa pl. ملح mulaḥ funny story,
anecdote, bon mot, witticism
ملاح mallāḥ sailor, seaman, mariner;
(mar.) ghetto of Moroccan cities
ملاحة malāḥa beauty, grace,
gracefulness; elegance; kindness,
kindliness, friendliness, amiability;
saltiness, salt taste, saltness, salinity
ملاحة mallāḥa pl. -āt salina, saline
spring; saltern, saltworks, salt mine;
saltcellar
ملاحة milāḥa navigation, shipping │
ملاحة تجارية (tijārīya) mercantile shipping,
maritime transportation; ملاحة جوية
(jawwīya) aviation; ملاحة داخلية (dākilīya)
inland navigation; ملاحة نھرية (nahrīya)
river traffic; صالح للملاحة navigable
ملاحي milāḥī navigational, shipping,
marine, maritime, nautical
ملوحة mulāḥa saltiness, salt taste
مليح malīḥ pl. ملاح millāḥ, املاح amlāḥ
salt, salty, briny, salted; pretty, handsome,
comely; beautiful; nice, pleasant,
agreeable; witty │ (eg.) علقة مليحة (‘alqa) a
sound beating
املوحة umlūḥa pl. اماليح amālīḥ2 joke,
anecdote
مملحة mamlaḥa pl. ممالح mamāliḥ2
salina; saltern, saltworks; saline spring;
saltcellar
تمليح tamlīḥ salting, salting down,
preservation in salt, corning, curing
مالح māliḥ salt, salty, briny
موالح mawāliḥ2 (pl. of مالحة māliḥa,
citrus fruits; (syr.) salted nuts, peanuts,
almonds, etc.
مملوح mamlūḥ salted, salty 920
مملح mumallaḥ salted; salted down,
corned, cured
مستملح mustamlaḥ brilliant, witty,
bright, clever, interesting
ملخ 1 malaka a (malk) to pull out, tear out ( ھ
s.th.); to wrench, dislocate, luxate ( ھ a
joint) VIII to pull out, extract ( ھ s.th.)
مليخ malīk tasteless, insipid
ملوخية 2 mulūlkīya Jew’s mallow (Corchorus
olitorius; bot.) cultivated as a pot herb; a
thick soup made of this herb (eg., syr.)
ملد malida a (malad) to be tender (esp., twig)
اماليد amalīd2 tender twigs
املد amlad2, f. ملداء maldā’ tender,
flexible
ملس malisa a and malusa u ( ملاسة
malāsa, ملوسة mulūsa) to be smooth, level,
even II to make smooth, to smooth, level,
even ( ھ s.th.); to make slippery ( ھ s.th.);
to pass the hand, brush (with the hand) (
على over), stroke, caress ( على s.th.) V to
become smooth; to glide, slide, slip; to
grope; to slip away, escape VII (also املس
immalasa) to become smooth; to glide,
slide, slip; to slip away; to escape
ملس malas (eg.) a thin outer garment;
على silk fabric for women’s dresses
ملس malis smooth, sleek
ملاسة malāsa smoothness
املس amlas 2, f. ملساء malsā’2, pl. ملس
muls smooth, sleek
ملص maliṣa a (malaṣ) to glide, slide, slip; to
slip away, escape; to disengage o.s., free
o.s., ( من، عن from an obligation), rid o.s. (
من، عن of) V to rid o.s. ( عن of), shirk,
dodge, evade ( من s.th.)
ملص maliṣ smooth, sleek, slippery
مليص malīṣ smooth, seleek, slippery;
miscarried fetus, stillborn child
تملص tamalluṣ slipping away, escaping,
escape
ملط 1 malaṭa u (malṭ) to plaster with mud or
mortar ( ھ a wall); to shave off ( ھ hair) II
to mortar, plaster ( ھ a wall)
ملط malṭ (eg.) stark naked │ عريان ملط
(‘uryān) stark naked
ملط milṭ pl. املاط amlāt, ملوط mulūṭ
dishonorable, discreditable; scoundrel │
خلط ملط kilṭ milṭ or kalṭ malṭ pell-mell, in
confusion
ملاط milāṭ pl. ملط muluṭ mortar
مليط malīṭ and املط amlaṭ pl. ملط mulṭ
hairless
مالطة 2 malṭa Malta
مالطي malṭī Maltese (adj. and n.)
ملق maliqa a (malaq) to flatter ( ه s.o.) U = I; to
even, level, plane ( ھ ھ s.th.) III = I IV to
become poor, impoverished, be reduced to
poverty V to flatter ( الى، ل or ه s.o.)
ملق maliq and ملاق mallāq flatterer,
adulator
ملق malaqa pl. -āt, املق amlaq (eg.)
Egyptian mile, league, the distance of
approximately one hour’s walk
مملقة mimlaqa planer, leveler; roller
تمليق tamlīq and تملق tamalluq flattery,
adulation
ملك malaka i (malk, mulk, milk) to take
in possession, take over, acquire ( ھ s.th.),
seize, lay hands ( ھ on), possess o.s., take
possession, lay hold ( ھ of); to possess,
own, have ( ھ s.th.), be the owner ( ھ of);
to dominate, control ( ھ s.th.): to be master
ھ) of); to role, reign, exercise power or
authority, hold sway, lord it ( على or ھ
over); to be capable ( ھ of), be 921 equal (
ھ to); to be able, be in a position ( ان or ھ
to do s.th.) │ ملكه الغيظ (gaiẓ) anger
overwhelmed him, got the better of him;
ملك عليه جميع مشاعره (jamī‘a mašā‘irihī) to
dominate s.o.’s every thought and deed,
be uppermost in s.o.’s mind; ملك عليه حسه
(ḥissahū) to take possession of s.o.’s
feelings; ملك عليه لبه (lubbahū) to
preoccupy s.o.’s heart; ملك عليه نفسه
(nafsahū) to lay hold of s.o.’s soul,
dominate s.o.’s thinking, affect s.o.
deeply, stir up, arouse, excite s.o.; ملك على
نفسه امرھا (amrahā) to have o.s. under
control, keep one’s temper; ملك العينين من
البكاء (‘ainaini, bukā’) to hold back the
tears; ملك نفسه (nafsahū) to control o.s.,
restrain o.s.; لم يملك ان he could not refrain
from ..., he couldn’t help it, he had to ...; ما
ملكت (يملك) يمينه (yamīnuhū) his fortune, his
property, his possessions II and IV to
make ( ه s.o.) the owner; to put ( ه s.o.) in
possession ( ھ of), transfer ( ه to s.o.)
ownership ( ھ of); to transfer, assign, make
over, convey ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.); to make ( ه
s.o.) king or sovereign ( على over) V to
take in possession, take over, appropriate,
acquire ( ھ s.th.), take possession ( ھ of
s.th., ه of s.o.), seize, lay hands ( ھ on
s.th.), lay hold ( ھ of s.th.); to possess,
own, have ( ھ s.th.), be in possession ( ھ
of); to become king or sovereign ( على
over); to become prevalent, become fixed,
take root (habit) VI to gain control ( ھ over
a feeling, نفسه nafsahū over o.s.); to
control o.s., restrain o.s., hold back; to
refrain, keep ( عن from s.th.) │ ما تمالك عن
he couldn’t help (doing s.th.), he couldn’t
refrain from ... VIII to possess, own, have
ھ) s.th.); to gain, win ( ھ s.th.); to acquire (
ھ s.th.) │ امتلك نواصي الشيء (nawāṣiya ššai’)
to b. master of s.th., rule over s.th. X
to appropriate ( ھ s.th.), take possession ( ھ
of); to dominate, control ( ھ s.th.); to
possess, own, have ( ھ s.th.); to master ( ھ
s.th.)
ملك mulk rule, reign, supreme authority,
dominion, domination, dominance, sway,
power; sovereignty, kingship, royalty;
monarchy; tenure, holding, right of
possession, possessory right, ownership
ملك mill: pl. املاك amlāk property,
possessions, goods and chattels, fortune,
wealth; estate; landed property, real estate;
pl. possessions (= colonies); lands, landed
property, estates │ املاك اميرية (amīrīya) or
املاك الحكومة government lands; ملك ثابت
landed property, real property, real estate,
realty, immovables; ملك منقول personal
estate, personal property, personality,
movables; املاك مبنية (mabnīya) developed
lots, real estate developments; صاحب
الأملاك، ذو الأملاك landowner; ملك اميري
(amīrī) government property; ملك مطلق
(muṭlaq) general property, fee simple
(absolute) (Isl. Law); ملك شائع joint
property, joint tenancy, co-ownership
ملك malik pl. ملوك mulūk, املاك amlāk
king, sovereign, monarch
ملكة malika pl. -āt queen │ ملكة الجمال m.
al-jamāl beauty queen
ملك malak (for ملأك ) angel │ ملك حارس
guardian angel
ملكي mulkī posessory, possessive,
proprietary; civilian, civil (as opposed to
military) │ بدلة ملكية (badla) civilian
clothes; موظف ملكي (muwaẓẓaf) civil
servant
ملكي malakī royal, kingly, regal;
monarchic, sovereign; monarchist; angelic
ملكية malakīya monarchy, kingship,
royalty
ملكية milkīya pl. -āt property; ownership
(jur.) │ الملكية الكبرى (kubrā) large landed
property; نزع الملكية naz‘ al-m.
expropriation, dispossession 922
ملكة malaka pl. -āt trait of character,
natural disposition, aptitude, bent; gift,
faculty, talent, knack
ملكوت malakūt realm, kingdom, empire;
kingship, royalty, sovereignty │ ملكوت
السماوات m. as-samāwāt the Kingdom of
Heaven (Chr.)
ملكوتي malakūtī divine, heavenly
ملاك malāk, milāk foundation, basis,
fundament, essential prerequisite
ملاك milāk (tun.) betrothal, engagement;
engagement present (of the fiancé to the
prospective bride)
ملوكي mulukī royal, kingly, regal;
monarchic; monarchist
ملاك mallākīya monarchic rule,
monarchism, kingship, royalty;
monarchist leaning
ملاك mallāk pl. -ūn owner, proprietor;
landowner, landholder, landed proprietor
│ كبار الملكين kibār al-m. large landowners
ملاكي mallākī private
مليك malīk pl. ملكاء mulakā’ king;
possessor, owner, proprietor
مليكة malīka queen
مملكة mamlaka pl. ممالك mamālik2
kingdom, empire, state, country; royal
power, sovereignty
تمليك tamlīk transfer of ownership,
conveyance of property, alienation
تملك tamalluk taking possession,
occupancy, seizure; possession; right or
possession, possessory right, tenure,
holding; domination, control, mastery
تمالك tamāluk self-control
امتلاك imtilāk taking possession,
occupancy, seizure; possession; right or
possession, possessory right, tenure,
holding; domination, control, mastery │
امتلاك النفس imt. an-nafs self-control
امتلاك imtilāk pl. -āt acquisition;
appropriation, taking possession,
occupancy, seizure
مالك mālik pl. ملاك mullāk, ملك mullak
reigning, ruling; owning, possessing,
holding; owner, proprietor, master,
possessor, holder │ مالك الحزين heron
(zool.)
مالكي mālikī Malikite, belonging to the
Malikite school of theology; a Maliki
المالكية al-mālikīya the Malikite school
of theology
مملوك mamlūk owned ( ل by), in
possession ( ل of), belonging ( ل to); (pl.
مماليك mamālīk2) white slave, mameluke;
Mameluke │ غير مملوك incapable of
individual possession, (res) extra
commercium (Isl. Law)
مملك mumallik assignor, transferor,
conveyer, alienator
ممتلك mumtalak owned, in possession;
pl. ممتلكات mumtalakāt property; estates,
landed property; possessions,
dependencies, colonies │ ممتلكات اميرية
(amīrīya) government property; الممتلكات
المستقلة (mustaqilla) the Dominions
ململ malmala to hurry, hasten; to make
restless, make fidgety ( ه s.o.) II tamalmala
to murmur; to mumble, mumble into one’s
beard; to grumble, be disgruntled, be
angry; to be restlessness, fidgety, nervous;
to twitch nervously; to be or become
wavering, uncertain
ململة malmala and تململ tamalmul
unrest, restlessness, fidgetiness,
nervousness
ملنخوليا malakōliyā melancholia
ملا (ملو 1 ) malā u (malw) to walk briskly, run II
to make ( ھ s.o.) enjoy ( ھ s.th.) for a long
time (said of God) IV to dictate ( ھ على to
s.o. .s.th.) V to enjoy ( من، ب، ھ s.th.) X to
take from dictation ( ھ s.th.) 923
ملا malā pl. املاء amlā’ open country,
open tract of land; steppe, desert
الملوان al-malawān day and night
ملوة malwa malouah, a dry measure
(Eg. = 2 قدح = ٤.١٢٥ l)
ملي malīy (relatively long) period of
time; مليا malīyan for quite a while, for a
long time
املاء imlā’ dictation; O transmission (of
a telephone message)
2□ ملاية milāya pl. -āt (< ملاءة mulā’a) wrap
worn by Egyptian women; sheet, bed
sheet
ملية malīya pl. ملايا malāyā (tun.)
garment of sedouin women
مليار (Fr.) milyār pl. -āt (U.S.) billion, (G.s.)
milliard
مليجرام milligrām pl. -āt milligram
مليم (Fr. millième) mallīm, malīm pl. -āt, ملاليم
malālīm2 the smallest monetary unit in
Egypt (= 1/1000 pound); see also under لوم
مليمتر millīmitr pl. -āt millimeter
مليون malyūn pl. -āt, ملايين malāyīn2 million │
اصحاب الملايين millionaires
مم mm. abbreviation of millimeter
مما mimmā, shortened form مم mimma = min
mā
ممن mimman = min man
من 2 man 1. (interr. pron.) who? which one?
which ones? 2. (relative pron.) who; the
one who; those who; one who; whoever,
whosoever, everyone who, he who
من 2 min (prep.) 1. of; some, some of, (a)
part of; belonging to, pertaining to, from
among │ كان من to belong or pertain to, be
among …, fall under ...; من ذلك ان (anna)
among other things ...; منھم من (man) some
of them; منھم من – ومنھم من some of them --
others ..., there are (were) those who --
and others who ...; رجل من قريش (rajul) a
man of the Koreish tribe; يوم من الأيام
(yaum, ayyām) some day, some day or
other; امر من الأمور (amr) s.th. or other,
some affair, some business; اكل من الطعام
(ṭa‘ām) he ate (a little, some) of the food;
ما رايته من الكتب mā ra’aituhū min salingkutub
(what I have seen of the books =)
the books I have seen; ما رايته من كتب (what
I have seen of books =) what(ever) books
I have seen; من شريك 􀍿 ما God has no
partner whatsoever; ما من احد يقدر (aḥadin
yaqdiru) nobody can ...; ما من شخص
(šakṣin) there ia absolutely none who ...
consisting of, made of, of (material) │
ثوب من حرير (taub) a garment of silk, a silk
dress
at, on (time) │ من الليل (lail) at night; من
يومه (yaumihī) on the very same day; من
ساعته at that moment, at once, right away
at, on, by (place) │ ھزه من منكبه
(hazzahū, mankibihī) he shook him by the
shoulder
like, as, such as, as for instance;
namely, to wit │ صفات ازلية من العلم والقدرة
والإرادة (ṣifāt azalīya, ‘ilm, qudra, irāda)
eternal attributes such as knowledge,
power, volition; اذا صح ما قالته الجرائد من ان
(ṣaḥḥa) if what the newspapers say is true,
namely that ...
in an exclamation: يا طولھا من ليلة yā
ṭūlahā min lailatin oh, the length of the
night! what a long night it is! ما اخفه من حمل
mā akaffahū min ḥimlin how light a
burden it is! ويحه من مخبول (waiḥahū) woe
to this fool!
in relation to, with respect to, toward │
مقاصد المانيا من تركيا Germany’s intentions as
far as Turkey is concerned
substituting for an accusative
(originally, in a partitive sense): اذكى ذلك
من فضولھا this kindled her curiosity 924
2. from, away from, out of, from the
direction of │ اخرج من ھنا ukruj min hunā
get out of here! جاء من بغداد he came from
Baghdad; من طرف (ṭarafi) and من قبل
(qibal) on the part of, on the side of, from,
by; من -- الى from -- (up) to; كان منه واليه
(wa-ilaihi) to depend entirely on s.o., he
inseparable from s.o., appertain to s.o.; ما
كان منھم what share they had in ..., to what
extent they were involved in ..., what part
they played in …
from, beginning , starting ..., since, for;
after │ من شھر (šahr) for a month (past),
since one month ago; من مدة (mudda) for
some time (in the past); بعد ايام من ھذه
الحوادث (ba‘da ayyāmin) a few days after
these events
of, by, at, about (denoting the source of
one’s fear, fright, alarm, apprehension,
etc.). e.g., فزع من، خاف من etc.
against, from (with verb, denoting
protection, defense, warning, freeing,
exemption), e.g., ، منعه من، حماه من، حرره من
اعفاه من , etc.
through, by, via, (with verb, of motion
to denote the way, route, or means) │ دخل
من الباب he entered through the gate; من
طريق الراديو by radio
than (with the comparative) │ اقوى من
aqwā min an too strong as to ..., too strong
for ...
due to, owing to, for, because of; at,
about (with verbs denoting emotions; as,
for instance, “be amazed”, “be delighted”,
“he glad”, etc.), e.g., تعجب من، دھش من , etc.
by, through (with the passive to
indicate the doer, agent, perpetrator)
as to compounds such as ، من بعد، من حيث
من دون، من غير، من قبل see under the second
word
من 3 manna u (mann) to he kind, kindly,
benign, gracious, benevolent, obliging (
على to or toward, s.o.); to show, grant, or
do s.o. ( على ) a favor, bestow blessings,
benefits, favors ( على upon s.o.); to grant,
award, present, give ( ب على to s.o. s.th.),
confer, bestow graciously ( ب على upon s.o.
s.th.), bless ( ب على s.o. with), inspire ( ب
على s.o. with; of God) IV to tire, fatigue,
weaken ( ه s.o.), sap the strength ( على of
s.o.) V do. VIII to be kind, kindly, benign,
gracious, benevolent, obliging ( على to or
toward s.o.), to show, grant, or do s.o. (
على ) a favor, bestow blessings, benefits,
favors ( على upon s.o.); to bestow or confer
most graciously ( ب على upon s.o. s.th.),
kindly grant, award, or give ( ب على to s.o.
s.th.)
من mann gracious bestowal; favor;
benefit, blessing, boon; gift, present,
largess; honeydew; manna; (pl. امنان
amnān) a weight of رطل 2 raṭl │ بمنه تعالى
by the grace of God
منة minna pl. منن minan grace; kindness,
kindliness, good will, friendliness,
amiability, graciousness, benevolence,
benignity; favor, act of kindness, benefit,
blessing, boon, gift, present
من munna pl. منن munan strength, vigor,
stamina │ شديد المنة strong, vigorous,
sturdy
منان mannān kind, kindly, benign,
gracious; munificent, liberal, generous;
benefactor; المنان (one of the attributes of
God) the Benefactor
منون manūn fate, destiny; fate of death,
death
امتنان grateful obligation, indebtedness,
obligedness, gratitude
ممنون indebted, obligated, obliged,
grateful, thankful ( ل to s.o.); weak,
languid
ممنونية mamnūnīya grateful obligation,
indebtedness, obligedness, gratitude
ممتن mumtann indebted. much obliged (
ل to s.o.) 925
منتول mintūl menthol
منجنيق manjanīq f., pl. -āt, مجانق majāniq2
mangonel, ballista, catapult
منجو mangū mango
منح manaḥa a (manḥ) to grant, give, accord,
award ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.), bestow, confer ( ھ
ه upon s.o. s.th.) III to bestow favor ( ه
upon s.o.)
منح manḥ granting, giving, donation,
bestowal, conferment, award(ing)
منحة minḥa pl. منح minaḥ act of
kindness; privilege; gift, present,
donation, grant, favor, benefit,
benefaction; compensation; remuneration,
allowance, indemnity (jur.); scholarship,
stipend │ منحة الإقامة m. al-iqāma living
allowance; منحة جامعية (jāmi‘īya) academic
scholarship; منحة السكنى m. as-suknā
housing allowance, rent allowance
مانح māniḥ donor, giver, granter
مندل 1 mandal see ندل
منديل 2 mandīl, mindīl pl. مناديل manādīl2
kerchief; handkerchief; head kerchief
منذ mundu and مذ mud 1. (prep.) since, for; ago
│ منذ شھر (šahr) for a month (past), since
one month ago; a month ago; منذ ايام
(ayyām) for the past few days; a few days
ago; منذ عقد قريب (‘aqd) of late, lately,
recently; منذ الآن (āna) from now on,
henceforth; منذ اليوم (yaum) as of today,
from this day on
2. (conj.) since, ever since, from the
time when │ منذ كنت طفلا صغيرا (ṭiflan)
since I was a small child
بحر المنش baḥr al-manš the Sea of Le Manche,
i.e., the English Channel
منشوبية manšūbīya (from Copt. manšōpi) cell,
living quarters (Copt.-Chr.)
منشوري manšūrī Manchurian
منصون manṣūn monsoon
منطر manṭara to threw down, toss down
منطق manṭaqa to gird ( ب ھ s.th. with) II to gird
o.s., swathe o.s. ( ب with), wind around
one’s body ( ب s.th.)
منطوفلة manṭūfla (syr.) slipper
منع mana‘a a (man‘) to stop, detain, keep from
entering or passing ( ه s.o.); to hinder,
prevent ( ھ s.th.; من or عن ه s.o. from),
keep, restrain, hold back ( ه s.o. من or عن
from); to bar, block, obstruct ( ھ ه s.o.’s
way or access to); to withdraw, take away
من) or عن or ھ ه from s.o. s.th.), deprive (
من or عن or ھ ه s.o. of); to forbid, interdict
من) or عن or ھ ه to s.o. s.th.), prohibit ( من
or عن or ھ ه s.o. from); to decline to
accept, declare impossible or out of the
question ( ان that); to refuse, deny ( عن ھ or
ه ھ s.th. to s.o.), withhold ( عن ھ or ه ھ
s.th. from s.o.); to stop, cease ( ھ doing
s.th., عن with regard to s.o.), abstain,
refrain ( ھ from doing s.th., عن with regard
to s.o.); to ward off, avert, keep, keep
away ( عن ھ s.th. from s.o.); to protect,
guard ( من ه s.o. from), defend ( ه s.o., ھ
s.th., عن against); -- manu‘a u ( مناع manā‘,
مناعة manā‘a) to be strongly fortified,
inaccessible, impregnable; to be
unconquerable, invincible, insurmountable
II to fortify, strengthen, make inaccessible
ھ) s.th.) III to put up resistance, act in
opposition ( ه to s.o.), oppose, counteract ( ه
s.o.), work against s.o. ( ه); to stand up, rise
ه) against s.o.); to resist, oppose ( في s.th.),
offer resistance, object, raise objections (
في to s.th.), revolt, rebel ( في against s.th.);
to refuse, deny ( ھ ه s.o. s.th.) V to refuse,
decline ( عن to do s.th.); to desist, refrain,
abstain, keep ( عن from s.th., from doing
s.th.), forbear, leave off ( عن s.th.), stop,
cease ( عن doing s.th.), avoid ( عن s.th. or
doing s.th.); to 926 be or become
inaccessible, unassailable, impregnable; to
strengthen, grow in strength; to seek
protection ( ب with or in) VIII to refrain,
abstain, keep ( عن from doing s.th.),
forbear ( عن s.th.), stop, cease ( عن doing
s.th.); to be prevented ( عن from); to be
impossible ( على for s.o.); to refuse ( عن to
do s.th.), decline, turn down ( عن s.th.); to
refuse to have anything to do ( على with),
keep aloof ( على from)
منع man‘ hindering, impeding,
obstruction; prevention, obviation,
preclusion; prohibition, interdiction, ban,
injunction; closure, stop, discontinuation,
embargo; withdrawal, deprival,
dispossession; withholding, detention
منعة manra resistance, power, force,
vigor, strength, stamina, insuperability,
invincibility
منيع manī‘ pl. منعاء muna‘ā’
unapproachable, inaccessible, impervious,
impenetrable, forbidding; well-fortified;
mighty, strong, powerful; impregnable,
unconquerable; insurmountable,
insuperable, invincible, immune │ منيع
الجانب strong, unassailable; حاجز منيع
insurmountable barrier
مناعة manā‘a inaccessibility; strength,
impregnability; hardiness, sturdiness,
power of resistance; immunity (to a
disease, also dipl.); imperviousness,
impermeability, impenetrability,
forbiddingness
امنع amna‘2 harder to get at, more
forbidding; offering greater resistance
ممانعة mumāna‘a opposition; resistance,
revolt, rebellion; O inductive resistance
(el.)
تمنع tamannu‘ rejection, refusal
امتناع imtinā‘ refraining, abstention ( عن
from); refusal, denial; impossibility
مانع māni‘ hindering, forbidding, etc.,
see 1; preventive; prohibitive; - (pl. موانع
mawāni‘2) hindrance, obstacle,
obstruction; impediment; a preventive,
preservative, prophylactic; objection; (pl.
-āt) O cutout, anti-interference device
(radio) │ ما رأى مانعا (ra’ā) to have no
objections; لا مانع māni‘a there is nothing
in the way, nothing prevents me (you,
etc.) from ( (عن
ممنوع mamnā‘ forbidden, prohibited,
banned, interdicted; indeclinable (gram.)
│ ممنوع التدخين no smoking! ممنوع الدخول no
admittance! keep out! off limits!
ممنوعية mamnū‘īya forbiddenness
ممتنع mumtani‘ refraining, abstaining,
forbearing; rejecting, refusing; prevented;
forbidden, interdicted, prohibited, banned;
inaccessible ( على to s.o.); forbidding,
inscrutable, impenetrable, elusive;
difficult to imitate; impossible
منغنيس manganīs manganese
منغوليا mungūliyā Mongolia
منفيلا (It. manovella) manafella crank
منلوج manalōg see منولوج
منو) and منى) منا manā u (manw) and منى manā
i (many) to put to the test, try, tempt,
afflict ( ب ه s.o. with; of God); pass. مني
muniya to be afflicted ( ب with), be sorely
tried ( ب by), suffer, sustain, undergo,
experience ( ب s.th.), be affected, hit,
smitten, stricken ( ب by); to find by good
luck, be so fortunate as to find ( ل s.th.) II
to awaken the desire ( ب or ھ ه in s.o. for),
make s.o. ( ه) wish ( ب or ھ for); to make ( ه
s.o.) hope ( ب or ھ for), give ( ه s.o.) reason
to hope ( ب or ھ for), raise hopes ( ب or ھھ
of) in s.o. ( ه); to promise ( ان، ب ه s.o. that)
│ منى نفسه ب (nafsahū) to indulge in the
hope of ..., have every hope that ... IV to
shed ( ھ blood); to emit, 927 ejaculate ( ھ
sperm) V to desire ( ھ s.th.), wish ( ھ for
s.th.; ھ ل s.o. s.th.) X to practice onanism,
masturbate
منى manan and منية manīya pl. منايا
manāyā fate, destiny, lot; fate of death;
death
منى minan semen, sperm
منوي minawī seminal, spermatic
منى minan m. and minā f. the valley of
Mina near Mecca
منية munya, minya pl. منى munan wish,
desire; object of desire
امنية umnīya pl. امان amānin, اماني
amānīy wish, demand, claim, desire,
longing, aspiration
تمنية tamniya and امناء imnā’ emission,
ejaculation of the sperm
تمن tamannin pl. -āt wish; desire;
request
استمناء istimnā’ self-pollution,
masturbation, onanism
منولوج manolōj, monolōg pl. -āt monologue;
(cabaret) act │ منولوجات فكاھية (fukāhīya)
skits, comic sketches, music-hall songs
منومتر manūmitr pl. -āt manometer, pressure
gauge
المنيا al-minyā El Minya (city in central Egypt)
مھجة muhja pl. مھج muhaj, مھجات muhajāt
lifeblood, heartblood; heart; innermost
self, intrinsic nature, core; soul; life │
طعنت الآمال في مھجتھا (ṭu‘inat) hopes
received the deathblow
مھد II to spread out evenly ( ھ s.th.); to smooth,
smoothen ( ھ s.th.); to pave ( ھ a road); to
flatten, plane, make even or level ( ھ s.th.):
to arrange, settle, straighten, put in order (
ھ s.th.); to free from obstacles, clear, pave
ھ) s.th.; esp., the way, ل for or to); to
make easy, facilitate, ease, make easily
accessible ( ھ ل to s.o. s.th.): to get ready,
prepare ( ھ s.th.), make ( ھ a bed, etc.); to
pass ( الكرة al-kurata the ball, ل to s.o.);
(verb alone, without qualifying direct
object) to pave, open, clear, or prepare the
way ( ب ل for s.th. by or with), open,
prepare, begin, start, initiate, bring about,
set in motion ( ب ل s.th. by or with) V to be
paved, be clear or cleared, be or become
open (way); to be or get settled or
arranged; to go smoothly, go well, come
off well; to be in order, be put in order, get
straightened out
مھد mahd pl. مھود muhūd bed; cradle │
من المھد على اللحد (laḥd) from cradle to
grave; قتله في مھده to nip s.th. in the bud; كان
في مھد to be still in its beginnings or
infancy, not have progressed beyond the
early stages
مھاد mihād place of rest, resting place;
bed; bosom, pale, fold (fig., in which s.th.
rests)
تمھيد tamhīd smoothing, leveling,
paving; facilitation, easing; preparation;
foreword, preface, proem; introduction;
preliminaries │ تمھيد ل in order to facilitate
...; in preparation of ..., as a preliminary
step toward ..., for the purpose of ...
تمھيدي tamhīdī introductory, prefatory,
preliminary, preparatory │ اجراءات تمھيدية
(ijrā’āt) preliminaries; preliminary
proceedings (jur.); حكم تمھيدي (ḥukm)
interlocutory decree, interlocutory
judgment (jur.); قرار تمھيدي (qarār)
provisional in, junction, temporary
restra.ining order (jur.); شرح تمھيدي (šarh)
prefatory remarks
ممھد mumahhad leveled, smoothed,
smooth, even, level; well-ordered,
wellarranged, well-prepared; prepared,
cleared, open (way); paved (road)
مماھد mumāhad paved, improved (road)
928
مھر 1 mahara u a (mahr, مھار mahār, مھارة
mahāra, مھور muhūr) to be skillful, adroit,
dexterous, skilled, adept, proficient,
expert, experienced, seasoned; -- u a
(mahr) to give a dower ( ھا to the bride) III
to vie in skill ( ه with s.o.) IV to give a
dower ( ھا to the bride)
مھر mahr pl. مھور muhūr dower, bridal
money; price, stake; ransom
مھر muhr, pl. امھار amhār, مھارة mihāra
foal, colt
مھرة muhra pl. مھر muhar, مھرات
muharāt filly
مھارة mahāra skillfulness, adroitness,
dexterity, skill, expertness, proficiency,
adeptness
ماھر māhir pl. مھرة mahara skillful,
adroit, dexterous, skilled, proficient,
adept, expert, practiced, experienced,
seasoned
مھر 2 muhr seal, signet; stamp
مھردار muhrədār keeper of the seal
مھرجان mahrajān, mihrajān pl. -āt festival,
festivity, celebration │ مھرجان بريطانيا
Festival of Britain
مھك mahaka a (mahk) to grind, crush, bruise,
pound
مھكة makha, muhka freshness of youth,
bloom of youth
مھل mahala a (mahl, مھلة muhla) to tarry,
dawdle, be slow, take one’s time ( في in
s.th.) II and IV to give ( ه s.o.) time, grant (
ه s.o.) a respite or delay V to be slow,
proceed slowly and deliberately ( في in
s.th.) │ تمھل في خطاه (kuṭāhu) to slacken
one’s pace; تمھل يقول he said slowly ... VI =
V; X to ask ( ه s.o.) for a respite; to ask ( ه
s.o.) to wait
مھل mahl, mahal slowness,
leisureliness, ease; leisure; مھلا mahlan
slowly, leisurely, in no hurry │ على مھل
slowly, leisurely, in no hurry; مھلك
mahlaka easy does it! take it easy! على
مھلك take it easy! take your time!
مھلة muhla respite, delay; time limit for
a decision, time to think s.th. over
مھيلة muhaila large boat (ir.)
امھال imhāl grant of respite, concession
of a delay
امھالي imhālī tending to delay, dilatory
تمھل tamahhul slowness deliberateness
│ بتمھل slowly; gradually
متمھل mutamahhil slow, deliberate,
leisurely, unburned, easy
متماھل mutamāhil leisurely,
comfortable, easy, unhurried, slow
مھما mahmā (conj.) whatever,
whatsoever; no matter how much,
however much, much as ...; whenever │
مھما يكن من الأمر (yakun, amr) whatever the
case may be, be it as it may
مھن mahana u a (mahn, مھنة mahna) to
serve ( ه s.o.); to humble, degrade, treat in
a humiliating manner ( ه s.o.); to hackney,
wear out in common service, wear out by
use ( ھ s.th.); -- mahuna u ( مھانة mahāna)
to be despicable, base, low, mean, menial
III to practice ( ھ a profession) VIII to
humble, degrade, treat in a humiliating
manner ( ه s.o.); to revile ( ه s.o.); to despise
ه) s.o.); to employ for menial services ( ه
s.o.); to hackney, wear out in common
service, wear out by use ( ھ s.th.); to
practice professionally, as a trade ( ھ s.th.)
مھنة mihna pl. مھن mihan work, job,
occupation, calling, vocation, profession,
trade, business
مھني mihnī professional, vocational;
gainfully employed │ الإرشاد المھني (iršād)
vocational guidance 929
مھين mahīn pl. مھناء muhanā’2 despised,
despicable, contemptible, vile
امتھان imtihān degradation, humiliation,
contempt, disdain; abuse, misuse,
improper treatment
ماھن māhin pl. مھان muhhān menial
servant
مھاة mahāh pl. مھوات mahawāt, مھيات mahayāt
wild cow
ماء (موء 1 ) mā’a u ( مواء muwā’) to mew, miaow
مواء muwā’ mewing, miaow (of a cat)
ماء 2 and مائي see موء
موبيليات mōbīlīyāt (pl.) furniture
مات (موت ) māta u (maut) to die; to perish; to
lose life, become dead; to abate, subside,
die down, let up (wind, heat) II and IV to
make ( ه s.o.) die, let ( ه s.o.) perish; to kill,
put to death ( ه s.o.); to be the death of s.o.
ه) ), cause the death of s.o. ( ه) IV to mortify
نفسه) o.s., one’s flesh); to suppress, deaden
ھ) s.th.) VI to feign death, pretend to be
dead; to feign weakness; to be sluggish,
listless, slack ( في in s.th.) X to seek death;
to defy death, sacrifice o.s., risk one’s life;
to strive desperately ( في for), make
desperate efforts <..i in order to); to tight
desperately
موت maut and موتة mauta death;
decease, demise │ موت ابيض (abyaḍ)
natural death
موات mawāt that which is lifeless an
inanimate thing; barren, uncultivated land,
wasteland
موتان mautāni, mūtān dying, death;
epidemic, plague
ميت mayit, mait pl. اموات amwāt, موتى
mautā lifeless inanimate, dead, deceased
ميتة maita corpse, carcass, carrion; meat
of an animal not slaughtered in
accordance with ritual requirements (Isl.
Law)
ميتة mīta manner of death │ ميتة الأبطال
death of a hero, death in battle
ممات mamāt place where s.o. died;
decease, death
اماتة imāta killing; mortification (of the
flesh)
استماتة istimāta death defiance;
desperate effort, desperate struggle ( في
for)
مائت mā’it dying, moribund, mortal
مميت mumīt lethal, fatal, mortal, deadly
│ خاطئة مميتة (kāṭi’a) mortal sin
ممات mumāt antiquated, obsolete
مستميت mustamīt death-defying,
reckless, heroin; martyr; suffering a
martyr’s death
موتوسيكل (Fr. motocycle) mōtōsīkil pl. -āt
motorcycle
ماج (موج ) māja u (mauj, موج mawajān) to
heave, swell, roll, surge (sea); to be
excited, agitated ( ب by) II to ripple ( ھ the
surface of water, etc.); to wave ( ھ the
hair) V = I; to rise in waves; to ripple, be
rippled (as, the surface of water); to
undulate, move in undulations; to sway,
roll VI to be waved, be undulate; to form
an undulating line ( حول around); to flow,
flood, swell, surge
موج mauj pl. امواج amwāj billows,
surges, seas, breakers; waves; ripples; --
(n. un. موجة mauja pl. -āt) billow, surge,
sea, breaker; wave; ripple; oscillation,
vibration, undulation │ موج طويل long
wave (radio); موج قصير short wave (radio);
موج متوسط (mutawassiṭ) medium wave
(radio); امواج صوتية (ṣauṭīya) sound waves;
امواج مستمرة (mustamirra) continuous
waves; امواج مضمحلة (muḍmaḥilla) 930
damped waves; امواج منعكسة (mun‘akisa)
reflected waves, indirect waves; امواج
(muwajjaha) directional beams (radio); O
موجة حارة (ḥārra) heat wave, hot spell;
موجة الشباب m. aš-šabāb bloom of youth,
freshness of youth; سعة الموجة sa‘at al-m.
amplitude; طول الموجة ṭūl al-m. wave
length (radio); موجة استنكار a wave of
disapproval
مواج mawwāj undulating, undulant;
surging, rolling; waved, undulated,
undulate; O (pl. -āt) transmitter (radio)
تمويج tamwīj waving (of the hair) │
التمويج على البارد cold wave, permanent
wave
تموج tamawwuj pl. -āt oscillation,
vibration; undulation, undulant motion;
swaying, rolling │ تموجات صوتية (ṣautīya)
sound waves; O تموج الھواء t. al-hawā’
atmospheric vibrations
مائج mā’ij surging, swelling, rolling,
tumultuous, stormy, high (sea)
مموج mumawwaj undulated, undulate,
waved, wavy, wavelike, undulatory
متموج mutamawwij surging, rolling,
undulating, undulant, wavelike,
undulatory; wavy (hair) │ الحمى المتموجة
(ḥummā) undulant fever, Malta fever,
brucellosis (med.)
متماوج mutamāwij undulate, waved,
wavy, rippled; curled
مودة mōda pl. -āt fashion, style; fashionable;
pl. hat fashions, millinery │ على المودة of
the latest fashion, fashionable, modish,
stylish
مودل mōdel or موديل mōdēl pl. -āt model,
pattern
مار (مور 1 ) māra u (maur) to move to and fro,
move from side to side V do.
موار mawwār O pendulum
تمور tamawwur swaying, swinging
motion; تمورا to and fro, back and forth
مار 2 look up alphabetically and under مر marra
المورة 3 al-mōra Morea, Poloponnesus
□ موراتزم mūrātizm (eg.) rheumatism
موراني mūrānī (syr.) = ماروني look up
alphabetically
مورفين murfīn morphine
مورينة mūrīna pl. -āt wooden beam, rafter
موز mauz (call.; n. un. ة) banana
ماس 1 mās diamond (cf. الماس alphabetically)
ماسي māsī diamond (used attributively)
موسى 2 mūsā f., pl. مواس mawāsin, امواس amwās
straight razor
موسى 3 mūsā Moses │ سمك موسى samak m.
plaice, flounder (zool.)
موسوي mūsawī Mosaic(al)
موسطردة (It. mostarda) musṭarda mustard
موسكو moskū, moskō Moscow
موسيقار mūsīqār musician
موسيقى mīsīqa (f.) music
موسيقي mūsīqī musician; musical │ آلة
موسيقية musical instrument
ماش māš (n. un. ة) leguminous plant with black
edible grains, Indian pea (Phaseolus max.
L.; bot.)
الموصل al-maṣil Mosul (city in N Iraq)
موضه (= موده ) mōḍa fashion, style
موق see مأق
مول 1 II to make rich, enrich ( ه s.o.); to finance (
ھ s.th.) V to be financed; to become rich,
wealthy X to become rich, wealthy
مال mal pl. اموال amwāl property,
possessions, chattels, goods; wealth,
affluence; fortune, estate; money; 931
income, revenue; assets, capital, stock,
fund; (eg.) tax, esp., land tax; (Isl. Law)
marketable title; pl. property, assets,
chattels, goods; pecuniary resources,
funds; taxes │ ذو مال wealthy, rich; مال
احتياطي (iḥtyāṭī) reserve fund; مال الاطيان
(eg.) land tax; مال الحرام m. al-ḥarām illgotten
gain; مال الحكومة (eg.) taxes; اموال
مقررة (muqarrara) direct taxes; مال نقلي
(naqlī) or مال منقول movable property,
movables (Isl. Law); مال ثابت landed
property, real property, immovables; مال
غير متقوم (mutaqawwim) thing without
commercial value (Isl. Law); امين المال
treasurer; بيت المال bait al-m. (public)
treasury; رأس مال etc., see رأس
مالي mālī monetary, pecuniary,
financial; finance (in compounds); fiscal;
financier, capitalist │ بت مالي (bait)
finance house, banking house; تضخم مالي
(taḍakkum) inflation; سنة مالية (sana) fiscal
year; غرامة مالية (garāma) or عقوبة مالية a
fine
مالية mālīya monetary affairs, finance,
public revenue; finances, financial
situation │ وزارة المالية finance ministry,
treasury department
موال mawwāl pl. -ūn (ir.) financier,
capitalist
تمويل tamwīl financing; (eg.) tax-paying
ممول mumawwil pl. -ūn (eg.) taxpayer
ممول mumawwal propertied, wealthy,
rich
متمول mutamawwil rich, wealthy, wellto-
do; financier, capitalist
موال 2 mawwāl pl. مواويل mawāwīl2 a poem in
colloquial language, often sung to the
accompaniment of a reed pipe
مواليا mawāliyā do.
موم mūm wax
مومياء mūmiyā’, مومية mūmiya pl. -āt mummy
مان (مون ) māna u (maun, مؤنة mu’na) and II to
provision. supply with provisions ( ه s.o.);
to provide, furnish, supply ( ب ھ or ه s.o.
or s.th. with) V to store up provisions, lay
in provisions, provision o.s.
مونة mūna provisions; (eg.) mortar
تموين tamwīn food supply, provisioning;
supply; replenishment
موانيء pl. ميناء
مونيخ mūnīk Munich
ماه ( موه ) māha u (mauh) to mix ( ب ھ s.th.
with); -- u a (mauh, مؤوه mu’ūh, ماھة
māha) to abound in water II to abound in
water; to pour water ( ھ into), admix water
ھ) to); to thin, dilute, water down,
adulterate ( ھ s.th.); to falsify ( ھ، على
s.th.), misrepresent ( ھ s.th.); to feign,
affect ( على ب s.th. toward s.o.); to
camouflage ( ھ s.th.; Syr., mil.); to coat,
overlay, plate ( ب ھ a base metal with gold
or silver) IV to add water ( ھ to)
ماء mā’ pl. مياه miyāh, امواه amwāh
water; liquid, fluid; juice │ كالماء الجاري
fluently, smoothly, like clockwork; ماء
ابيض (abyaḍ) cataract (eye disease); ماء
الزھر m. az-zahr orange-blossom water; ماء
الشباب m. aš-šabāb freshness of youth,
prime of youth; ماء عذب (‘adb) fresh water,
potable water; ماء غازي pl. مياه غازية
carbonated water, mineral water; ماء
الكولونيا Eau de Cologne; ماء الوجه m. alwajh
honor, decency, modesty, selfrespect;
اراق ماء وجھه arāqa mā’a wajhihī
to sacrifice one’s honor, abase o.s.; to
dishonor, disgrace s.o.; بذل ماء وجھه do.; ماء
الورد m. al-ward rose water; مياه اقليمية
(iqlīmīya) territorial waters; مياه الأمطار m.
al-amṭār rain water; مياه جوفية (jaufīya)
ground water; مياه ساحلية (sāḥilīya) coastal
waters; بنو ماء السماء banū m. as-samā’ the
Arabs 932
ماھي māhī and ماوي māwī watery,
aqueous, aquatic
مائي mā’ī aquatic, water; liquid, fluid;
hydraulic
ماھية look up alphabetically
ماوية māwīya and مائية mā’īya juice, sap
تمويه tamwīh coating, plating; clothing,
attire, garb; overfilling; feigning,
pretending, affectation; camouflage (syr.,
mil.); distortion (of facts),
misrepresentation, falsification │ كأس
التمويه ka’s at-t. overfull cup
تمويھي tamwīhī feigned, sham, mock,
make-believe │ غارة تمويھية mock attack,
feint
ماوية see موه
ميت and ميتة see موت
ماح (ميح ) māḥa i (maiḥ, ميحوحة maiḥūḥa) to
strut, walk with affected dignity; to
waddle V and VI to reel, totter, stagger; to
swing X to ask ( ھ ه s.o. a favor), request (
ھ s.th.) │ استماح عذرا من (‘udran) to
apologize for s.th.
ماد (ميد ) māda i (maid, ميدان mayadān) to be
moved, shaken, upset, shocked; to sway;
to swing; to feel giddy, be dizzy; ماد ب to
shake s.th. violently VI to sway back and
forth, swing from side to side
ميدة mīda pl. ميد miyad (eg.) lintel,
breastsummer (arch.)
ميداء mīdā’ measure, amount, length,
distance; mīdā’a (prep.) in front of,
opposite, facing
ميدان maidān, mīdān pl. ميادين mayādīn2
square, open place, open tract; field;
arena; battleground, battlefield; combat
area, fighting zone; race course, race
track; playground (fig.); field, domain,
line, sphere of activity │ ميدان التدريب drill
ground; military training center; ميدان
الحرب m. al-ḥarb theater of war; ميدان السباق
race course, race track; ميدان العمل m.
al-‘amal field of activity, scope of action;
ميدان القتال battlefield; خرج من ميدان العمل to
be put out of servi-šce or commission; ظھر
في الميدان to turn up, appear on the scene; في
ميدان الشرف m. iš-šaraf on the field of
honor; مدافع الميدان fieldpieces, field guns,
infantry howitzers
مائد mā’id pl. ميدى maidā dizzy, seasick
مائدة mā’ida pl. -āt, موائد mawā’id2 table
│ مائدة التشريح operating table; مائدة الزينة m.
az-zīna dressing table; مائدة السفرة m. assufra
dining table
مداليون madāliyōn medallion
مار (مير 1 ) māra i (mair) and IV to provide ( عياله
‘iyālahū for one’s family)
ميرة mīra pl. مير miyar provisions,
supplies, stores
ميار mayyār caterer, purveyor, supplier
ميري 2 mīrī (= اميري ) public, governmental,
government-, satate- (in compounds);
fiscal; الميري the government, the fiso, the
exchequer │ مال الميري government taxes;
املاك الميري government land
ميرآلاى mīrālāy (formerly, Eg.) colonel
ميرلواء mīrliwā’ (Ir.) brigadier general
مير 3 (Fr. maire) mēr pl. اميار amyār (magr.)
mayor
ميرون mairūn chrism (Chr.)
ماز (ميز ) māza i (maiz) to separate, keep apart (
بين two things); to distinguish, honor,
favor ( ه s.o.) II to confer distinction ( ه
upon s.o.), distinguish, commend, honor,
favor ( ه s.o., عن above s.o. else, also ;(على
to distinguish, set aside, cause to stand out
ھ، ه) s.o., s.th., عن from); to 933 prefer ( عن
ھ or ه s.o. or s.th. to); to separate,
segregate, set apart, single out, select,
choose, pick ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to grant a
special right or privilege ( ه to s.o.),
privilege ( ه s.o.); to distinguish,
differentiate, discriminate ( عن ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th. from, also من؛ بين between two things,
one thing from another) IV to distinguish,
mark ( ھ s.th.); to prefer ( ھ s.th.) V to be
set apart, be separated
or separate, be distinct, be
distinguished, be differentiated; to
distinguish o.s., be distinguished, be
marked, stand out; to be marked out with
distinction, be honored, be favored; to be
preferred │ تميز غيظا (gaiẓan) to burst with
anger VI to distinguish o.s. ( في in); to
differ VIII to distinguish o.s. ( ب by, في in
s.th., عن or على above s.o. or s.th., من as
compared with s.o. or s.th.); to be
distinguished, be marked ( ب by); to be
characterized, be signalized ( ب by); to
excel, surpass, outdo, outshine ( عن or على
s.o. or s.th.); to have the advantage, take
preference ( على over), be preferred ( على
to); to differ ( من or على from s.o., في or ب
in, in that ...)
ميز maiz distinction; favoring,
preferment
ميزة mīza peculiarity, distinguishing
feature, distinctive mark, essential
property, characteristic; prerogative,
priority right
اميز amyaz 2 preferable ( على to)
تمييز tamyīz distinction; preference;
preferment, favoring, favoritism,
preferential treatment; privileging;
partiality; separation, segregation, sifting,
singling out; specification (gram.);
differentiation; discrimination, judgment,
discretion, common sense; realization,
discernment, conscious perception;
deliberate intention │ سن التمييز sinn at-t.
age of discretion (jur.); محكمة التمييز
maḥkamat at-t. court of cassation (Syr.);
من غير تمييز unwittingly, unintentionally,
with no definite purpose in mind; اخرجه عن
دائرة التمييز (akrajahū) to deprive s.o. of his
clear judgment, rob s.o. of his senses
امتياز imtiyāz pl. -āt distinction, (mark
of) honor; advantage, benefit, merit;
difference, distinction, differentiation,
discrimination; special right, privilege;
concession, patent, permit, license,
franchise; (oil) concession; prerogative,
priority right │ الامتيازات الأجنبية (ajnabiya)
the capitulations (of Western powers in
the Orient) ; الامتيازات الدبلوماسية diplomatic
privileges; صاحب الامتياز holder of the
concession, concessionaire, responsible
publisher of a newspaper
مميز mumayyiz distinguishing,
distinctive; characteristic, peculiar,
proper; discriminating, discerning,
reasonable, rational (Isl. Law)
مميزة mumayyiza pl. -āt distinguishing
feature, distinctive mark, characteristic
trait, peculiarity; distinction, (mark of)
honor; advantage, merit
مميز mumayyaz distinguished,
preferred, favored, privileged; distinct,
separate, special
متميز mutamayyiz distinguished,
distingue; marked, notable, prominent,
outstanding, characterized by distinctive
traits, characteristic
ممتاز mumtāz distinguished,
differentiated; exquisite, select, choice,
rare; outstanding, superior, first-rate, firstclass,
top-notch, exceptional, excellent;
privileged; special, extra; (as an
examination grade) passed with
distinction, excellent │ درجة ممتازة
(daraja) special class; ديون ممتازة (duyūn)
privileged debts, preferred debts; عدد ممتاز
(‘adad) special issue (of a periodical) 934
ميزانين (It. mezzanino) mēzānīn mezzanine
ماس (ميس ) māsa i (mais, ميسان mayasān) to
move to and fro, swing from side to side;
to walk with a proud, swinging gait V to
walk with a proud, swinging gait
ميس mais proud gait; proud bearing
ميس mīs pl. امياس amyās (eg.) target
مياس mayyās walking with a lofty,
proud gait, strutting
ميس 2 (Engl. mess), ميس الضباط m. aḍ-ḍubbāṭ
officers mess
ماط (ميط ) māṭa i (maiṭ, ميطان mayaṭān) to
remove, pull away, draw back ( ھ s.th.) IV
do. │ اماط اللثام عن to disolose, uncover,
reveal s.th., bring s.th. to light
ماع (ميع ) mā‘a i (mai‘ to flow; to spread; to
melt, dissolve (fat) II to soften, attenuate,
dilute, liquefy ( ھ s.th.) IV to melt, liquefy
ھ) s.th.) V and VII to be melted, melt,
dissolve
ميع mai‘ flowing, flow; liquidity,
fluidity
ميعة mai‘a storax, a kind of incense
obtained from the storax tree, resin of the
storax tree (Styrax offioinalis); prime,
bloom (of youth); indulgence,
compliance; unstableness, unsteadiness
ميوعة muyū‘a liquid state; unstableness,
unsteadiness
اماعة imā‘a melting, liquefaction
تميع tamayyu‘ liquescence, liquefaction
مائع mā’i‘ melting, liquid, fluid;
liquescent, semiliquid; vague
(expression); undecided, pending. in flux
(situation)
ميكا (Engl.) mica
ميكاني mikānī mechanical, mechanize
ميكانيكا mīkānīkāhlnlhl meohanios
ميكانيكي mīkānīkī mechanical, automatic,
mechanized, mechanic; motorized; a
mechanic
ميكروب mikrūb pl. -āt microbe
ميكروفون mikrōfōn pl. -āt microphone
مال (ميل 1 ) mīla i (mail, ميلان mayalān) to bend,
bend down ( الى to; على over); to bow
down, lean over, turn ( على to s.o.); to
incline, slope, slant, tilt, tip, be inclined,
slanting, oblique; to incline, tend. be
favorably disposed ( الى to), have a
predilection, a liking, an inclination, a
propensity ( الى for), feel sympathy ( الى
for). sympathize ( الى with), favor ( الى s.o.);
to take side, to side ( مع with), be partial,
biased, prejudiced; to lean ( على against); to
revolt, rebel ( على against), be hostile ( على
to s.o.); to be disinclined, be averse ( عن to
s.th.); to have an antipathy, a distaste, a
dislike ( عن for); to deviate, digress, turn
away, depart ( عن from); مال به الى to drag
or take s.o. or s.th. along to ...; -- ( ميول
muyūl) to prepare to set (sun); to decline,
draw to its end (day, night); -- ميل mayila
a (mayal) to be bent, bowed, tilted,
averted, turned aside II and IV to incline,
tip, tilt, bend, bow ( ھ s.th.); to make ( ه
s.o.) inclined, sympathetic or favorably
disposed ( نحو or الى to s.o., to s.th.),
incline, dispose ( ه s.o.’s mind نحو or الى
to), fill ( ه s.o.) with sympathy ( الى for); to
make ( ه s.o.) disinclined or averse ( عن to),
turn s.o.’s mind ( ه) away from ( ,(عن
alienate ( عن ه s.o. from) V and VI to reel,
totter, stagger; to waver (tone); to sway,
swing X to cause to incline, incline, tip,
tilt ( ھ s.th., الى to or toward); to win ( ه s.o.,
also القلوب the hearts), attract, win over,
bring to one’s side ( ه s.o.), gain favor ( ه
with s.o.), win s.o.’s ( ه) affection
ميل mail pl. ميول muyūl, اميال amyāl
inclination, tilt; bend, turn, deflection;
obliqueness, obliquity, slant; slope,
incline, declivity; deviation, divergence,
declination (astron.); affection ( الى for),
935 attachment ( الى to); predilection,
liking, sympathy ( الى for); propensity,
disposition, bent, leaning, inclination,
taste, desire, wish, longing; tendency,
trend, drift ( الى to, toward)
ميال mayyāl inclined, favorably
disposed ( الى to), leaning ( الى toward); in
favor ( الى of), biased ( الى toward or for)
اميل amyal2 more inclined, strongly
inclined ( الى to), more in favor ( الى of)
امالة imāla pronunciation of a shaded
toward e (gram.)
تمايل tamāyul reel(ing), swaying,
tottering, stagger(ing), waver(ing);
vibration
مائل mā’il inclining ( الى to or toward);
bending down, bowing down, leaning
over; bent, tilted; sloping, declivitous
(terrain); inclined, slanting, oblique │ سطح
مائل (saṭḥ) inclined plane (math.)
ميل 2 mīl pl. اميال amyāl mile (= ;(ذراع 4000
milestone │ ميل بحري (baḥrī) nautical
mile, knot
ميلي 3 milli-, 1/1000 (in measures)
مان (مين ) māna i (main) to lie, tell a lie
مين main pl. ميون muyūn lie, falsehood,
untruth
ميان mayyān and مائن mā’in liar
ميناء 1 mīnā and ميناء mīnā’ glaze, glazing;
enamel (of the teeth; as a coating of metal,
glass, or pottery); (pl. موانئ mawāni’) dial
(of a watch or clock) │ مطلى بالمينا (maṭlīy)
enamel-coated, enameled
ميناء 2 mīnā’ f. and مينة mīna pl. موان mawānin,
مين miyan port, harbor, anchorage │ ميناء
جوية (jawwīya) airport
ن
نابلس nābulus2 Nablus (town in W Jordan)
نابلي nābulī or نابولي nābūlī Napoli, Naples
(seaport in S Italy)
نارجيل nārajīl coconut(s) (coll.)
نارجيلة nārajīla (n. un.) coconut; Persian
water pipe, narghile
ناردين nāradīn nard, spikenard
نارنج naranj bitter orange
نازي nāzī Nazi
نازية nāzīya Nazism
ناس nās men, people, folks (cf. (انس
ناسوت nāsūt human nature, humanity
نأم 1 na’ama i a to sound, resound, ring out; to
groan, moan
نأمة na’ma noise, sound, tone
نؤوم 2 na’um see نوم
ناموس nāmūs pl. نواميس nawāmīs2 law; rule;
honor; see also نمس
نأى 1 na’ā a (na’y) to be far, far away, distant,
remote ( عن from), keep away, stay away,
keep at a distance, remain aloof, go away,
move away, depart, absent o.s. ( عن from),
leave ( عن s.th., s.o.) III to keep far away,
keep at a distance ( عن ھ or ه s.o. or s.th.
from), keep a wide distance ( ھ، ه between
s.o. or s.th., عن and) IV to remove, move
away, take away, place at a distance ( عن ه
s.o. from) VI to move away, move apart,
draw sway from one another; to be away
from one another, be at a distance, be
separated, be apart; to keep away, stand
aloof, be away, be at a distance ( عن from)
VIII to 936 be away, be at a distance ( عن
from); to go away, move away, draw
away, depart, absent o.s. ( عن from), leave
عن) s.th., s.o.)
نأي na’y remoteness
نأي na’y and نؤى nu’ā pl. آناء anā’, انآء
an’ā’ ditch
انأى an’ā farther away, remoter, more
distant
منأى man’an distant place │ كان بمنأى عن
to keep away from, remain aloof from,
keep out of, not get involved in, refuse to
have anything to do with
تناء tanā’in great distance, remoteness
ناء nā’in far, far away, distant, remote;
outlying, out-of-the-way, secluded
ناي 2 nāy pl. -āt nay, a flute without mouthpiece,
made of bamboo, rarely of wood, in
different sizes, which, when blown, is
held in a slanting forward position (unlike
a German flute)
انبوب unbūb and انبوبة unbūba pl. انابيب
anābīb على 2 int (of a knotted stem), part
between two nodes; tube, pipe, conduit,
conduit pipe, main duct; tube (e.g., of
toothpaste); light bulb │ انبوب الرئة u. arri’a
windpipe, trachea (anat.); انبوب
الطوربيد torpedo tube; انبوب مفرغ (mufarrag)
vacuum tube (radio); خط الأنابيب kaṭṭ al-a.
pipeline
انبوبي unbūbī tubular, tube-shaped,
fistulous; pipe- (in compounds)
نبأ naba’a a ( نبء nab’, نبوء nubū’) to be high,
raised, elevated, protruding, projecting,
prominent; to overcome, overpower,
overwhelm ( على s.o.); to turn away,
withdraw, shrink ( عن from); to be
repelled, repulsed, sickened, disgusted,
shocked ( عن by) II to inform, notify, tell,
advise ( عن or ب ه s.o. of s.th.), let ( ه s.o.)
know ( عن or ب about), make known,
announce, impart, communicate ( عن or ب ه
to s.o. s.th.); to be evidence ( عن of), show,
indicate, manifest, bespeak, reveal,
disclose ( عن s.th.) IV to inform, notify,
tell, advise ( ب ه s.o. of), let ( ه s.o.) know (
ب about), make known, announce, impart,
communicate ( ب ه to s.o. s.th.) V to
predict, foretell, forecast, prognosticate,
presage, prophesy ( ب s.th.); to claim to be
a prophet, pose as a prophet X to ask for
news, for information ( ه s.o.); to inquire (
ھ after), ask ( ھ about)
نبأ naba’ pl. انباء anbā’ news, tidings
information, intelligence; announcement,
report, news item, dispatch │ وكالة الأنباء
wakālat al-a. or مكتب الأنباء maktab al-a.
news agency, wire service
نبأة nab’a faint noise, low sound
نبوءة nubū’a pl. -āt prophecy
انباء inbā’ pl. -āt notification,
information, communication
تنبؤ tanabbu’ pl. -āt prediction, forecast,
prognostication, prophecy
نبت nabata u (nabt) to grow (esp., of plants,
also, e.g., of teeth); to sprout, germinate;
to produce plants, bring forth vegetation
(soil) II to plant, sow, seed ( ھ s.th.) IV to
germinate, cause to sprout ( ھ a seed); to
make ( ھ s.th.) grow; to grow, plant,
cultivate ( ھ s.th ) X to plant, cultivate,
grow, raise ( ھ plants); to breed ( ھ plants),
culture ( ھ e.g., bacteria)
نبت nabt germination, sprouting;
growth; vegetable growth, vegetation,
plants; herbage, herbs, grass; sprout, plant
│ قوة النبت qūwat an-n. germinability,
germinative faculty
نبتة nabta plant, sprout, shoot, seedling
نبات nabāt (coll.) plants, vegetation; --
(pl. -āt) plant, vegetable organism; herb │
نبات اقتصادي (iqtiṣādī) economic 937 plant;
نبات الزينة n. az-zīna ornamental plant; نبات
طبي (ṭibbī) medicinal plant; آكل النبات
herbivorous animal; سكر النبات sukar an-n.
rock candy; علم النبات ‘ilm an-n. botany
نباتي nabātī vegetable, vegetal, plant-
(in compounds); botanical; botanist;
vegetarian (adj. and n.)
نبوت nabbūt pl. نبابيت nabābīt2 (eg.)
quarterstaff, cudgel, bludgeon, club,
truncheon, night stick
منبت manbat, manbit pl. منابت manābit2
plantation, plant nursery, arboretum;
hotbed, birthplace, fountainhead,
headspring, origin, source
تنبيت tanbīt planting, cultivation, seedbed
planting
استنبات istinbāt planting, cultivation,
growing
نابتة nābita generation
مستنبت mustanbat cultivated, grown,
raised, bred; plantation, nursery, culture │
O مستنبت البكتريا bacterial culture
نبح nabaḥa a (nabḥ, نباح nubāḥ, nibāḥ, نبيح
nabīḥ to bark ( على at s.o.), bay ( على s.o.)
VI to bark at each other; to bark
simultaneously, answer each other’s barks
(dogs, e.g., at night)
نبح nabḥ, نباح nubāḥ, nibāḥ and نبيح
nabīḥ barking, bark, baying, yelp(ing)
نباح nabbāḥ barker, yelper
نبذ nabada i (nabd) to hurl, fling, throw, or
toss, away (. s.th.); to reject, discard,
spurn ( ھ s.th.); to cut out, cast off,
ostracize, expel, banish, disown,
repudiate, remove, eliminate, dismiss,
abandon, forsake, give up, renounce ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to withdraw, turn away ( ھ
from), relinquish, forswear ( ھ s.th.); to
break, violate, infringe ( ھ a contract, a
treaty), default ( الى against s.o.) │ نبذه نبذ
النواة (nabda n-nawāh) to reject or dismiss
s.th. or s.o. with disdain, spurn or scorn
s.th. or s.o. II = I; to press ( ھ grapes) III to
separate, secede, withdraw ( ه from s.o.),
oppose, resist ( ه s.o.) │ نابذة الحرب (ḥarba)
to declare war on s.o. IV to press ( ھ
grapes) VI to be feuding nil to withdraw,
retire, retreat │ انتبذ ناحية (nāḥiyatan) to
step aside, withdraw to one side; to retreat
into a comer
نبذ nabd throwing away, discarding;
rejection, repudiation, disavowal;
renunciation, resignation; surrender,
relinquishment, abandonment; (pl. انباذ
anbād) small amount, a little, a trifle,
bagatelle │ نبذ الطاعة insubordination
نبذة nubda pl. نبذ nubad small piece,
part, portion, fragment, fraction, section;
(newspaper) article, story; tract, pamphlet,
leaflet; small ad(vertisement)
نبيذ nabīd cast-off, discarded, rejected,
disowned, repudiated, dismissed; (pl. انبذة
anbida) wine │ روح النبيذ rūḥ an-n. spirits
of wine, alcohol
نابذ nābid: O القوة النابذة (qūwa)
centrifugal force
منبوذ manbūd caot-off, discarded; castout,
ostracized, banished, expelled,
disowned, repudiated; abandoned;
foundling, waif; neglected, disregarded;
المنبوذون the untouchables (in India), the
pariahs
نبر nabara i (nabr) to raise, elevate; to go up
with the voice, sing in a high, pitched
voice; to stress, emphasize, accentuate; to
shout, yell, scream ( ه at s.o.); to cry out
VIII to swell, become swollen
نبر nabr accentuation, accent, stress,
emphasis
نبر nibr and انبار anbār pl. انابر anābir2,
انابير anābīr barn, shed, granary,
storeroom, storehouse, warehouse 938
نبرة nabra pl. nabarāt swelling,
intumescence, protuberance; stress,
accent, accentuation; tone (of the voice);
pl. نبرات inflection of the voice, intonation,
cadence
منبر minbar pl. منابر manābīr2 mimbar;
pulpit; rostrum, platform, dais
منبار minbār pl. منابير manābīr gut,
intestine │ منبار محشي (maḥšīy) sausage
نبراس nibrās pl. نباريس nabārīs2 lamp, light,
lantern │ اتخذ منه نبراسا (ittakada) to take
s.o. for an example, model o.s. after s.o.
نبز nabaza i (nabz) to give a derisive or
insulting name ( ه to s.o.) II do.
نبز nabaz pl. انباز anbāz nickname,
sobriquet
نبس nabasa i (nabs, نبسة nubsa), to utter, say,
speak II do. │ ما نبس بكلمة (bikalima) he did
not say a word
نبش nabaša u (nabš) to excavate, dig
up, dig out of the ground, unearth,
exhume, disinter ( ھ s.th.); to uncover, lay
open, unveil, disclose, reveal, bring to
light, bring out into the open ( ھ s.th.) II to
search, rummage, burrow ( في in s.th.),
ransack, rifle ( في s.th.)
نبش nabš excavation, unearthing,
digging up; examination, search,
exploration; uncovering, disclosure,
revelation │ نبش القبور desecration of
graves, body snatching
نباش nabbāš gravedigger; body snatcher
نبيش nabīš dug up, excavated
انبوش unbūš and انبوشة unbūša pl. انابيش
anābīš excavation, excavated object
نبض nabaḍa i (nabḍ, نبضان nabaḍān) to beat,
throb, pulsate, palpitate (heart, pulse); -- u
نبوض) nubūḍ) to flow off, run off, drain
(water)
نبض nabḍ, nabaḍ pl. انباض anbāḍ
throbbing, throb, pulsation, palpitation;
pulse
نبضة nabḍa, nabaḍa pulsation, pulse
beat
نابض nābiḍ pulsating, pulsative,
beating, throbbing, palpitating; spring,
main-spring, coil spring, spiral spring │
نابض بالحياة (bi-l-ḥayāh) vibrant with life
منبض manbiḍ spot where the pulse or
heartbeat is felt
نبط nabaṭa u i (nabṭ, نبوط nubūṭ) to well out,
gush out, spout, issue, stream forth (water)
II (eg.) to find fault ( على with s.o.), carp,
scoff, gibe, sneer ( على at s.o.) IV to cause (
ھ s.th.) to gush out or well forth, bring ( ھ
s.th.) to the surface; to find, discover ( ھ
water, oil, etc.), come upon ( ھ ), open up,
tap (.a a source, a well, etc.) X to find,
discover ( الى I water, oil, etc.), come upon (
ھ ), open up, tap ( ھ a source, a well, etc.);
to invent, discover, think up, devise,
design, contrive, find out ( ھ s.th.); to
derive, extract, draw, take ( من ھ s.th.
from)
نبط nabaṭ depth, deep, profundity; the
innermost, inmost part, core, heart
النبط an-nabaṭ pl. الأنباط al-anbāṭ the
Nabateans
نبطي nabaṭī Nabatean (adj. and n.)
استنباط isṭinbāt discovery, invention
مستنبط mustanbiṭ discoverer, inventor
مستنبطات mustanbaṭāt discoveries,
inventions
نبع naba‘a u i a (nab‘, نبوع nubū‘, نبعان
naba‘ān) to well, well up, gush forth,
flow, issue ( من from); to rise, spring,
originate (river) IV to cause ( ھ s.th.) to
gush forth or flow out
نبع nab‘ a tree whose wood was used in
arrow-making; spring, source │ قرع 939
النبع بالنبع (nab‘a) approx.: to cross swords
with the opponent
منبع manba‘ pl. منابع manābi‘2 spring,
well; fountainhead, springhead, source,
origin │ منبع زيت m. zait or منبع بترول oil
well
ينبوع yanbū’ pl. ينابيع yanābī‘2 spring,
source, well
نبغ nabaga a u i (nabg, نبوغ nubūg) to arise,
emerge ( من from), come to the fore, come
in eight, appear, show; to spread, diffuse,
be diffused; to have superior or
extraordinary qualities, stand out,
distinguish o.s., be distinguished, be
marked; to excel, be outstanding ( في in);
to be an outstanding, exceptional man, be
a genius
نبوغ nubūg eminence, distinction;
superior or extraordinary qualities,
exceptional faculties, giftedness, talent,
genius; outstanding greatness, brilliancy,
genius (of an artistic achievement)
نابغ nābig outstanding, distinguished;
gifted, talented; man of genius, brilliant
person
نابغة nābiga pl. نوابغ nawābig2 a
distinguished, famous, or outstanding
man, a poetic genius
نبق nabq, nibq, nabaq, nabiq (coll.; n. un. (ة
nabk, a Christ’s-thorn (Zizyphus spinachristi;
bot.); lotus fruit; lotu. blossom
انبيق anbīq, inbīq pl. انابيق anābīq2
alembic, distilling flask
نبكة nabka, nabaka hill, hillock
نبل nabala u (nabl) to shoot arrows ( ه at s.o.);
-- nabula u ( نبالة nabāla) to be noble,
noble-minded, generous, magnanimous,
highborn, patrician; to be above s.th. ( ,(عن
be too high-minded to stoop to ( (عن
نبل nabl (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. نبال nibāl,
انبال anbāl arrows
نبل nubl and نبالة nabāla nobility,
nobleness, exalted, rank, or station,
eminence; noble-mindedness, highmindedness,
magnanimity, generosity
نبل nabl and نبيل nabīl pl. نبال nibāl, نبلاء
nubalā’2 noble; lofty. exalted, sublime,
august; aristocratic, highborn, highbred,
patrician, distinguished; noble-minded,
high-minded, generous, magnanimous;
excellent, outstanding, superior;
magnificent, splendid, glorious; النبيل pl.
النبلاء (formerly:) title of members of the
Egyptian royal family
نبال nabbāl pl. نبالة nabbāla and نابل
nābil pl. نبل nubbāl archer, bowman
نبه nabaha u, nabiha a and nabuha u ( نباھة
nabāha) to be well-known, noted,
renowned, famous; -- nabiha a (nabah) to
heed, mind, note, observe ( ل s.th.), pay
attention ( ل to), take notice ( ل of); to wake
up, awaken II to call s.o.’s attention ( ه) to (
الى or على ), point out, show, indicate ( الى or
على ه to s.o. s.th.); to inform, tell, apprise,
notify ( الى or على ه s.o. of); to remind ( الى ه
s.o. of); to inform, instruct, brief ( على ه s.o.
about); to warn, caution ( ه s.o.); to wake,
awakn, rouse ( من النوم ه s.o. from sleep); to
arouse, alert, stir up, excite, stimulate ( ه
s.o.) IV to awaken, rouse ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.) V
to perceive, notice, note, realize ( ل or الى s.
th.), become aware, become conscious ( ل
or الى of); to be alerted, have one’s
attention drawn ( ل or الى، على to), take
notice ( ل or الى، على of), pay attention ( ل or
الى، على to), be mindful, heedful ( ل or ، الى
على of); to wake up, awaken; to come to,
regain consciousness (with لنفسه li-nafsihī)
VIII to be on one’s guard, be wary,
cautious, careful; to be awake, alert,
wakeful; to awaken, wake up; to perceive,
notice, note, observe ( الى or ل s.th.); to
understand, realize, grasp, comprehend (
الى or ل s.th.); to be 940 aware, be
conscious ( الى or ل of s.th.); to pay
attention ( الى or ل to); to come to, regain
consciousness (with لنفسه li-nafsihī)
نبه nubh insight, discernment,
perception, acumen, sagacity;
understanding, attention; vigilance,
alertness
نبه nabih and نبيه nabīh pl. نبھاء nubahā’2
noble, highborn, patrician; outstanding,
eminent, distinguished, excellent; famous,
renowned, celebrated; understanding,
sensible, discerning, judicious,
perspicacious
نباھة nabāha fame, renown, celebrity;
exalted rank or station, eminence,
nobility; vigilance, alertness; intelligence
منبھة manbaha a call to draw s.o.’s
attention to s.th. ( على ), rousing call,
incitement, impetus, incentive ( على to)
تنبيه tanbīh rousing, awakening;
excitation, stimulation, incitement,
arousing; warning, cautioning, alerting;
notification, notice, information;
admonition, exhortation, advice, counsel,
briefing, instruction, direction; nota bene,
note, remark, annotation (in books) │ آلة
التنبيه horn (of an automobile, etc.)
تنبه tanabbuh awakening, wakefulness,
alertness
انتباه intibāh attention, attentiveness;
vigilance, watchfulness, alertness;
foresight, circumspection, prudence, care,
carefulness; caution; heed, notice,
observance │ بانتباه attentively, carefully
نابه nābih noble, highborn, patrician;
eminent; well-known, renowned,
distinguished; famous, important
منبه munabbih awakening, rousing;
warning, cautioning, alerting; excitant,
stimulant; (pl. -āt) alarm clock; stimulus,
stimulative agent, stimulant, excitant
متنبه mutanabbih awake, wakeful; alert,
vigilant, watchful
منتبه muntabih awake, wakeful; alert,
vigilant, watchful; attentive, heedful;
careful, prudent, cautious, wary, guarded
نبا (نبو ) nabā u ( نبو nabw, nubūw) to be far off,
distant, remote; to move away, withdraw
in the distance; to mill (arrow, عن the
target); to bounce off, rebound, bounce,
bound ( الى عن from-to; ball); to disagree (
عن with); to be contradictory ( عن to), to
conflict, be in conflict, be inconsistent ( عن
with); to be offensive, repugnant ( عن to
s.o.); to dislike, find repugnant ( عن s.th.)
│ نبا به المكان (makānu) he felt unable to
remain in the place
نبي nabīy pl. -ūn, انبياء anbiyā’2 prophet
│ خشب الأنبياء guaiacum wood
نبوي nabawī prophetic, of or pertaining
to a prophet or specifically to the Prophet
Mohammed
نبوة nubūwa prophethood, prophecy
ناب nābin repugnant, distasteful,
improper, ugly
نتأ nata’a a ( نتء nat’, نتوء nutū’) to swell; to
bulge, bulge out; to protrude, project, jut
out, stand out, be prominent, protuberant,
embossed, in relief
نتأة nat’a hill, hillock, elevation
نتوء nutū’ swelling, intumescence;
growth, tumor; outgrowth, excrescence;
protrusion, projection, protuberance,
prominence, bulge; hill, hillock, elevation
│ نتوء الجبھة n. al-jabha salient, bulge in
the front line (mil.)
ناتئ nati’ pl. نواتئ nawāti’2 swelling,
swollen; protruding, projecting, jutting
out, salient, protuberant, bulging; bulge,
hump, protuberance │ ناتئ كعبري (ku‘burī)
wristbone
ناتئة nāti’a pl. نواتئ nawāti’2 projection,
protrusion, jut, prominence; outgrowth,
excrescence, protuberance; hump,
elevation 941
نتج nataja i ( نتاج nitāj) to bear, bring forth,
throw ( ھ a young one); to proceed, derive,
arise, follow, ensue, result ( من or عن
from), be the result of ( من or عن ) IV to
bear, throw ( ھ a young one); to bring
forth, yield, generate, produce, make,
manufacture, fabricate, create, originate,
cause, provoke, bring about, occasion ( ھ
s.th.), give rise ( ھ to) X to conclude,
gather, infer, deduce, derive, trace ( من ھ
s.th. from), draw a conclusion ( من from)
نتاج nitāj (act or process of) bearing,
throwing, littering (of animals); brood,
litter, offspring, young ones, young
animals │ نتاج الخيل n. al-kail foal(s)
نتيجة natīja pl. نتائج natā’ij2 result,
upshot, issue, outcome, consequence;
product, effect, immediate result, fruits,
yield, proceeds, gain, profit; (techn.)
output; conclusion, inference, deduction;
almanac, calendar; natījata (prep.)
because of, as a result of, due to, owing to
│ بالنتيجة consequently, hence, therefore;
نتيجة الجيب n. al-jaib pocket calendar; نتيجة
الحائط wall calendar
إنتاج intāj generation; making,
manufacture; production; rearing, raising,
breeding, growing, cultivation;
productivity; creating, creation, creative
activity; output (of a machine; O in
mining) │ الإنتاج الأدبي (adabī) literary
production; رسم الإنتاج rasm al-i. excise tax
استنتاج istintāj pl. -āt inference,
conclusion; deduction
ناتج nātij resultant, resulting, following,
ensuing, proceeding, deriving, arising ( عن
from); result; maker, producer
منتوج mantūj pl. -āt product, creation,
work, production
منتج muntij bearing, giving birth,
producing; fruitful, productive; fertile,
fecund, prolific; conclusive (evidence);
maker, manufacturer, producer; film,
producer
منتجات muntajāt proceeds, returns,
yields, products │ منتجات زراعية (zirā‘īya)
agricultural products, farming products,
produce
مستنتج mustantij maker, manufacturer,
producer
نتحة natḥa exudation
نتر 1 natara u (natr) to grab, grasp, wrest away,
take away by force ( ھ s.th.)
نترات 2 nitrāt nitrate
نتروجين nitrōjēn nitrogen
نتش nataša i (natš) to pull out, extract ( ھ s.th.);
to pluck out, tear out ( ھ s.th.); to snatch
away; to beat, strike, hit
منتاش mintāš tweezers, pincette
نتع nata‘a u i ( نتوع nutū‘) to well up, bubble
up, trickle out, ooze out, dribble, trickle; --
(eg.) to lift up, carry away ( ه s.o.)
نتف natafa i (natf) to pluck out, pull out, tear
out ( ھ hair, and the like) II do.
نتفة nutfa pl. نتف nutaf tuft of hair; a
small amount, a little of s.th.
نتيف natīf pulled out, torn out; plucked
نتن natana i, natina a (natn) and natuna u ( نتانة
natāna, نتونة nutūna) to have an offensive
smell, be malodorous, stink; to
decompose, rot, decay, become putrid II
to render putrid, putrefy ( ھ s.th.); to cause
to decay or rot, decompose ( ھ s.th.) IV = I
نتن natn and نتانة natāna stench, evil
smell, malodor; rotting, putrescence,
putrefaction, decomposition; decay
نتن natin stinking, evil-smelling,
malodorous; rotten, putrid, putrescent,
putrefied, decayed, decomposed; (eg.)
miserly, closefisted, stingy, niggardly 942
منتن munattan putrefied, putrescent,
rotten, decayed, decomposed
منتن muntin stinking, evil-smelling,
malodorous; rotting, putrescent, putrid,
decayed
نثر natara u i (natr, نثار nitār) to scatter,
disperse, strew, sprinkle ( على ھ s.th. over
or on); to write in prose ( ھ s.th.) II to
scatter, disperse, strew about ( ھ s.th.) VI
and VIII to be scattered, about, be strewn
about, be dispersed; to scatter, disperse; to
fall off, fall out
نثر natr scattering, dispersal,
dispersion; prose
نثر natrī prose, prosaic, in prose; small,
little, insignificant, trifling, petty; نثريات
sundries, miscellany │ مصاريف نثرية
incidental expenses; petty expenses
نثار nattār scattered fragments; floating
particles (dust); tiny pieces; O confetti
نثر natīr scattered, dispersed
تناثر tanātur dispersion (e.g., of a
machine gun)
ناثر nātir prose writer, prosaist
منثور mantūr scattered, dispersed,
strewn about; prosaic, prose; wall-flower,
gillyflower (Cheiranthus cheiri; bot.); see
also ھباء habā’
متناثر mutanātir scattered
نجب najuba u ( نجابة najāba) to be of noble
birth, be highborn, aristocratic, patrician,
noble, distinguished, excellent,
highminded, generous, magnanimous IV
do.; to give birth ( ه to a child), bear ( ه a
child); to beget, sire ( ه s.o.) │ انجب منھا he
had children by her VIII and X to choose,
select, pick out ( ھ s.th.)
نجب najb and نجبة nujaba noble,
highminded, generous, magnanimous
نجابة najāba nobility, nobleness, noble
descent, exalted rank or station, eminence;
excellence, superiority, perfection
نجيب najīb pl. نجب nujub, نجباء nujabā’2,
انجاب anjāb of noble breed; highborn,
highbred, of noble descent, noble,
distinguished, aristocratic, patrician;
excellent, superior, outstanding
نجاب najjāb dromedary rider, courier
انتجاب intijāb choice; selection
نجح najaḥa a (najḥ, nujḥ, نجاح najāḥ) to turn
out well, come off well, succeed; to
progress well, develop satisfactorily; to
succeed, have success ( في in), be
successful; to pass ( في الامتحان the
examination) II and IV to give ( ه s.o.)
successful ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) succeed, render
successful ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), make ( ھ s.th.)
a success
نجح nujḥ favorable, successful outcome,
happy ending; success; satisfactory
development, good progress
نجاح najāḥ favorable, successful
outcome, happy ending; success;
satisfactory development, good progress;
passing (of an examination) │ لقي نجاحا
(laqiya) to have success, be successful,
succeed, meet with success
نجيح najīḥ sound, good (advice,
opinion)
انجاح injāḥ success
ناجح nājiḥ successful; passing, having
passed (examination)
نجد najada i (najd) to help, aid, assist, support
ه) s.o.), stand by s.o. ( ه), najida a (najad)
to sweat, perspire II to furnish ( ھ s.th.); to
upholster ( ھ s.th.), to comb, card, tease (
القطن al-quṭna cotton) III = najada IV =
najada; to travel in the highland (of
Arabia) X to ask for help ( ه s.o.), appeal
for help) to s.o.), seek aid ( ه or ب from
s.o.), to take liberties, make bold ( على with
s.o.) ه ٩٤٣
نجد najd pl. نجاد nijād highland, upland,
tableland, plateau; the Arabian highland,
Nejd
نجدي najdī Nejd, Nejdi, native of Nejd
نجدة najda pl. najadāt help, aid, succor,
assistance, support; emergency, crisis,
trouble, difficulty, distress, calamity;
courage, bravery, intrepidity,
undauntedness, pl. auxiliaries,
reinforcements │ النجدة! النجدة ! help! help!
بوليس النجدة approx.: riot squad (Eg.)
نجاد sword belt │ طويل النجاد tall, of tall
stature
نجاد nijād upholsterer; (pl. نجادة ) a kind
of boy scout (syr.)
نجادة nijāda upholsterer’s trade,
upholstery
تنجيد tanjīd upholstering, upholstery
work
نجذ najada i (nad) to importune ( ه s.o.)
مناجذ manājid 2 moles (zool.)
ناجذ nājid pl. نواجذ nawājd2 molar │ ابدى
عن نواجذه (abdā) to show one’s teeth,
display a hostile, threatening attitude ( ل
toward s.o.); عض بالنواجذ (‘aḍḍa) to grit
one’s teeth; عض على ناجذيه (nājidaihi) to
have reached the age of manhood; عض
بالنواجذ على to cling stubbornly to ..., stick
doggedly to ...
نجر najara u (najr) to hew, carve, plane ( ھ
wood)
نجر najr heat, hot time of the day
نجار najjār pl. -ūn carpenter,
cabinetmaker, joiner
نجار nujār origin, descent, stock, root
نجارة nujāra wood shavings
نجارة nijāra woodworking,
cabinetwork, joinery, carpentry
منجر minjar pl. مناجر manajir2 plane
(tool)
منجور manjūr pulley; sheave;
waterwheel; woodwork, paneling,
wainscoting
نجز najaza u (najz) to carry out, execute,
implement, realize, accomplish, fulfill,
complete ( ھ s.th.); -- najiza a (najaz) to be
carried out, be executed, be implemented,
be realized, be accomplished, be
completed, be achieved II to carry out,
execute, implement, realize, effect(uate},
accomplish ( ھ s.th.); to fulfill, grant,
answer ( ھ a wish, and the like) III to fight,
battle, struggle ( ه against s.o.) IV to carry
out, execute, implement, realize,
effect(uate), accomplish, complete,
consummate ( ھ s.th.); to do ( ھ work, a
job); to perform ( ھ an action, an
operation); to fulfill ( ھ a promise),
discharge ( ھ a duty); to finish ( على s.o.)
off, deal ( على s.o.) the deathblow X to ask
for the fulfillment ( ھ of a promise)
نجز najz and نجاز najāz execution,
implementation, realization, effectuation,
completion, consummation,
accomplishment, achievement,
fulfillment, discharge
تنجيز tanjīz and انجاز injāz execution,
implementation, realization, effectuation,
accomplishment, achievement,
completion, consummation; performance;
fulfillment, discharge
مناجزة munājaza and تناجز tanājuz fight,
struggle, contention, strife
ناجز nājiz completed; full, total, whole,
entire, complete, consummate
نجس najusa u ( نجاسة najāsa) and najisa a
(najas) to be impure, unclean, soiled,
dirty, sullied, stained, tainted II and IV to
soil, sully, dirty, pollute, contaminate,
defile, stain, taint ( ھ s.th.) V to be or
become impure, unclean, soiled, sullied,
polluted, contaminated, defiled, stained,
944 tainted; to sully o.s., contaminate o.s.,
defile o.s.
نجس najas and نجاسة najāsa impurity,
uncleanness, uncleanliness, dirt, filth,
squalor
نجس najis pl. انجاس anjās impure,
unclean, defiled, polluted, contaminated,
soiled, sullied, dirty, filthy, squalid
نجس najis and نجيس najīs incurable,
fatal (disease)
تنجيس tanjīs soiling, sullying,
defilement, contamination, pollution
نجاشي najāšī, nijāšī Negus, Emperor of
Ethiopia
نجع naja‘a a (naj‘, نجوع nujū‘) to be useful,
beneficial, salutary, have a wholesome
effect II and IV do. VIII to take refuge ( ه
with s.o.), resort, have recourse ( ه to); to
seek ( ھ rest, and the like) X to seek ( ھ
pasture, rest, relaxation)
نجع naj‘ pl. نجوع nujū‘ hamlet, small
village
نجعة nuj‘a search for food
نجيع najī‘ useful, beneficial;
wholesome, healthful, salubrious,
salutary; -- blood
ناجع nāji‘ useful, beneficial;
wholesome, healthful, salubrious, salutary
منتجع muntaja‘ refuge, retreat;
recreation center; health resort, rest center,
convalescent home, sanatorium
نجف najaf pl. نجاف nijāf (sand) hill, dune; dam,
dike, levee; النجف an-najaf An Najaf (town
in central Iraq)
نجفة najafa pl. -āt chandelier, luster
نجل najala u (najl) to beget, sire, father ( ه a
son)
نجل najl pl. انجال anjāl offspring,
descendant, scion, son; progeny, issue
نجيل najīl pl. نجل nujūl a variety of
orchard grass (Dactylis; bot.); herbage
انجل anjal2, f. ن جلالاء najlā’2 large-eyed;
large, big, wide (eye); gaping (wound) │
طعنة نجلاء (ṭa‘na) a blow causing a gaping
wound; heavy blow or thrust
منجل minjal pl. مناجل manajil2 scythe,
sickle
منجلة manjala vise
انجيل 2 look up alphabetically
نجم najama u ( نجوم nujūm) to appear, come in
sight, rise (star), begin, commence, set in;
to result, follow, ensue, arise, proceed,
derive, originate, spring ( عن or من from) │
نجم قرنه (qarnuhū) to begin to show II to
observe the stars; to predict the future
from the stars, practice astrology; to pay
in installments V to observe the stars,
predict the future from the stars
نجم najm pl. نجوم nujūm installment,
partial payment; نجوما nujūman in
installments
نجم najm pl. نجم nujūm, انجم anjum
celestial body; star; lucky star;
constellation, asterism; (coll.) herbs,
herbage, grass │ نجم ذو ذنب (dū danab)
comet; نجوم السينما film stars, movie stars
نجمة najma pl. najamāt star; asterisk
(typ.) │ نجمة سينمائية film star, movie star;
مرض النجمة maraḍ an-n. a disease
afflicting horses
نجمي najmī star-shaped, stelliform,
starlike, stellate, stellular, stellar, astral; --
in installments, installment- (in
compounds)
نجيمة nujaima small star, starlet
نجام najjām and منجم munajjim pl. -ūn
astrologer
منجم manjam pl. مناجم manājim2 source,
origin; mine; pit
تنجيم tanjīm astrology 945
نجا ( نجو ) najā u (najw, نجاء najā’, نجاة najāh) to
save o.s., be saved, be rescued, make for
safety, get away ( من from), escape ( من
s.th.), he delivered ( من from) │ نجا بنفسه
(bi-nafsihī) or نجا بروحه (bi-rūḥihī) to save
o.s. ( من from); نجا بحياته (bi-ḥayātihī) to
save one’s life, save one’s skin; -- (najw,
نجوى najwan) to entrust a secret ( ه to s.o.)
II and IV to deliver, save, fescue, bring to
safety ( ه s.o., من from) III to whisper ( ب ه
to s.o. s.th.), entrust ( ب ه to s.o. s.th.
secret), take into one’s confidence ( ه s.o.),
confide ( ه in s.o.) │ ناجى نفسه (nafsahū) to
soliloquize, talk to o.s., say to o.s. VI to
whisper to each other, carry on a
whispered conversation, converse
intimately, confidentially, exchange
secrets, exchange ideas VIII to whisper
into each other’s ear ( ھ s.th.) X to save
o.s. ( من from), escape ( من s.th.); to he
delivered ( من from)
نجا najan deliverance, release, rescue
نجاة najāh escape, flight; deliverance,
rescue; salvation, redemption; safety
نجو najw excrement
نجوة najwa pl. نجاء najā’ elevation,
rising ground, upland │ في نجوة من free
from, far from, a long way from
نجوى najwā pl. نجاوى najāwā
confidential talk, secret conversation
نجي najīy pl. انجية anjiya secret;
confident, intimate friend, bosom friend
منجى manjan safety, security ( من from)
منجاة manjāh pl. مناج manājin safe place,
haven, refuge; safeguard, protection;
rescue, salvation │ كان بمنجاة من to he safe
from, he secure from, he safeguarded
against
تنجية tanjiya rescue, salvation,
deliverance
مناجاة munājāh secret conversation;
confidential talk │ مناجاة الأرواح spiritism,
spiritualism
منج munajjin rescuer, savior, deliverer
نحب naḥaba i a (naḥb, نحيب naḥīb) and VIII to
sob, weep, cry, wail, lament
نحب naḥb weeping, crying, sobbing.
sighing, moaning, wail(ing), lamentation;
time, period, term, span, interval; death │
قضى نحبه qaḍā naḥbahū to fulfill one’s
vow, redeem one’s pledge; to pass away,
die, expire
نحب naḥīb loud weeping, wail(ing),
lamentation
نحت naḥata i u (naḥt) to hew, dress ( ھ stone or
wood), plane, smooth, face; to carve, cut
out, hew out, chisel, sculpture; to form,
coin ( ھ s.th.)
نحت naḥt wood or stone dressing,
woodwork, stonework; sculpturing,
sculpture
نحات stonemason, stonecutter, stone
dresser; sculptor
نحاتة nuḥāta shavings, parings, chips,
splinters, slivers
منحت minḥat pl. مناحت manāḥit2 chisel
نحر naḥara u (naḥr) to cut the throat ( ھ of an
animal) slaughter, butcher, kill ( ھ an
animal) VI to fight; to kill each other,
hack each other to pieces, engage in
internecine fighting VIII to commit
suicide; O to be scuttled (ship) │ انتحر شنقا
(šanqan) to hang o.s., commit suicide by
hanging
نحر naḥr killing, slaughter(ing),
butchering │ يوم النحر yaum an-n. Day of
Immolation (on the 10th of Zu’lhijja)
نحر naḥr pl. نحور nuḥūr upper portion
of the chest, throat 946
نحر niḥr, and نحرير niḥrīr pl. نحارير
naḥārīr2 skilled, adept, proficient, versed,
experienced ( في in)
نحير naḥīr, and منحور manḥūr killed,
slaughtered, butchered
منحر manḥar throat, neck
انتحار intiḥār suicide; O scuttling
منتحر muntaḥir suicide (person)
نحيزة naḥīza nature, natural disposition │ طيب
النحيزة ṭayyib an-n. good-natured, goodhumored;
كريم النحيزة high-minded, nobleminded,
of generous disposition
نحس naḥasa a (naḥs) to make ( ه s.o.) unhappy,
bring ( ه s.o.) bad luck; -- naḥusa u ( نحوسة
nuḥūsa, نحاسة naḥāsa) and naḥisa a
(naḥas) to be unlucky, ominous, ill-fated,
calamitous, ill-boding, portend evil II to
covert coat, or sheathe with copper, to
copper ( ھ s.th.)
نحس naḥs pl. نحوس nuḥūs misfortune,
calamity, disaster
نحس naḥs, naḥis unlucky, luckless,
ominous, calamitous, disastrous, ill-fated,
ill-starred, sinister, ill-omened, ill-boding
نحاس naḥḥās coppersmith
نحاس nuḥās copper; (tun.) a small coin
│ نحاس اصفر (aṣfar2) brass
مناحس manāḥis2 ominous events
منحوس manḥūs luckless, ill-fated, starcrossed
نحف naḥufa a ( نحافة naḥāfa) to be thin, slim,
slender, lean, skinny; to become thin, lose
weight IV to make thin, weaken,
debilitate, enervate, emaciate
نحافة naḥāfa leanness, thinness,
slenderness, slimness. enervation.
emaciation, wasting away
نحيف naḥīf pl. نحاف niḥāf, نحفاء nuḥfā’2
thin, slim, slender, slight; delicate, of
fragile build; lean, gaunt, enervated,
debilitated, emaciated
منحف manḥaf dieting resort, weightreducing
resort
منحوف manḥūf thin, slim, slender,
slight; lean, gaunt, enervated, debilitated,
emaciated
نحل naḥala u a, naḥula u and naḥila a (
نحول nuḥūl) to be emaciated; to waste
away, lose weight, grow thin; -- naḥala a
(nuḥl) to make a donation, make a present
ه) to s.o.); to ascribe, attribute, impute
(wrongly, unduly) ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.) IV to
make thin, enervate, emaciate ( ه s.o.); to
weaken ( ھ s.th.) V and esp. VIII to
ascribe to o.s., claim for o.s. ( ,(لنفسه
assume unduly, presume, arrogate to o.s. (
ھ s.th.); to embrace ( ھ a religion); to
borrow, adopt, take over ( ھ foreign
words); to take up ( ھ s.th.) │ انتحل الإسلام
to profess Islam; انتحل اسمه (ismahū) to
assume s.o.’s name; انتحل الأعرابية
(a‘rabīya) to claim to be a Bedouin; انتحل
الأعذار (a‘dār) to think up excuses, make
excuses, use pretexts or subterfuges; انتحل
شخصية فلان (šakšīyata) to pass o.s. off as
s.o., purport to be ..., impersonate s.o.
نحل naḥl (coll.; n. un. ة) bee
نحلة naḥla pl. نحل niḥal present, gift,
donation; creed, faith, seat
نحال naḥḥāl beekeeper, apiarist,
apiculturist
نحالة niḥāla beekeeping, apiculture
نحول nuḥūl leanness, skinniness,
thinness, slimness, slenderness;
enervation, emaciation, wasting away
نحيل naḥīl and ناحل nāḥil pl. نحلى naḥlā,
نحل nuḥḥal thin, slim, slender, lean,
skinny; enervated, emaciated, gaunt
منحل manḥal pl. مناحل manāḥil2 beehive;
apiary, apicultural station 947
انتحال intiḥāl undue assumption,
arrogation; literary theft, plagiarism
منتحل muntaḥil plagiarist
منتحل muntaḥal: اسم منتحل (ism) assumed
name, alias, pseudonym, nom de guerre
نحم naḥama i (naḥm, نحيم naḥīm, نحمان
naḥamān) to clear one’s throat; to wheeze,
pant, gasp
نحام nuḥām flamingo
نحن naḥnu we
نحنح naḥnaḥa and II tanaḥnaḥa to clear one’s
throat, to hem, say “ahem”
نحنحة naḥnaḥa hem, hawk, little cough
نحا ( نحو ) naḥā a u (naḥw) to wend one’s way (
ه، ھ to), go, walk, move, turn ( ه، ھ to,
toward), take the road ( ھ to), go in the
direction ( ھ of) │ نحا نحوه (naḥā naḥwahū)
to follow s.o., follow s.o.’s example, be
guided by s.o. or s.th.; to imitate s.o.; to be
of the same nature, of the same kind, on
the same line as ..., be like ...; نحا نحو الباب
to walk toward the door; نحا به نحو الباب to
show s.o. to the door II to put aside, push
away, brush aside ( ھ s.th.); to remove,
take away ( من ھ s.th. from) IV to turn
away, avert ( بصره عن baṣarahū ‘an one’s
eyes from); to turn ( على against s.o.),
assail, overcome ( ب على s.o. with); to help
ب على) upon s.o. reproach, or the like),
shower ( ب على s.o. with); to turn, apply
o.s. attend ( على to s.th.) V to step aside, go
away, withdraw, move away, fall back ( من
or من from); to turn away; to forgo,
renounce, waive ( من s.th.); to abandon,
give up, surrender, yield, relinquish ( عن
s.th.); to retreat, retire ( ھ to a place); to
lean, rest, support o.s. ( ل on) VIII to turn (
ھ to, toward); to lean, support o.s. ( ل on)
│ انتحى ناحية to turn aside; انتحى جانبا do.,
step back, withdraw, retire
نحو naḥw pl. انحاء anḥā’ direction; side;
section, part; way, course, method,
manner, mode, fashion; (with foll. genit.)
corresponding to, analogous to, similar to,
like, somewhat like; (gram.) grammar;
syntax │ على نحو ما (naḥwi) in the manner
of, as; على نحو ما (naḥwin) rather, pretty
much; على ھذا النحو in this manner, this
way; in this respect; وعلى ھذا النحو and so
forth, and so on; في نحو الساعة السابعة at
about the seventh hour, at about 7 o’clock,
around seven; من نحوي as far as I am
concerned, as for me, for my part, I for
one; نحوا من (naḥwan) approximately,
roughly, about, circa (with foll. figure); في
انحاء الأرض (a. il-arḍ) all over the earth; في
كل انحاء العالم ( المعمورة ) (‘ālam) all over the
world; النحو المقارن (muqārin) comparative
grammar
نحو naḥwa (prep.) in the direction of,
toward, to; according to, in analogy with,
similar to, like, as, as for instance;
approximately, roughly, about, around,
circa
نحوي naḥwī syntactical; grammatical;
grammarian; philologist
منحى manḥan pl. مناح manāḥin aim,
goal, object, end, purpose; manner of
acting, mode of conduct, behavior;
direction; (rhetorical, literary) form; field,
domain, realm, province, bailiwick, sphere
(fig.) │ مناحي الحياة m. l-ḥayāh walks of life
ناح nāḥin pl. نحاة nuḥāh grammarian;
philologist
ناحية nāḥiya pl. نواح nawāḥin side;
direction; viewpoint, standpoint, aspect;
region, area, section; sphere, domain,
field; district, canton; (Ir.) subdivision of a
قضاء qaḍā’, roughly corresponding to a
county; off side, secluded part, corner
(e.g., of a room); nāḥiyata in the direction
of, toward, to │ من ناحية with regard to, in
respect to, as to, as for, 948 concerning,
regarding, on the part of; من ناحية اخرى
(ukrā) on the other hand; من الناحية العسكرية
(‘askarīya) from a military standpoint; من
ناحية قانونية de jure; من ناحية واقعية (wāqi‘īya)
de facto; سليم النواحي sound in body; متعدد
النواحي muta‘addid an-n. many-sided; من
جميع النواحي in every respect
نخ nakk pl. انخاخ ankāk mat; rug, carpet
نخب nakaba u (nakb) and VIII to select, pick,
choose ( ھ s.th.); to choose, make one’s
choice; to vote, go to the polls; to elect ( ه
s.o.)
نخب nakb selection, choice; a drink to
s.o.’s health │ شرب نخب (šariba) to drink
to s.o.’s health, toast s.o.
نخبة nukba pl. نخب nukab selected piece,
selected item, selected passage; the pick,
cream, elite, flower
انتخاب intikāb pl. -āt election (pol.);
choice; selection
انتخابي intikābī of or pertaining to an
election or elections, election (used
attributively); elective; electoral │ معركة
انتخابية (ma’raka) election campaign
ناخب nākib and منتخب muntakib pl. -ūn
elector (esp., pol.), voter, constituent
منخوب mankūb lean, emaciated
منتخب muntakab chosen, elected,
selected, hand-picked; elected candidate;
(pl. -āt) team (in sports); منتخبات = selected
pieces, selected items, selected passages
نخر nakara u i (nakr, نخير nakīr) to
snort; to snore; to gnaw ( ل on s.th.), bore,
burrow, eat ( في into s.th.; worm); to eat
away ( ھ at s.th.); to enervate, sap, ruin,
decay ( ھ s.th.); -- nakira a (nakar) to be
eaten away, worm-eaten, rotten, decayed,
full of holes; to spoil, rot, decay; to
decompose, disintegrate, crumble
نخر nakr snorting, snort; snoring, snore;
decay, rot, rottenness; tooth decay, caries
نخر nakr and ناخر nākir worm-eaten;
rotting, decaying
نخير nakīr snort(ing), snoring, snore;
grunt(s)
منخر mankar, mankir, minkar pl. مناخر
manākir2 nostril; nose
منخار minkār pl. مناخير manākīr2 nostril;
nose
نخرب nakraba to eat holes into s.th. ( ھ ), eat
away ( ھ at); to hollow out ( ھ s.th.)
نخروب nukrūb pl. نخاريب nakārīb2 hole;
cavity, hollow; cell; honeycomb
نخز nakaza a (nakz) to bore into or through
s.th. ( ھ ; worm)
نخس nakaaa a u (naks) to prick, goad, prod,
urge on, drive on ( ھ an animal)
نخس nakkās drover; cattle dealer; slave
trader; white slaver
نخاسة nikāsa cattle trade; slave trade;
white-slave traffic
منخس minkas pl. مناخس manākis2 spur,
goad, prod (for driving cattle)
منخاس minkās pl. مناخيس manākīs2 spur,
goad, prod (for driving cattle)
نخشوش nakšūš pl. نخاشيش nakāšīš2 gill, branchia
(respiratory organ of fish)
نخع V to clear one’s throat, hawk, spit out,
expectorate
نخاع nukā‘, nikā‘ pl. نخع nuku‘ spinal
marrow, spinal cord; bone marrow,
medulla; brain
نخاعة nukā’a phlegm, mucus, sputum,
expectoration
نخل nakala u (nakl) to sift, bolt, sieve out ( ھ
s.th.); to strain ( ھ s.th.) V and VIII do.
949
نخل nakl (coll.; n. un. ة) and نخيل nakīl
palm; date palm
نخالة nukāla residue left in a sieve; bran;
waste, refuse │ لا يساوي ملء اذنه نخالة lā
yusāwī mil’a udnihī nukālatan he isn’t
worth a bent nickel
منخل mankal, munkul pl. مناخل manākil2
sieve
نخم nakama a (nakam) and V to clear one’s
throat, hawk, spit out, expectorate
نخامة nukāma phlegm, mucus, sputum,
expectoration
غدة نخامية gudda nukāmīya hypophysis,
pituitary body (anat.)
نخا ( نخو ) nakā u ( نخوة nakwa) to be proud,
haughty, supercilious ( على toward s.o.) II
and IV to inflame, incite, excite, stimulate,
arouse, awaken ( ھ s.th.)
نخوة nakwa haughtiness, arrogance;
pride, dignity, sense of honor, self-respect;
high-mindedness, generosity
ند nadda i (nadd, ندد nadad, نداد nidād, ندود
nudūd, نديد nadīd) to run away, flee; to slip
away; to slip out (exclamation); to escape
عن) s.o.) II to expose, show up,
compromise ( ب s.o.); to criticize ( ب s.o. or
s.th.), find fault ( ب with)
ند nadd high hill; -- nadd, nidd incense
(of aloeswood, with ambergris, musk and
frankincense)
ند nidd pl. انداد andād equal, (a)like,
same; an equal, a peer; partner; antagonist,
rival
نديد nadīd pl. ندداء nudadā’2 equal; rival
تنديد tandīd pl. -āt criticism; revilement,
abuse, disparagement, defamation
ندب nadaba u (nadb) to mourn, lament, bewail
ه) the deceased); to appoint, assign ( ل ه s.o.
to an office), detail ( ل ه s.o. for a job, for a
task); to send as a representative or
delegate, to delegate, depute, deputize ( ه
s.o.); to commission, charge, entrust ( ه
s.o., ب with); -- nadiba a (nadab) to scar
over, cicatrize, heal IV = nadiba VIII to
appoint, assign ( ل ه s.o. to an office), detail
ل ه) s.o. for a job, for a task); to
commission, charge, empower, authorize (
ل ه s.o. to do s.th., ب with), order ( ل ه s.o.
to do s.th.); to entrust ( ل ه to s.o. a task);
(mil.) to detach, detail, transfer ( ل ه s.o.
to); (with نفسه nafsahū) to apply o.s.,
devote o.s. dedicate o.s. ( ل to s.th.); to
give ( ھ a country) the mandate ( على over);
to comply readily ( ل with an order or
instruction), be willing, be prepared, stand
ready ( ل to); to present o.s. ( الى to s.o.),
turn ( الى toward, to)
ندب nadb weeping, wailing,
lamentation; lament, dirge, elegy;
assignment, commissioning, delegation,
deputation; appointment, authorization,
mandation
ندب nadab pl. انداب andāb, ندوب nudūb
scar, cicatrice
ندبة nadba pl. انداب andāb, ندوب nudūb
scar, cicatrice; scabby wound
ندبة nudba lamentation for the dead;
elegy; dirge, funeral song
ندابة nadāba pl. -āt hired female
mourner
مندب mandab pl. منادب manādib2 wail,
lamentation │ باب المندب Bab el Mandeb
(strait between SW Arabia and Africa;
geogr.)
انتداب intidāb deputation, appointment;
commissioning, charging, authorization;
detailing, detachment, assignment,
mission; (pl. -āt) mandate (over a
territory); mandatory rule │ دولة الانتداب
daulat al-int. mandatory power; لجنة
الانتدابات lajnat al-int. Mandate
Commission (of the League of Nations)
950
انتدابي intidābī mandatory │ ادارة انتدابية
(idāra) mandatory administration
نادبة nādiba pl. -āt, نوادب nawādib2 hired
female mourner
مندوب mandūb bewailed, bemoaned,
mourned, lamented; regrettable,
deplorable, lamentable; -- (pl. -ūn) deputy,
delegate, agent, functionary,
commissioner; representative;
representative of the press, correspondent,
reporter (of a newspaper); plenipotentiary,
authorized agent; (Isl. Law) recommended
│ مندوب التأمين insurance agent; مندوب خاص
(kaṣṣ) special envoy; مندوب سام (sāmin)
High Commissioner; مندوب فوق العادة
ambassador extraordinary; مندوب مفوض
(mufawwaḍ) plenipotentiary, authorized
agent; (dipl.) minister; مندوب فوق العادة ووزير
مفوض ambassador extraordinary and
minister plenipotentiary (official title of
ambassadors)
مندوبية mandūbīya delegation; High
Commission
منتدب muntadab deputized, delegated;
commissioned, charged; entrusted;
appointed; assigned, detailed │ دولة منتدبة
(daula) mandatory power
ندح nadaḥa a (nadḥ) to extend, expand,
enlarge ( ھ s.th.)
ندحة nadḥa, nudḥa wide, open space;
freedom (of action) │ لا ندحة عنه (nadḥata)
it is indispensable, unavoidable,
inevitable; لا اجد لي ندحة عن (ajidu,
nadḥatan) I feel compelled to ...
مندوحة mandūḥa pl. منادح manādiḥ2 and
منتدح muntadaḥ alternative, choice;
freedom of action │ لا مندوحة له
(mandūḥata) it is indispensable,
absolutely necessary, mandatory,
imperative for him; لك عنه مندوحة (منتدح ) it
is up to you, it is optional for you; لو ير
مندوحة من (lam yara mandūḥatan) to feel
obligated, feel compelled to ...
ندر 1 nadara u (nadr, ندور nudūr) to be rare; to
be uncommon, unusual; -- nadura u ( ندارة
nadāra) to be strange, odd, queer,
unusual, extraordinary V to make fun ( ب
or على of); to joke, jest VI to tell each
other stories and jokes
ندر nadr rare; strange, odd
ندرة nadra, nudra and ندورة nudūra
rarity, rareness; nadratan rarely, seldom │
في الندرة rarely, seldom
اندر andar pl. انادر anādir2 (tun.)
threshing floor
اندر andar2 rarer
مندرة mandara pl. منادر manādir2 (tun.)
threshing floor; see also below
منادرات munādarāt causeries on
amusing, witty topics
تندر tanaddur amusement, fun-making,
joking
تنادر tanādur gay chat
نادر nādir rare; infrequent; strange, odd,
unusual, uncommon; excellent, precious,
priceless; an eccentric, a crank, an odd
fellow; نادرا nādiran rarely, seldom │ في
النادر rarely, seldom; نادر المثال unparalleled,
singular, unique; عملة نادرة (‘umla) specie,
hard money
نادرة nādira pl. نوادر nawādir2 rarity,
rare thing, rare phenomenon; rare,
uncommon word; phenomenon, prodigy,
extraordinary person; funny, droll story,
anecdote, joke; accident, incident
2□ مندرة mandara (for منظرة , esp. eg.) pl. منادر
manādir2 reception parlor for male
visitors; منادر (= مجالس ) parties
ندس nadasa u to throw down, bring to the
ground ( ه s.o.); to revile, defame, discredit
ه) s.o.)
ندف nadafa i (nadf) to tease, comb, or card
cotton 951
ندف nadf teasing, combing, carding (of
cotton) │ جھاز الندف jahāz an-n. card,
carding machine
ندفة nudfa pl. ندف nudaf flock (of wool);
flake │ ندفة الثلج n. at-talj snowflake
نديف nadīf and مندوف mandūf carded,
teased (cotton)
نداف naddāf cotton carder, cotton teaser
مندف mindaf pl. منادف manādif2 teasing
bow (for carding cotton)
ندل nadala u (nadl) to snatch away ( ھ s.th.)
□ ندل nadl = نذل
مندالة mindāla rammer
نادل nādil pl. ندل nudul waiter; servant
who waits on table
مندل 2 mandal: ضرب المندل ḍarb al-m. (eg.) a
magic practice in which a fortuneteller, or
a medium, prophesies while
contemplating a mirror-like surface
منديل look up alphabetically
ندم nadima a (nadam, ندامة nadāma) to repent (
على of), rue, regret ( على s.th.) III to drink,
carouse ( ه with s.o.) V = I VI to drink
together, carouse together
ندم nadam, ندامة nadāma remorse,
repentance, regret
نديم nadīm pl. ندماء nudamā’ ندام , 2 nidām
drinking companion; friend, intimate,
confidant
ندمان nadmān pl. ندامى nadāmā
repenting, repentant, rueful, remorseful,
regretful
مندم mandam remorse, repentance,
regret
منادمة munādama drinking
companionship, intimate friendship
تندم tanaddum remorse, repentance,
regret
نادم nādim pl. ندام nuddām repenting,
repentant, rueful, remorseful, regretful
منادم munādim drinking companion,
boon companion, intimate
متندم mutanaddim repenting, repent, ant,
rueful, remorseful, regretful
نده nadaha a (nadh) to drive, urge, spur on ( ه
s.o.); to drive away ( ه s.o.)
ندا (ندو ) nadā u (nadw) to call ( ه s.o.); to invite;
to call together, convoke, convene,
summon ( ھ a meeting); to get together,
meet, convene, assemble, gather; -- ندي
nadiya a ( ندى nadan, نداوة nadāwa, ندوة
nudūwa) to be moist, damp, dewy, wet │
شيء يندى له الجبين an embarrassing or
shocking thing, a disgraceful thing II to
moisten, wet, bedew ( ھ s.th.) III to shout,
call out, cry out, exclaim; to call ( ب or ه
s.o. or for s.o., also على ), summon ( ه s.o.,
also على ); to call out, shout ( ه to s.o.); to
call for s.th. ( ب), invite to s.th. ( ب); to
proclaim, announce ( ب s.th.); to
emphasize ( ب s.th.); O to announce, act as
announcer (radio); to cry one’s wares,
hawk ( على s.th. to be sold) │ نودي به رئيسا
(nūdiya) to be proclaimed president IV =
II; to be noble, generous, magnanimous V
to he moistened, he bedewed; to show o.s.
generous, liberal, openhanded VI and VIII
to get together, meet, convene, gather,
assemble, form a club
ندوة nadwa council; debating group,
study group; club │ دار الندوة city hall,
town hall; parliament, house of
representatives, chamber of deputies
ندوة nudūwa and نداوة nadāwa
moistness, moisture, dampness
ندى nadan pl. انداء andā’, اندية andiya
moistness, moisture, dampness, wetness;
dew; generosity, liberality, magnanimity
952
ند nadin and نديان nadyān2 moist, damp
│ ندم الكف al-kaff generous, liberal,
openhanded
ندى nadīy moist, damp; tender, delicate
│ ندى الكف al-kaff generous, liberal,
openhanded
نداء nidā’ pl. -āt shout; call;
exclamation; summons; public
announcement; proclamation, appeal;
address; vocative (gram.) │ نداء الاستغاثة
call for help, distress signal; حرف النداء
ḥarf an-n. interjection (gram.); اصدر نداء ل
(aṣdara) to issue s proclamation to
مناداة munādāh calling, shouting; call;
vocative; public notice, announcement;
proclamation │ بيع المناداة bai‘ al-m. public
sale, auction
ناد nādin pl. اندية andiya, نواد nawādin
club; circle; association; clubhouse │ ناد
رياضي (riyāḍī) athletic club; دار النادي
clubhouse
مندى munaddan wet, damp; bedewed,
dewy; refreshing
مناد munādin caller; herald; town crier;
auctioneer; O announcer (radio)
منادى munādan noun in the vocative
(gram.)
مندية mundiya pl. -āt disgraceful, evil
deed; insult, abuse, affront
l.s.J.::... muntadan pl. u4,.J.::...o
muntadayāt gathering place, assembly
room; club
نذر nadara u i (nadr, نذور nudūr) to dedicate,
consecrate (􀍿 s.th. to God); to vow, make
a vow │ ان 􀍿 نذرت I vow to God that ..., I
swear by God that ...; نذر على نفسه ھ to vow
to o.s., make the solemn pledge to ...; --
nadira a (nadar) to have been warned, be
on one’s guard ( ب against) IV to warn ( ب ه
s.o. of or against), caution ( ب ه s.o.
against), admonish ( ه s.o.); to announce ( ب
ه to s.o. s.th.), give notice or warning ( ب ه
to s.o. of), notify in advance ( ه s.o., ب of)
│ انذره بتسليم منزله (bi-taslīmi manzilihī) he
gave him notice to vacate the premises
نذر nadr pl. نذور nudur, نذورات nudūrāt
vow, solemn pledge; votive offering, exvoto
نذير nadīr pl. نذر nudur consecrated to
God; vowed, solemnly pledged; warner;
herald, harbinger, forerunner; warning;
alarm │ O نذير الخطر n. al-kaṭar airraid
warning
انذار indār pl. -āt warning;
announcement, notice; admonition; airraid
warning, alarm │ O انذار بوقوع غارات
جوية (bi-wuqū’ gārāt jawwiya) or انذار
للأخطار الجوية (li-l-akṭār) air-raid warning;
انذار نھائي (nihā’ī) ultimatum; O صفارة الإنذار
ṣaffārat al-i. warning siren
تناذر tanādur syndrome (med.)
ناذر nādir one who has made a vow
منذور mandūr solemnly pledged,
vowed, consecrated to God
منذر mundir warner, cautioner
منذرة mundira alarm signal; warning
sign ( ب against)
نذل nadula u ( نذالة nadāla, نذولة nudūla) to be
low, base, mean, vile, despicable,
debased, depraved
نذل nadl pl. انذال andāl, نذول nudūl low,
base, mean, vile, despicable, debased,
depraved; coward
نذيل nadīl pl. نذلاء nudalā’ نذال , 2 nidāl
low, base, mean, vile, despicable,
debased, depraved; coward
نذالة nadāla depravity
نربيج narbīj pl. نرابيج narābīj2 mouthpiece of a
narghile 953
نربيش narbīš pl. نرابيش narābīš2 mouthpiece of
a narghile
نرجس narjis, nirjis narcissus (bot.)
نرد nard backgammon, tricktrack
نردين nardīn nard, spikenard
نرفزة narfaza nervousness
منرفز munarfaz (pal.-syr.) nervous
نرنج naranj bitter orange
نروج nurūj, narūj Norway
نرويج nurwīj Norway
نرويجي nurwījī Norwegian
نز nazza i (nazz, نزيز nazīz) to seep, trickle,
ooze, or leak, through; to vibrate (string)
نز nazz, nizz, نزازة nuzāza pl. نزوز nuzūz
seepage, leakage water
نز nazz swift, nimble, agile, lively,
sprightly; changeable, inconstant,
unsteady, fickle
نزة nazza, nizza (sensuous) passion, lust
نزيز nazīz unsteady, inconstant,
unstable; sensuous, passionate
نزح nazaḥa a i (nazḥ, نزوح nuzūḥ) to be far off,
be distant; to leave ( من s.th.), depart,
emigrate (or from); to immigrate ( الى to);
to wander, migrate, rove, roam, range; O
to march off, pull out (troops); pass. نزح به
nuziḥa bihī to emigrate, be away from
home, live abroad; -- (nazḥ) and IV to
scoop out, bail out, empty ( ھ s.th.); to
drain, dry out ( ھ a well, a ditch, a latrine,
and the like) VIII to emigrate
نزح nazḥ scooping out, emptying;
draining, drainage
نزح nazaḥ pl. انزاح anzāḥ muddy water
نزوح nuzūḥ emigration
نزوح nazūḥ and نزيح nazīḥ far-off,
faraway, distant, remote
نازح nāziḥ far-off, faraway, distant,
remote; going away from home, moving
to other lands, leaving for distant shores,
emigrating; emigrant; one who scoops out,
bails out or empties, a latrine cleaner
نزر nazr and نزير nazīr little; insignificant,
trivial, petty; trifle, small amount,
insignificant number, negligible portion │
نزر الحديث taciturn, of few words; نزر قليل
tiny amount
نزع naza‘a i (naz‘) to pull out, extract (
ھ s.th.); to remove, take, take away, strike,
cross off ( عن ھ s.th. from); to take off,
shed ( ھ a garment); to strip, divest,
deprive, rob ( ھ من or عن s.o. of s.th.); to
wrest, take away ( ھ من from s.o. s.th.,
possession, right, reputation, etc.); to
remove ( ه s.o. from a position), depose,
dismiss, fire, cashier, demote, reduce in
rank ( ه s.o.); to adduce as proof or in
refutation ( ب s.th.); (intr.) to move,
proceed, go, betake o.s., repair ( الى to); to
emigrate ( الى to); -- ( نزوع nuzū‘) to desire (
الى s.th.), wish, long, yearn, pine ( الى for);
to incline, tend, have an inclination or a
tendency ( الى to); to take on, take over,
adopt ( الى s.th.), resort ( الى to; e.g., to a
method); to absent o.s., depart (or from);
to desist, abstain, refrain (or from), keep
clear ( عن of), give up, avoid, eschew ( عن
s.th.); to be in the throes of death │ نزع منه
نازع الى (nāzi‘un) he felt a desire for ...,
discovered his inclination to ... II to
remove, take away ( ھ s.th.) III to fight,
struggle, contend, dispute ( ه with s.o.),
combat ( ھ s.th.); to contest, challenge ( في
s.th.); to attempt to wrest ( ھ ه from s.o.
s.th.), contest ( ھ ه s.o.’s right to s.th.); to
be in the throes of death VI to contend
with one another; to rival ( ھ for s.th.),
contest each other’s right ( ھ to), carry on
a 954 dispute, be at variance ( ھ over) VIII
to pull out, extract, pluck out, tear out ( ھ
s.th. .i- from); to match, wrest ( ھ من from
1.o. s.th.), tear away, pull off ( من ھ s.th.
from); to take, draw, borrow ( ھ s.th.); to
be removed, be taken away
نزع naz‘ removal; withdrawal,
elimination; deposition, removal from
office; death struggle, agony of death │
نزع السلاح disarming, disarmament; مؤتمر
نزع السلاح mu’tamar n. as-s. disarmament
conference; نزع الملكية n. al-milkīya
expropriation
نزعة naz‘a pl. naza‘āt inclination,
tendency, leaning; attitude, position, stand
نزوع nuzū‘ striving, endeavor, longing,
wish, desire ( الى for)
نزاع nazzā‘ tending, having an
inclination ( الى to), leaning ( الى toward)
نزيع nazī‘ pl. نزاع nuzzā‘ stranger
منزع manza‘ pl. منازع manāzi‘ intent,
intention, purpose; aim, end, objective,
goal; way, method; manner, behavior
منزع minza‘ arrow
نزاع nizā‘ fight, struggle, strife, contest,
controversy; dispute; death struggle,
agony of death │ بلا نزاع (bi-lā)
indisputably, incontestibly,
incontrovertibly, indubitably, undeniably;
عليه نزاع disputed, contested, debatable; لا
نزاع فيه (nizā‘a) undisputed, uncontested,
unquestioned
منازعة munāza‘a pl. -āt tight, struggle,
strife, contention, controversy, quarrel,
dissension, discord; dispute; matter in
controversy, case at issue (before a court
of justice)
تنازع tanāzu‘ tight, struggle, strife,
contention, controversy │ تنازع البقاء t. albaqā’
struggle for existence
انتزاع intizā‘ removal, withdrawal,
elimination; dispossession, expropriation
نازعة nāzi‘a pl. نوازع nawāzi‘ tendency,
inclination, leaning
منزوع manzū‘ removed, taken away │
منطقة منزوعة السلاح (minṭaqa) demilitarized
zone
منازع munāzi‘ struggling with death,
being in the throes of death; contending,
fighting, militant, litigious, renitent │ ليس
من منازع في no one will deny that ...
منازع عليه munāza‘ ‘alaihi contested,
disputed, debatable
متنازع mutanāzi‘ conflicting, clashing
متنازع عليه (mutanāza‘) and متنازع فيه
contested, disputed, debatable; litigated
matter, matter in controversy, case at issue
منتزع muntaza‘ taken, drawn ( من from)
نزغ nazg and نزغة pl. nazagāt incitement to
evil │ نزغ الشيطان n. aš-šaiṭān insinuations
of the devil, satanic inspiration
نزف nazafa i (nazf) to drain, exhaust, empty ( ھ
s.th.); to dry up ( ھ a well); to draw off ( ھ
blood); to be drained, exhausted, spent;
pass. نزف دمه nuzifa damuhū to lose much
blood, bleed (to death) IV to drain, empty
ھ) a well); to be exhausted X to drain off,
draw, extract ( من ھ s.th. from); to exhaust,
consume, use up, swallow up, devour ( ھ
s.th.)
نزف nazf exhaustion, draining,
emptying; hemorrhage; loss of blood │ O
النزف الدموي (damawī) hemophilis (med.)
نزفة nuzfa small quantity, modicum (of
a liquid)
نزيف nazīf weakened by loss of blood;
bleeding, effusion of blood; hemorrhage,
hemorrhea (med.)
منزوف manzūf exhausted through loss
of blood 955
نزق nazaqa i (nazq) and naziqa a (nazaq, نزوق
nuzūq) to storm ahead, rush forward; to be
hasty, rash, precipitate, impetuous,
lightheaded, frivolous, reckless, ruthless,
II to spur on, urge on ( ھ a horse)
نزق nazaq haste; rashness,
precipitateness, impetuosity;
lightheadedness, recklessness,
thoughtlessness, frivolity
نزق naziq hasty; rash, precipitate,
impetuous; thoughtless, heedless, careless,
inattentive, lightheaded, frivolous, flighty,
superficial
نزك nazaka u (nazk) to stab, pierce ( ه s.o.)
نيزك naizak pl. نيازك nayāzik2 short
lance; shooting star, meteor
نزل nazala i ( نزول nuzūl) to dismount, alight; to
descend, go down, come down, move
down, get down, step down, climb down;
to get off ( من , e.g., a train), get out, step
out ( من , e.g., of a car), debark, disembark (
من from a vessel); to put down, land
(airplane); to fall (rain); to descend from
heaven, be revealed (esp., the Koran); to
fall, sink, sag (prices), drop (water level);
to subside, abate, let up, decrease; to stop,
or halt, for a rest, to camp; to stop, stop
over, put up, take up quarters, take
lodgings, lodge, room, stay to live ( على or
ب at s.o.’s home, also عند ), live, dwell ( ھin
a place), inhabit ( ھ a place); to step into
the arena, take the field, meet an opposing
team (sports); to give in, yield ( على e.g., to
s.o.’s pleas); to give up, renounce, resign (
عن ل s.th. in s.o.’s favor), cede, waive,
relinquish, abandon ( عن s.th.); to resign (
عن from); to refrain ( عن from), forgo ( عن
s.th.); to descend, come ( ب upon s.o.;
misfortune, punishment, etc.), befall, hit,
afflict ( ب s.o.; misfortune), happen, occur
ب) to s.o.); to fall ( على upon s.o.), attack,
assail, assault ( على s.o.); to enter, embark (
على upon s.th.), set out ( على to do s.th.),
tackle, attack ( على s.th.), pounce ( على on
s.th.); (with ب:) to take, bring, lead, etc.,
s.o. or s.th. down ( الى to); -- nazila a ( نزلة
nazla) to have a cold │ نزل الى البر (barr)
to disembark, go ashore, land; نزل الى
الميدان (maidān) to take the field; نزل دون
مننلته (manzilatihī) to sink below one’s
level; نزل ضيفا على (ḍaifan) to avail o.s. of
s.o.’s hospitality, stay as a guest with s.o.;
نزل على حكمه (ḥukmihī) to defer, give in,
yield, submit to s.o.; to comply with the
standard of s.th.; نزل عند ارادته (irādatihī) to
defer to s.o.’s will, do s.o.’s bidding; نزل
عند رغبته (طلبه ) (ragbatihī, ṭalabihī) to
comply with, or fulfill, s.o.’s wish or
demand; منزلا (manzilan) to occupy a
place or position, get to a place or into a
position; نزل منزله اللائق (manzilahū) to
occupy one’s due place; نزل منزلة فلان
(manzilata f.) to hold the position of, serve
as II to cause to come down; to make ( ه
s.o.) descend, dismount, or step down; to
lower, let down ( ھ s.th., e.g., a bucket, a
curtain, etc.); to send down ( على ھ a
revelation to a prophet), reveal ( ھ s.th.); to
take down, put down ( ھ s.th.); to lower,
decrease, diminish, lessen, minimize,
curtail, reduce ( ھ or من s.th.); to dip, tilt (
ھ s.th.); to lower, strike ( ھ a flag); to
relieve, divest, discharge ( عن ھ s.o. of),
depose, dethrone ( عن العرش ه s.o.); to
unload ( ھ s.th.); to grant hospitality ( ه to
s.o.). receive hospitably, take in, put up,
lodge, accumulate ( ه s.o.); to deduct
subtract ( ھ من s.th. from); to insert, inlay (
في ھ s.th. in. e.g., ivory in wood); (Tun.)
to cede ( ھ s.th.) on the basis of inzāl (q.v.)
│ نزل درجته (darajatahū) to demote s.o.,
reduce s.o. in rank III to get into a fight,
join issue, clash ( ه with s.o.) IV to bring
down, take down; to cause to descend,
dismount, or step down; to send down.
reveal ( على ه ٩٥٦ s.th. to s.o.; of God); to
bestow, grant, give ( ھ s.th.; of God); to
make ( ه s.o.) alight, stop, halt, camp, put
up, tab up quarters, live, stay, abide ( ھ in
a place); to unload ( ھ s.th.); to take ashore
الى البر ھ) ilā l-barr s.th. from a vessel); to
land, put ashore, disembark, debark ( ھ
troops); to lower, strike ( ھ a flag); to
abase, degrade; to lower, decrease,
diminish, reduce ( الى ھ number, price,
etc., to); to cause ( ھ ب to s.o. loss), inflict
ھ ب) upon s.o. a loss); to compel, force,
coerce ( على ه s.o. to) │ ما انزل لله به من سلطان
(sulṭān) (lit.: God has given it no power,
i.e.) futile, vain, fruitless, unavailing,
unfounded, absurd, preposterous,
completely arbitrary, random; انزل الى البحر
(baḥr) to launch ( ھ a ship); انزلوھم ضيوفا
عليھم (ḍuyūfan) they took them in as
guests; انزل به خسارة قادحة (kusāratan
fāḍiḥatan) to inflict a heavy loss on s.o.;
انزله منزلة فلان (manzilata f.) he had him
occupy the same position as, gave him the
same status as, made him equal in rank
with V to lower o.s., stoop, condescend (
الى to s.th.); to abase o.s., humble o.s.,
demean o.s., eat crow; to give up,
renounce, resign, waive, forgo ( عن s.th.),
refrain ( عن from) VI to give up, renounce,
resign, waive, forgo ( عن ل s.th. in favor
of), refrain ( عن from), yield, surrender,
abandon, relinquish ( عن s.th.); to cede ( عن
ل s.th. to); to leave, assign, transfer, make
over ( عن ل s.th. to); to lower o.s., stoop,
condescend; to deign; to dismount, or line
up, for battle │ تنازل (تنزل) عن العرش ل
(‘arš) to abdicate in favor of; تنازل عن
منصب (manṣib) to lay down an office,
resign from office X to ask ( ه s.o.) to step
down; to call down, invoke ( ھ s.th.); to
make ( ه s.o.) descend; to call upon s.o. ( (ه
to waive or forgo ( عن s.th.); to force ( ه the
beleaguered) to surrender; to deduct,
subtract (~ 0 s.th. from)
نزل nazl pl. نزول nuzūl, نزل nuzûl
quarters, lodging; hotel, inn; -- (pl. نزول
nuzūl) small tribal unit (of Bedouins);
camp, camp site (of nomads, gypsies)
نزل nuzl pl. انزال anzāl food served to a
guest
نزلة nazla putting up, stopping, stop,
stay, arrival │ نزلة الحج al-ḥajj (eg.)
festival of the return of the mahmal from
Mecca (celebrated in the months of Safar
or Rabia I)
نزلة nazla pl. nazalāt cold; catarrh │
نزلة شعبية (šu‘abīya) bronchial catarrh; نزلة
صدرية (ṣadrīya) bronchitis; نزلة وافدة
influenza (med.)
نزالة nizāla settlement, colony
نزول nuzūl descending, descent;
dismounting. alighting; getting off or out
(of a vehicle), disembarkation,
debarkation; landing (of an airplane);
arrival; putting up, stopping, stop,
stopover, stay; cession, surrender,
relinquishment, renunciation, resignation;
falling, fall, drop; sinking; decline in
prices, price slump │ نزولا على according
to, in accordance with, in deference to;
نزولا عند رغبته (ragbatihī) in compliance
with his wish, in deference to his wish, at
his request; نزولا عند طلبه (ṭalabihī) in
compliance with his demand, in
accordance with his request; نزول المطر n.
al-maṭar rainfall
نزولي nuzūlī relative to decline (in
prices and stocks), recessive, falling,
sinking
نزيل nazīl pl. نزلاء nuzalā’2 guest;
stranger; lodger, boarder; inmate;
occupant, tenant
منزل manzil pl. منازل manāzil2 stopping
place, way station, camp site; apartment,
fiat; house; lunar phase; see also under
verb I │ منزل الاستراحة resthouse; منازل اللھو
واللعب m. al-lahw wa-l-la‘b amusement
centers; اھل المنزل ahl al-m. household,
family; صاحب المنزل landlord 957
منزلي manzilī domestic, house (adj.);
private; household (adj.)
منزلة manzila degree, grade, rank;
position, status, standing; dignity; see also
under verb I and IV
تنزيل tanzīl sending down, bringing
down; revelation, inspiration; reduction,
diminution, lowering, lessening, decrease;
-- (pl. -āt) reduction (of prices);
subtraction (arith.); deduction, discount;
inlaying, inlay work │ تنزيل الرتبة t. arrutba
or تنزيل المقام t. al-maqām, demotion,
reduction in rank; تنزيل نقدي (naqdī)
currency devaluation
نزال nizāl and منازلة munāzala lining up
for battle; encounter, battle, fight
انزال inzāl bringing down, lowering;
landing, debarkation, disembarkation;
ejaculation of sperm; (pl. -āt) lease
contract for life over a habous estate
(Tun.) │ انزال الى البحر (baḥr) launching (of
a ship); انزال الى العمل (‘amal)
commissioning (of a ship)
تنازل tanāzul condescension; yielding,
relenting; relinquishment, surrender,
waiver, renunciation; transfer, assignment,
cession; resignation, abdication; lining up
for battle; struggle, fight, battle │ عدم
التنازل ‘adam at-t. relentlessness,
intransigence; عقد التنازل ‘aqd at-t. deed of
cession
استنزال istinzāl deduction, discount
نازل nāzil living, resident
نازلة nāzila pl. نوازل nawāzil occurrence,
event; mishap, accident, calamity, reverse,
blow of fate; (tun.) (judicial) case, legal
action │ نازلة مدنية (madanīya; tun.) civil
action; اوراق نازلة (tun.) records of a
lawsuit; قسم النوازل qism an-n. (tun.)
division for contentious matters (of a court
of justice); قام بنازلة (tun.) to take legal
action, commence a lawsuit
منزول manzūl (eg.) a kind of narcotic
منزولي manzūlī (egs.) narcotic addict,
dope addict
منزل munazzal inlaid (with ivory or a
precious metal)
منزل munzal sent down (from heaven),
revealed
متنازل mutanāzil abdicating, resigning;
one who waives, cedes or asap a right,
assignor
مستنزل mustanzil lessee on the basis of
inzāl (Tun.; see above)
نزنز to rock, dandle (a baby)
نزه nazuha u ( نزاھة nazāha) to be far ( عن from),
be untouched. unblemished ( عن by), be
free ( عن from); to steer clear ( عن of), keep
away, refrain ( عن from, esp., from a base
or dishonorable action); -- naziha a to be
respectable, honorable, decent II to deem
or declare ( ه s.o.) above s.th. ( عن ) V =
nazuha; to be (far) above s.th. ( عن ); to go
for a walk, take a walk, promenade, stroll
about; to go out, to amuse o.s., enjoy o.s.,
have a good time
نزه nazih and نزيه nazīh pl. نزھاء
nuzahā’ نزاه , 2 nizāh pure, chaste,
blameless, above reproach, of
unblemished record, decent, honorable,
respectable; honest, upright. righteous;
scrupulous, correct; impartial
نزه nazah and نزاھة nazāha purity,
blamelessness, honesty; uprightness,
righteousness, probity, integrity,
respectability; impartiality
نزھة nuzha pl. نزه nuzah, -āt walk,
stroll, promenade; pleasure ride; outing,
excursion, pleasure trip; recreation;
amusement. entertainment, diversion, fun;
excursion spot, picnic ground, sightseeing
spot, tourist attraction 958
منزھة manzaha pl. منازه manāzih2
recreation ground, park, garden
تنزيه tanzīh elimination of
anthropomorphic elements from the
conception of deity, deanthropomorphism
(theol.)
تنزه tanazzuh pl. -āt walk, stroll,
promenade
منزه munazzah infallible, free ( عن
from), (far) above s.th. ( (عن
متنزه mutanazzih pl. -ūn walker, stroller,
promenader; excursionist
متنزه mutanazzah promenade, walk,
stroll, park
منتزه muntazah pl. -āt promenade, walk,
stroll; recreation ground; park
نزا (نزو 1 ) nazā u ( نزو nazw, nuzūw, نزوان
nazawān) to spring, jump, leap, bound; --
نزوان) nazawān) to escape ( عن s.th.) │ نزا
به قلبه الى (qalbuhū) to long, yearn for V to
spring, jump, leap, bound; to be in a state
of great commotion, be violently agitated,
to heave, tremble (breast)
نزوان nazawān sally, sortie; outburst,
outbreak, eruption
نزوة nazwa pl. nazawāt (n. vic.) jump,
leap, bound; sally, sortie; outburst,
outbreak, eruption; surge, dare, dare-up;
impetuosity, violence, vehemence; fit,
attack, paroxysm; sudden mood, caprice,
whim
نازي 2 and نازية look up alphabetically
نسأ nasa’a a ( نسء nas’) to put off,
postpone, delay, defer, procrastinate ( ھ
s.th.), -- ( نساء nasā’) to allow ( ه s.o.) time
to pay, grant ( ه s.o.) credit IV = I
نساء nasā’ long life, longevity
نساء nisā’ women, see نسو
نسيئة nasī’a credit, delay of payment,
nasī’atan on credit
منسأة minsa’a stick, staff
نسب nasaba u i (nasab, نسبة nisba) to relate,
refer ( الى ھ s.th. to), link, correlate, bring
into relation ( الى ھ s.th. with), to trace ( الى
ھ s.th. to s.o. as the originator, الى ه s.o.’s
ancestry to); to ascribe, attribute, impute.
lay ( ل or الى ھ s.th. to s.o.), charge ( ل or الى
ھ with s.th. s.o.), accuse ( ل or الى ھ of s.th.
s.o.) III to stand in the same relationship ( ه
to s.o.); to correspond ( ھ، ه to s.o., to
s.th.), tally ( ھ with s.th.), to suit, fit ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.), go ( ھ, ه with), become, befit,
behoove ( ه s.o.); to harmonize, agree, be
in keeping, be compatible, consistent ( ھ
with), to be similar ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.),
resemble ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.), be like s.o. or
s.th. ( ھ, ه ); to be in agreement, in
conformity, in accordance. to tally, check
ھ) with), be conformable ( ھ to), to be of
the same family ( ه as), be or become
related by marriage ( ه to) VI to be related
to one another, be relatives; to be alike, be
akin, be mutually corresponding, be
interrelated, be in agreement or
conformity, be in the right proportion, be
proportionate, match, fit together, go
together; to be in agreement, in
conformity, in accordance, to tally, check
مع) with), be conformable ( مع to) VIII to
be related ( الى to s.o.); to derive one’s
origin ( الى from), trace one’s ancestry ( الى
to), to derive one's name ( الى from), be
named ( الى after), to belong, pertain, be
relative ( الى to), to be associated ( الى with),
belong ( الى to a clan, a party, a faction,
etc.); to attach o.s. ( الى to), associate,
affiliate ( الى with), to join ( الى e.g., a
political party), to be admitted ( الى to a
community), be affiliated ( الى with, esp.,
as an extraordinary, not a full, member) X
to trace back the ancestry ( ه of s.o.), to
deem 959 proper ( ھ s.th.), approve ( ھ of),
sanction, condone ( ھ s.th.)
نسب nasab pl. اناسب anāsib lineage,
descent; origin. extraction, derivation,
provenience; kinship, relationship,
affinity, relationship by marriage │ سلسلة
النسب silsilat an-n. family tree, pedigree,
ancestral line, genealogy; علماء الأنساب
‘ulamā’ al-a. genealogists
نسبة nisba ascription, attribution,
imputation; kinship, relationship, affinity,
relationship by marriage; connection, link;
agreement, conformity, affinity; -- (pl. نسب
nisab) relation, reference, bearing; ratio,
rate; measure; proportion (math.);
percentage; adjective denoting descent or
origin, ending in نسبة الى │ ي (nisbatan)
and ( ل or) بالنسبة الى in respect to, with
regard to, regarding, concerning, as to; as
compared with, in comparison with; in
relation to, with reference to; for, to; على
نسبة in proportion to, in keeping
with, in accordance with, according to,
corresponding to, commensurate with; نسبة
الموت al-maut death rate; نسبة مئوية
(mi’awīya) percentage
نسبي nisbī relative, comparative;
percentual, percentile; proportional; نسبيا
nisbīyan relatively │ وزن نسبي (wazn)
specific gravity
نسبية nisbīya relativity
نساب nisāb genealogist
نسيب nasīb erotic introduction of the
ancient Arabic kasida; -- (pl. , انسباء
ansibā’2) relative, kinsman (by mania~e);
brother-in-law; son-in-law; descending
from a distinguished family, patrician,
highborn, noble
انسب ansab2 more adequate, more
appropriate, more suitable, better
qualified, fitter
مناسبة mun<isaba suitability,
suitableness, appropriateness, aptness,
adequacy; fitness; correlation, analogy,
correspondence; kinship, relationship.
affinity; (pl. -āt) relation, reference,
bearing, relevancy, pertinence; link;
connection; occasion, opportunity │ في
مناسبة or لمناسبة or بمناسبة on the occasion of;
بھذه المناسبة in this connection; لھذه المناسبة
due to these circumstances, for this
reason, therefore, consequently, hence; في
كل مناسبة whenever an opportunity arises,
at every suitable occasion
تناسب tanāsub proportional relation,
proportionality; proportionateness,
balance, evenness; uniformity; regularity,
symmetry; harmony; O proportion,
mathematical equation; reciprocal
relationship, interrelation; link, connection
│ عدم التناسب ‘adam at-t. disproportion
انتساب intisāb membership; affiliation │
طالب بالانتساب student by affiliation
منسوب mansūb related, brought into
relation; attributed, ascribed, imputed ( الى
to s.o.); belonging, pertaining ( الى to);
relative (to), concerning, regarding (s.o. or
s.th.); -- (pl. مناسيب manāsīb2) level,
altitude; water level │ منسوب البحر m. albaḥr
sea level; مناسيب عالية (‘āliya) high
water levels, high waters
منسوبية mansūbīya nepotism
مناسب munāsib suitable, fitting,
appropriate, proper, adequate;
corresponding, commensurate;
correspondent, congruous, analogous,
conformable; proportional (math.)
متناسب mutanāsib proportionate,
properly proportioned; proportional;
mutually corresponding, analogous │
متناسب الأجزاء even, regular, symmetrical
منتسب muntasib member, affiliate │
عضو منتسب (‘uḍw) associate (e.g., of an
academy)
ناسوت nāsūt human nature, humanity 960
نسج nasaja u i (nasj) to weave ( ھ s.th.); to knit
│ نسج على منواله (minwālihī) to imitate s.o.,
follow in s.o.’s tracks, walk in s.o.’s
footsteps, act or proceed like s.o.; نسج نسجه
(nasjahū) do. VIII to be woven
نسج nasj weaving; fabric, texture │ نسج
الخيال al-kayāl fabling, flight of fancy
نساج nassāj weaver
نساجة nisāja art of weaving; weaver’s
trade, textile industry
نسيج nasīj pl. نسوج nusūj, انسجة ansija,
انساج ansāj texture, web, tissue (also
anat.); woven fabric, textile │ نسيج خلوي
(kalawī) cellular tissue (anat.); نسيج
العنكبوت n. al-‘ankabūt spider’s web,
cobweb; نسيج وحده n. waḥdihī unique in his
(its) kind, singular, unparalleled; نسيج
عصره n. ‘aṣrihī unique in his (its) time
منسج mansaj, mansij pl. مناسج manāsij
weaver’s shop, weaving mill
منسج minsaj loom
منسوج mansūj woven; woven fabric,
textile; texture, tisane, web; pl. منسوجات
woven goods, dry goods, textiles
نسخ nasaka a (nask) to delete ( ھ s.th.);
to abolish ( ھ s.th.); to abrogate, invalidate
ھ) s.th.); to repeal, revoke, withdraw ( ھ
s.th.); to cancel ( ھ a contract); to replace (
ب ھ s.th. by), substitute ( ب ھ for s.th. s.th.
else); to transcribe, copy ( ھ s.th.) III to
supersede, supplant, replace ( ھ s.th.), take
the place ( ھ of s.th.) V to be deleted,
abolished, abrogated, invalidated VI to
succeed, each other, follow successively;
to pass from one body into another,
transmigrate (soul) VIII to abolish, cancel,
abrogate, invalidate (s.th.); to transcribe,
copy ( ھ s.th.) X to demand the abolition (
ھ of s.th.); to transcribe, copy ( ھ s.th.)
نسخ nask abolition, abolishment,
abrogation, cancellation, invalidation;
copying, transcription │ قلم النسخ qalam
an-n. Neskhi ductus (see below); آ لة النسخ
duplicating machine, mimeograph;
copying press
نسخي naskī Neskhi, the ordinary cursive
Arabic script, the common calligraphic
style
نسخة nuska pl. نسخ nusak transcript;
copy (also, e.g., of a book, of a
newspaper, etc.)
نساخ nasssāk pl. نساخة nassāka copyist,
transcriber; scribe, scrivener, clerk
تناسخ tanāsuk succession;
transmigration of souls, metempsychosis
استنساخ istinsāk copying, transcription
ناسخ nāsik pl. نساخ nusssāk abrogative,
abolishing; copyist, transcriber │ آية ناسخة
Koranic verse which abrogates and
supersedes another verse
منسوخ mansūk abrogated (Koranic
verse)
نسر V to get torn; to break, snap X to become
eagle-like
نسور nasr pl. نسور nusūr, نسورة nusūra
eagle; vulture
نسارية nusārīya eagle
ناسور nāsūr pl. نواسر nawāsir2 fistula,
tumor
منسر minsar, mansir, pl. مناسر manāsir2
beak (of predatory birds); band, gang,
group, troop
نسطوري nusṭūrī pl. نساطرة nasāṭira Nestorian
نسغ nusg sap (of a plant)
نسف nasafa i (nasf) to pulverize, atomize,
spray ( ھ s.th.); to carry away and scatter
(wind -- the dust); to blow up, blast ( ھ
s.th.); O to torpedo ( ھ a ship) IV to 961
scatter (esp., wind -- the dust) VIII to raze
ھ) s.th.); to blow up, blast ( ھ s.th.)
نسف nasf blowing up, blasting;
destruction, demolition
نساف nussāf pl. نساسيف nasāsīf a variety
of swallow; rhinoceros hornbill (zool.)
نسافة nusāfa chaff
نسافة nassāfa pl. -āt torpedo boat
منسف minsaf and منسفة minsafa pl. مناسف
manāsif2 winnow
ناسف nāsif and ناسفة nāsifa explosive,
dynamite
نسق nasaqa u (nasq) and II to string ( ھ pearls);
to put in proper order, arrange nicely,
range, array, order, marshal, dispose ( ھ
s.th.); to set up, line up ( ھ s.th.) V to be
well-ordered, be in proper order, be nicely
arranged; to be arranged, arrayed,
disposed VI do.; to be geared to each
other, be well-coordinated (weapons) VIII
= V
نسق nask ordering, successive
arrangement, lining up, alignment
نسق nasaq order, array, layout,
arrangement, disposition; connection,
succession, sequence; manner, mode,
system, method; symmetry; نسقا nasaqan
in regular order, in rows │ على نسق in the
manner of; على نسق واحد in the same
manner, equally, evenly, uniformly; حروف
النسق conjunctions (gram.)
نسيق nasīq well-ordered, well-arranged,
regular, even, uniform
تنسيق tansīq ordering, arraying; setting
up, drawing up; distribution, disposition;
arrangement; systematic arrangement;
planned economy │ تنسيق داخلي (dākilī)
interior decoration
تنسق tanassuk uniformity
تناسق tanāsuk order; symmetry;
harmony
منسق munasaq well-ordered, wellarranged;
staggered (troop formation);
harmonious
متناسق mutanāsiq well-ordered, wellarranged,
regular, symmetrical
نسك nasaka u and nasuka u ( نساكة nasāka) to
lead a devout life; to live the life of an
ascetic V do.; to be pious, devout,
otherworldly
نسك nask, nusk, nusuk piety,
devoutness; asceticism; reclusion
نسكي nusukī ascetic (adj.)
نسك nusuk sacrifice; ceremonies (of the
pilgrimage)
ناسك nāsik pl. نساك nussāk hermit,
recluse, penitent; ascetic; pious man,
devotee
منسك mansik pl. مناسك manāsik2
hermitage, cell of an ascetic; place of
sacrifice; ceremony, ritual, esp., during
the pilgrimage
نسل nasala u (nasl) to beget, procreate, sire,
father ( ه children); -- u to pluck out ( ھ
s.th.); to pluck ( ھ s.th.); to ravel out,
unravel, untwist, fray ( ھ s.th.); to molt; (
نسول nusūl) to fall out (hair, feathers) II to
separate into fibers, to shred, ravel ( ھ
rags); to unravel, undo ( ھ a woven or
knitted fabric) IV to beget, procreate, sire,
father ( ه children); to molt; to fall out
(hair, feathers) VI to propagate, breed,
reproduce, multiply; to beget offspring; to
descend, be descended ( من from)
نسل nasl pl. انسال ansāl progeny,
offspring, issue, descendants │ تقليل النسل
birth control; الحرث والنسل (ḥart) the
civilization of mankind
نسالة nusāla fibrous waste, thrums;
ravelings; lint
O نسالة nassāla raveling machine,
willow 962
نسولة nasūla brood animal
O نسيلة nasīla offprint, reprint
انسال insāl procreation, generation
تناسل tanāsul sexual propagation,
procreation, generation, reproduction │
اعضاء التناسل sexual organs, genitals; ضعف
التناسل ḍu‘f at-t. sexual impotence
تناسلي tanāsulī procreative, propagative;
genital, sexual │ مرض تناسلي (maraḍ)
venereal disease
تناسليات tanāsulīyāt sexual organs
نسم nasama i (nasm, نسمان nasamān) to
blow gently II to commence, start, begin
في) s.th.) V to blow; to breathe; to
inhale ( ھ s.th.); to-exhale ( ب a fragrant
smell), smell pleasantly, be redolent ( ب
of), be fragrant ( ب with) │ تنسم الخبر
(kabara) to nose around for news, sniff
out the news
نسم nasam pl. انسام ansām breath; breath
of life
نسمة nasama pl. -āt breath; whiff, waft;
breeze; O aura; breathing, living creature;
person, soul (e.g., in a census, as a
numerative in statistics)
نسيم nasīm pl. نسام nisām, نسائم nasā’im2
breath of air, fresh air; wind, breeze │ شم
النسيم šamm an-n. Egyptian popular holiday
celebrated on the Monday following
Greek-Coptio Easter
منسم mansim pl. مناسم manāsim2 foot
sole, padded foot (of animals)
متنسم mutanassim (with foll. genit.)
place where s.th. blows, is exhaled,
emanates, or exudes
نسانس nanās, nisnās pl. نسانس nasānis2 a
fabulous creature of the woods, having
one leg and one arm; (eg.) monkey
نسوة niswa, نسوان niswān and نساء nisā’ women
(pl. of (امرأة
نسوي nisawī and نسائي nisā’ī female,
feminine, womanly, women’s; نسائيات
women’s affairs, things belonging to a
woman’s world
نسائية nisā’īya feminist movement
نسي nasiya a (nasy, نسيان nisyān) to forget ( ھ
s.th.) │ ما انس لا انس mā ansa lā ansā (lit.:
whatever I may forget, I shall not forget,
i.e.) I shall never forget; sometimes also:
ما انس لا انسى (ansā) and ان انس فلا انسى (in) I
shall never forget IV to make ( ه s.o.)
forget ( ھ s.th.) VI to pretend to have
forgotten ( ھ s.th.); to forget, neglect, omit
ھ) s.th.), become oblivious ( ھ of)
نسي nasy oblivion, forgetfulness; s.th.
one hal forgotten │ اصبح نسيا منسيا aṣbaḥa
nasyan mansīyas to be completely
forgotten, fall into utter oblivion
نسي nasīy, نساء nassā’ and نسيان nisyān2
forgetful, oblivious
نسيان nisyān oblivion, forgetfulness
منسي mansīy forgotten; pl. منسيات (as
opposed to محفوظات ) things once
memorized and now forgotten
نش našša i (našš, نشيش nasīš) to sizzle, simmer,
bubble, boil up; to hiss; -- to drive away
flies
ورق نشاش waraq naššāš blotting paper
منشة minašša fly whisk
نشأ naša’a a and نشؤ našū’a u ( نشء naš’, نشوء
nušū’, نشأة naš’a) to rise, rise aloft,
emerge, appear, loom up; to come into
being, come into existence, originate,
form, arise, come about, crop up; to
proceed, spring ( من or عن from), grow out
من) or عن of); to follow, ensue, result,
derive ( من or عن from); to grow, grow up;
to develop, evolve │ نشأ نشوءا ذاتيا (dātīyan)
to start by iteslf, arise spontaneously,
come about automatically 963 II to cause
to grow; to bring up, raise ( ھ a child) IV
to cause ( ھ s.th.) to rise; to create, bring
into being ( ھ s.th., of God); to bring forth,
produce, generate, engender ( ھ s.th.), give
rise ( ھ to s.th.); to make, manufacture,
fabricate ( ھ s.th.); to build, construct ( ھ
s.th.); to call into existence, originate,
start, found, establish, organize. institute (
ھ s.th.); to set up, erect ( ھ s.th.); to install
ھ) s.th.); to compose, draw up ( ھ a piece
of writing), write ( ھ a book); to bring up,
raise, rear ( ه a child); to begin, start,
commence, initiate ( ھ s.th.) V to grow,
develop, spread, gain ground X to search,
ask, look ( ھ for news)
نشء naš’ youth; new generation │ النشء
الجديد the young generation
نشأة naš’a growing up, upgrowth,
growth; early life. youth; rise, birth,
formation, genesis; origin; youth, young
generation; culture, refinement;
upbringing. background (of a person) │
نشأة مستأنفة (musta’nafa) rebirth,
renaissance
نشوء nusii’ growing, growth,
development, evolution │ O النشوء 
والترقي madhab an-n. wa-t-taraqqī theory
of evolution, evolutionism
O النشوئيون an-nušū’īyūn the
evolutionists
منشأ manša’ place of origin or upgrowth;
birth place, home town, home;
fatherland, homeland, native country;
origin, rise, birth, formation, genesis;
source, springhead, fountainhead;
beginning, start, onset
تنشيء tanšī’ upbringing, education
تنشئة tanši’a upbringing, education
إنشاء inšā’ creation; origination;
bringing about; setting up. Establishment,
organization, institution; formation;
making, manufacture, production;
erection; building, construction; founding,
foundation; installation; composition,
compilation, writing; letter writing; style,
art of composition; essay, treatise │
انشاءات عسكرية (‘askarīya) military
installations; اعادة الإنشاء i’ādat al-i.
reconstruction
إنشائي inšā’ī creative; constructive;
relating to composition or style; stylistic;
editing, editorial │ برنامج إنشائي (barnāmaj)
production program; قطعة انشائية (qiṭ‘a)
exercise in composition; موضوع انشائي
theme, composition
ناشئ nāši’ growing, growing up;
arising, originating, proceeding,
emanating, springing, resulting (or from);
beginner; (in sports) junior; youngster,
youth
ناشئة nāši’a youth, rising generation
منشئ munši’ creating; creative; creator;
organizer, promoter, founder; author,
writer
منشأة munša’a pl. -āt creation, product,
work, OpUs; foundation, establishment;
installation; institution, institute; pl.
installations (e.g., industrial, military)
نشب 1 našiba a (našb, نشبة nušba, نشوب nušūb)
to be fixed, be attached, cling, stick,
adhere ( في to); to attend ( ب s.th.), be
incident ( ب to); to get involved ( في in),
meddle ( في with); to break out (war) │ ما
نشب or لم ينشب not to hesitate II and IV to
stick on, paste on, attach, fix, insert ( ھ
s.th.)
نشب našb property, possession
نشوب nušūb clinging, adherence ( في to);
outbreak
نشاب naššāb arrow maker; archer,
bowman
نشاب nuššāb (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. نشاشيب
našāšīb2 arrows
منتشب muntašib fierce, violent (battle)
منشوبية 2 look up alphabetically 964
نشج našaja i ( نشيج našīj) to sob
نشد našada u (našd, نشدة našda, نشدان nišdān) to
seek ( ھ s.th.), look, search ( ھ for); to
adjure, implore ( ه ه s.o. by, e.g., لله allaha
by God) III to adjure, implore ( ان يفعل ه or
ھ ه s.o. to do s.th., ه ه s.o. by, e.g., لله
allāha by God) IV to seek ( ھ s.th.), look,
search ( ھ for); to sing ( ھ s.th.); to recite (
ھ ه to s.o. verses) VI to recite verses to
each other X to ask ( ه s.o.) to recite verses
نشيد našīd and انشودة unšūda pl. نشائد
našā’id انشاد , 2 anšād, اناشيد anāšīd2 song;
hymn, anthem │ نشيد الأناشد or نشيد الأنشاد
the Song of Solomon, the Song of Songs;
النشيد الأممي (umamī) the International; نشيد
حماسي (ḥamāsī) rallying song; نشيد عسكري
(‘askarī) soldier’s song, marching song;
military march; نشيد قومي (qaumī) or نشيد
وطني (waṭanī) national anthem; نشيد ليلي
(lailī) serenade; نشيد ملكي (malakī) royal
anthem
مناشدة munāšada urgent request, earnest
appeal, adjuration
انشاد inšād recitation, recital
منشود manšūd sought, aspired, desired,
pursued (aim, objective)
منشد munšid singer
نشادر nušādir and نوشادر nūšādir ammonia
نشر našara u (našr) to spread out ( ھ s.th.); to
unfold, open ( ھ s.th.); to unroll ( ھ s.th.);
to hoist ( ھ a flag); -- u i to spread, diffuse,
emit ( ھ e.g., a scent); to announce
publicly, publicize ( ھ s.th.); to publish ( ھ
a book, an advertisement, etc.); to
propagate, spread ( ھ s.th.); -- u (našr, نشور
nušūr) to resurrect from the dead ( ه s.o.);
-- to saw apart ( ھ s.th.) II to spread out,
unfold ( ھ s.th.) IV to resurrect from the
dead ( ه s.o.) V to be spread out, be
unfolded; to spread VIII to be spread out,
be unfolded; to spread (news, a disease,
etc.); to spread out, extend, expand; to be
propagated, be conveyed (waves); to be
diffused, be scattered, be dispersed, be
thrown into disorder; O to fan out, extend
(mil.)
نشر našr unfolding; spreading,
diffusion; propagation; promulgation;
publication; notification, announcement;
resurrection │ نشر الدعوة n. ad-da‘wa
propaganda; .r;J1 r.J! lIa..m an·n. Day of
Resurrection; دار النشر publishing house
نشرة našra pl. našarāt (public) notice,
proclamation; publication; report, account;
announcement; advertisement; circular;
leaflet, pamphlet, handbill; periodical;
order, ordinance, decree, edict │ نشرة
الأخبار or نشرة اخبارية (ikbārīya) newscast,
news (radio); نشرة دورية (daurīya)
periodical publication; نشرة اسبوعية
(usbū‘īya) weekly publication, weekly
paper; newsreel; نشرات جوية (jawwīya)
weather report (radio); نشر خاصة بالأسعار
(kāṣṣa) prospectus, price list; نشرة يومية
(rasmīya) official publication, bulletin;
نشرة شھرية (šahrīya) monthly publication;
O نشرة يومية (yaumīya) order of the day
(mil.)
نشار naššār sawyer
نشارة nišāra (activity of) sawing
نشارة nušāra sawdust
نشور nušūr resurrection │ يوم النشور
yaum an-n. Day of Resurrection
منشار minšār pl. مناشير manāšīr2 saw
انتشار intišār spreading, spread,
diffusion, diffusiveness
ناشر nāšir publisher
منشور manšūr spread abroad.
propagated, made public, published; sawn
(apart); -- (pl. -āt, مناشير manāšīr2) leaflet,
pamphlet, handbill; circular; prospectus;
proclamation; order, ordinance, decree,
edict; prism (math.) 965
منشوري look up alphabetically
منتشر muntašir spreading, spread out;
widespread, current, rife; prevailing,
prevalent, predominant
نشز našaza u i (našz) to be elevated, be
located high above; to rise; -- ( نشوز nušūz)
to be recalcitrant, disobedient ( على، من، ب
toward her husband; said of a woman); to
treat (a wife) brutally (said of a man) IV
to restore to life, revive, reanimate ( ھ
s.th.)
نشز našaz pl. انشاز anšāz elevated place,
high ground
نشاز našāz dissonance, discord
نشوز nušūz animosity, hostility;
antipathy; dissonance, discord; (īsl. Law)
violation of marital duties on the part of
either husband or wife, specif.,
recalcitrance of the woman toward her
husband, and brutal treatment of the wife
by the husband
ناشز nāšiz protruding, elevated, raised;
jarring, dissonant, discordant; recalcitrant
ناشزة nāšiza pl. نواشز nawāšiz2
recalcitrant woman, shrew, termagant
نشط našiṭa a ( نشاط našāṭ) to be lively,
animated, brisk, sprightly, vivacious,
spirited, active, eager, keen, zealous,
brave, cheerful, gay; to display vim and
energy ( في in some work), be energetic
and active, work energetically and
actively ( الى for, toward); to be in the
mood ( ل for), feel like doing s.th. ( ل); to
be glad, enthusiastic ( ل about); to apply
o.s. eagerly, attend actively ( ل to some
activity), embark briskly ( ل upon s.th.) │
نشط من عقاله (‘iqālihī) to be freed from
one’s shackles, be unfettered, be
unshackled; -- našafa u (našf) to tie a knot
ھ) in a rope), knot (. a rope) II and IV
to incite, spur on, enliven, stimulate,
activate, excite ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
strengthen, invigorate, animate, inspirit,
energize ( ه s.o.), impart vim and energy ( ه
to s.o.), encourage, embolden ( ه s.o., الى to
do s.th.); to knot, tie up ( ھ s.th.) V to be
lively, animated, brisk, sprightly,
vivacious, spirited, active, eager, keen,
zealous, brave, cheerful, gay; to display
vim and energy ( في in some work), be
energetic and active, work energetically
and actively ( الى for, toward); to be in the
mood ( ل for), feel like doing s.th. ( (ل
نشط našiṭ lively, animated, spirited,
brisk, sprightly, vivacious, agile, nimble;
stirring, bustling, busy, enterprising,
energetic, active
نشطة našṭa energy; eagerness, ardor,
zeal
نشاط našāṭ briskness, sprightliness,
liveliness, animation, vivacity; agility,
alacrity, eagerness, ardor, zeal, energy,
vim, activeness; activity; lively activity,
action, operation; strength, power
(physical and mental); vigor, vital energy,
vitality │ نشاط جوي (jawwī) aerial activity;
نشاط اشعاعي (iš‘ā‘ī) radioactivity; ذو نشاط
اشعاعي radioactive; مواد ذات نشاط اشعاعي
(mawād2) radioactive substances,
radioactive matter; صاحب نشاط active; عديم
النشاط inactive, dull, listless (stock market)
نشيط našīṭ pl. نشاط nišāṭ brisk, lively,
spirited, animated, cheerful, gay; stirring,
bustling, busy, active, energetic; glad,
happy, enthusiastic ( ل about), actively
devoted ( ل to) │ الجنس النشيط (jins) the
stronger sex
انشوطة unšūṭa pl. اناشيط anāšīṭ2 knot,
slipknot, bow, noose
منشط manšaṭ pleasant thing
تنشيط tanšīṭ encouragement, incitement;
stimulation; enlivening, animation,
activation 966
ناشط nāšiṭ brisk, lively, spirited,
animated, cheerful, gay; stirring, bustling,
busy, active, energetic
منشط munšiṭ spur, incentive, impetus,
stimulus
نشع naša‘a a (naš‘) to tear out, tear off ( ھ
s.th.) VIII do.
نشع naš‘ leakage water, seepage
منشع munašša‘ sodden, soggy, soaked,
drenched, soaking wet
نشف našafa u (našf) to suck up, absorb ( ھ
s.th.); -- nasifa a to dry, dry up, dry out,
become dry II to dry, make dry ( ھ s.th.);
to wipe (dry), rub dry ( ھ s.th.) │ نشف ريقه
(rīqahū) to exert o.s., toil hard; to pester,
molest s.o. V = nasifa; to wipe o.s. dry; to
be wiped dry, be dried
نشف našaf desiccation, dryfless
نشاف naššāf blotting paper
نشافة naššāfa sheet of blotting paper,
blotting pad; blotter; towel
منشفة minšafa pl. مناشف manāšif towel;
cleaning rag; napkin
تنشيف tanšīfdrying
ناشف nāšif desiccated, dried up, dry;
hard, stiff, tough
نشق našiqa a (našq and našaq) to smell, sniff,
inhale ( ھ sth.); to suff up the nosrils( ھ
s.th.) II and IV to give ( ھ ه s.o. s.th.) to
smell, make ( ه s.o.) inhale ( ھ s.th.) V and
VIII to inhale, breathe in; to snuff up the
nostrils ( ھ s.th.) │ انتشق الھواء (hawā’a) to
get some fresh air X = I; to nose around (
ھ for), sniff out ( ھ s.th.)
نشق našq, تنشق tanaššuq and استنشاق
istinšāq inhaling, inhalation
نشوق našūq, nušūq snuff
تنشيقة tanšīqa pinch of snuff
نشل našala u (naš) to take away, snatch away,
steal, pilfer ( ھ s.th.); to extricate (from
dangers, difficulties, etc.), liberate,
deliver, save ( ه s.o.) VIII to extricate; to
raise, raise aloft; to gather up, pick up
(shipwrecked persons, etc.), save, rescue (
ه s.o.)
نشل našl pickpocketing, pickpocketry
نشال naššāl pickpocket
نشان nišān and نيشان nīšān pl. نياشين nayāšīn2
sign; mark; aim, goal; target; decoration,
medal. order; ('1/.) bridal attire
نشنجي našanjī and نشانجي naānjī
marksman, good shot, sharpshooter
نشنكاه nišankāh sight (of a gun)
نشنش našnaša to be nimble, swift, brisk, adroit,
dexterous, agile, active; to boil up, sizzle,
simmer, bubble II tanašnaša to be nimble
and dexterous; to revive, recover, pick up
نشو) and نشي) نشي našiya a ( نشوة našwa, nušwa,
nišwa) to be or become intoxicated, be or
become drunk II to starch ( ھ clothes,
linen) VIII to become intoxicated X to
smell ( ھ a scent), to inhale ( ھ a breeze)
نشوة našwa fragrance, aroma, scent,
perfume; intoxication, drunkenness;
frenzy, delirium │ نشوة الطرب n. aṭ-ṭarab
rapture, elation, exultation, enthusiasm,
ecstasy
نشا našan scent, perfume; starch,
cornstarch
نشاء našā’ starch, cornstarch
نشوي našawī starchy; pl. نشويات starchy
foodstuffs
نشوان našawān2, f. نشوى našwā, pl. نشاوى
našāwā intoxicated, drunk; enraptured,
elated, exultant, flushed
انتشاء intišā’ intoxication 967
نص naṣṣa u (naṣṣ) to fix, lay down, appoint,
stipulate ( على s.th.), provide ( على for),
specify, determine ( على or عن s.th.), define
على) s.th.); to fix or determine the text ( ھof
s.th.), draw up, compose ( ھ a letter); to
arrange, stack, pile up in layers ( ھ s.th.);
to set up, line up ( ھ s.th.)
نص pl. نصوص text; wording, version;
passage, word, phrase, sentence, clause;
expression, manner of expression,
language, phraseology, style; provision,
term, stipulation, condition; arrangement;
manifestation, evidence │ بنصه verbatim,
بنصه وفصه bi-n. wa-faṣṣihī in the very
words, ipsissimis verbis, literally,
precicely; نصا وروحا naṣṣan wa-rūḥan in
letter and spirit
نصة nuṣṣa pl. نصص nuṣaṣ, forelock
منصة minṣa pl. -āt, مناص manāṣṣ2 raised
platform, dais, tribune, podium; bridal
throne; easel │ منصة الحكم m. al-ḥukm
position of power; منصة الخطابة rostrum
تنصيص tanṣīṣ quotation │ علامات
التنصيص ‘alāmāt at-t. quotation marks
منصوص عليه manṣūṣ ‘alaihi fixed,
appointed, stipulated, provided for,
specified; determined; laid down in
writing
نصب naṣaba u (naṣb) to raise, rear,
erect, set up, put up ( ھ s.th.); to prepare,
get ready, fit up ( ھ s.th.); to pitch ( ھ a
tent); to plant, raise ( ھ a standard, a
flagstaff), hoist ( ھ a flag); to plant ( ھ a
tree); O to level, aim ( ھ a cannon); to
appoint to an office, install in an official
position; to show, manifest, display ( ل
toward s.o., ھ evil, enmity); to direct, aim
ھ) s.th., e.g., criticism, على against or at
s.o.); (eg.) to cheat, swindle, dupe, gull,
deceive ( على s.o.); (gram.) to pronounce (a
final consonant) with the vowel a; to put
(a noun) in the accusative, put (a verb) in
the subjunctive │ نصب له الحرب (ḥarba) to
declare war on s.o.; نصب له شركا (šarakan)
or نصب له فخا (fakkan) to set a trap for s.o.;
نصب له كمينا (kamīnan) to prepare an
ambush for s.o.; نصب مكيدة (makīdatan) to
devise a clever plan, hatch a plot; --
naṣaba u (naṣb) to distress, trouble,
fatigue, wear out, exhaust (disease or
sorrow; ه s.o.); to jade ( ه s.o.) │ نصبوا انفسھم
ل (anfusahum) they made every effort in
order to ..., they struggled hard to ...; --
naṣiba a (naṣab) to be tired, fatigued,
jaded, worn out, exhausted; to exert o.s. to
the utmost ( في in) II to set up, set upright,
rear, raise, lift up ( ھ s.th.); to install ( ه ه
s.o. as), appoint ( ه ه s.o. to an office) │ نص
ب اذنيه (udnaihi) to prick up one’s ears III
to be hostile ( ه to s.o.), fight, combat,
oppose ( ه s.o.), display enmity │ ناصبه
الحرب (ḥarba) to declare war on s.o.; ناصبه
الشر (šarra) to show o.s. openly hostile to
s.o., open hostilities against s.o.; ناصب
العداء (‘adā’a) to declare o.s. the enemy of
s.o. IV to tire, fatigue, wear out, exhaust ( ه
s.o.); to fix a share or allotment ( ه for s.o.)
VIII to rise up, straighten up, draw o.s. up;
to plant o.s.; to rise; to get up, stand up,
get on one’s feet; to stand upright, be in a
vertical position; to be set up, be raised; to
be appointed ( ل to an office), hold an
office ( ل); (gram.) to be pronounced with
a (final consonant), be in naṣb (accusative
or subjunctive) │ انتصب للحكم (li-l-ḥukm) to
sit in judgment
نصب setting up, putting up, placing;
erection; planting, raising (e.g., of a
flagstaff); appointment, installation,
investiture; pronunciation of a final
consonant with a; the putting a noun in the
accusative, or a verb in the subjunctive
(gram.); disease, illness; (eg.) swindle,
trickery, skulduggery, deception, fraud
نصب naṣb pl. انصاب anṣāb s.th. planted
in the ground, set up, or erected; plants
(coll.) 968
نصب nuṣb, nuṣub pl. انصاب anṣāb
statue; idol, graven image; monument │
نصب تذكاري (tadkārī) monument, cenotaph
نصب nuṣba (prep.) in front of, opposite,
facing │ نصب عيني (‘ainayya) before my
eyes; جعل (وضع) ھ نصب عينيه (‘ainaihi) to
direct one’s attention to ..., have ... in view
نصب naṣab exertion, strain, hardship,
fatigue; (pl. انصاب anṣāb) flag planted in
the ground
نصبة naṣba pl. -āt plant
نصبة nuṣba post; pale, stake, pier,
buttress, pillar; signpost, guidepost
نصاب niṣāb origin, beginning; (Isl.
Law) minimum amount of property liable
to payment of the zakāh tax; minimum
number or amount; quorum; (pl. -āt, نصب
nuṣub) sword hilt, knife handle, saber
guard │ في نصابه in its proper place, in
good order, perfectly all right; استقرت الأمور
في نصابھا (istaqarrat) things were
straightened out, returned to normal; وضع
الحق في نصابه (ḥaqqa) to restore justice; رد
اعاد، وضع) امرا الى نصابه ) (radda, a‘āda
amran) to straighten s.th. out, set a matter
right; عاد الھدوء الى نصابه (hudū’u) peace has
been restored; اتماما للنصاب (itmāman) so as
to complete the number, in order to round
off the amount
نصاب naṣṣāb fraud, cheat, sharper,
swindler, impostor; deceitful, fraudulent
نصيب naṣīb pl. نصب nuṣub, انصباء
anṣibā’ انصبة , 2 anṣiba share, participation
في) in); share of profits, dividend; luck,
chance; fate, lot │ كان من نصيبه to fall to
s.o.’s share or lot; كان من نصيبه ان to be so
fortunate as to ..., have the good fortune to
كان نصيبه من ذلك الإخفاق ;... (ikfāqu) to have
bad luck in s.th., draw a blank; ھو على
نصيب وافر من (wāfirin) to have an ample
share in ...
يا نصيب yā-naṣīb lottery
منصب manṣib pl. مناصب manāṣib2 place
where s.th. is planted, set up, or erected;
office, dignity, rank, position, poet │ ارباب
الممناصب or اصحاب المناصب high dignitaries
منصب minṣab pl. مناصب manāṣib2
kitchen range, cookstove
تنصيب tanṣīb appointment, nomination;
installation, induction (in an official
position)
انتصاب intiṣāb raising, rearing, righting;
setting up, putting up; erection
ناصب nāṣib tiring, wearisome,
exhausting; -- (pl. نواصب nawāṣib2) word
governing the subjunctive (gram.)
منصوب manṣūb erected; set-up, raised;
planted in the ground; fixed, fastened,
attached; installed in office; leveled,
aimed (cannon; على at); (pl. -āt) word in
the accusative or subjunctive
منتصب muntaṣib set upright, set-up,
raised, planted in the ground; erected;
upright, erect, straight, vertical,
perpendicular
نصت naṣata i (naṣt) and IV to listen, hearken,
give ear ( الى or ل to s.o., ل to s.th.) V to try
to hear; to eavesdrop, listen secretly
منتصت mutanaṣṣit eavesdropper
نصح naṣaḥa a (naṣḥ, nuṣḥ, نصاحة naṣāḥa,
نصيحة naṣīḥa) to give ( ه، ل s.o.) sincere
advice, advise, counsel ( ه، ل s.o., ب to do
s.th.), admonish. exhort; -- a (naṣḥ, نصوح
nuṣūḥ) to be sincere; to mean well ( ل with
s.o.), wish s.o. ( ل) well, be well-disposed,
show good will ( ل toward s.o.); to act in
good faith ( ل toward s.o.) III to give ( ه
s.o.) sincere advice; to be sincere in one’s
intentions ( ه toward s.o.) VI to be loyal
and sincere toward each other VIII to take
good advice, follow an advice X to 969
ask ( ه s.o.) for advice, be advised ( ه by
s.o.), consult ( ه s.o.)
نصح naṣḥ, nuṣḥ good advice;
counseling, counsel; guidance
نصيح naṣīḥ sincere; faithful adviser
نصيحة naṣīḥa pl. نصائح naṣā’iḥ2 sincere
advice; friendly admonition, friendly
reminder │ بذل النصيحة to give a word of
advice
نصوح naṣūḥ sincere, true, faithful, loyal
استنصاح istinṣāḥ consultation
ناصح nāṣiḥ pl. نصاح nuṣṣāḥ, نصح
nuṣṣah sincere; good counselor, sincere
adviser
نصر naṣara u (naṣr, نصور nuṣūr) to help, aid,
assist ( على ه s.o. against); to render
victorious, let triumph ( على ه s.o. over; of
God); to deliver ( من ه s.o. from), keep,
protect, save II to Christianize, convert to
Christianity ( ه s.o.) III to help, aid, assist,
support, defend, protect ( ه s.o.) V to try to
help, seek to support ( ل s.o.), stand up for
s.o. ( ل); to become a Christian VI to
render mutual assistance, help each other
VIII to come to s.o.’s ( ل) aid, be on s.o.’s (
ل) side, side with s.o. ( ل); to be victorious;
to gain a victory, to triumph ( على over); to
take revenge ( من on) X to ask ( ه s.o.) for
assistance
نصر naṣr help, aid, assistance, support,
backing; victory; triumph
نصرة nuṣra help, aid, assistance,
support, backing
نصراني naṣrānī pl. نصارى naṣārā
Christian
نصرانية naṣrānīya Christianity
نصير naṣīr pl. نصراء nuṣarā’2 helper;
supporter, defender, protector; ally,
canfederate; adherent, follower, partisan;
furtherer, promoter, patron
النصيرية an-nuṣairīya the Ansarie, a
gnostic sect in Syria
ناصور naṣūr pl. نواصير nawāṣīr2 fistula
منصر manṣar pl. مناصر manāṣir2 (eg.)
band of robbers
تنصير tanṣīr Christianization; baptism
مناصرة munāṣara assistance, help, aid,
support, backing, furtherance, promotion,
patronage
انتصار intiṣār (pl. -āt) victory, triumph;
revenge
ناصر nāṣir pl. -ūn, انصار anṣār, نصار
nuṣṣār helper; protector; granting victory
│ اخذ بناصره to help s.o.
انصار anṣār (pl.) adherents, followers,
partisans, sponsors, patrons, friends;
الأنصار the Medinan followers of
Mohammed who granted him refuge after
the Hegira
الناصرة an-nāṣira Nazareth
ناصري nāṣirī of Nazareth; Nazarene
منصور manṣūr supported, aided (by
God); victorious, triumphant; victor;
المنصورة El Mansûra (city in N Egypt)
مناصر munāṣir helper, supporter,
defender, protector
منتصر muntaṣir victorious, triumphant
نصع naṣa‘a a ( نصوع nuṣū‘) to be clear, pure; to
be plain, evident, obvious, manifest,
patent; to recognize ( ب s.th., esp., a claim
or title) IV to recognize. acknowledge ( ب
s.th.)
نصوع nuṣū‘ whiteness; brightness (of a
color)
نصيع naṣī‘ pure, clear; plain, evident,
obvious, ostensible, manifest, patent
نصاعة naṣā‘a purity; clearness, clarity
(also. e.g., of argumentation, of
expression) 970
ناصع nāṣi‘ pure, clear; plain, evident,
obvious, ostensible, manifest, patent;
white │ ناصع البياض n. al-bayāḍ
snowwhite; حق ناصع (ḥaqq) plain truth; لھم
جباه ناصعة approx.: they have a clean slate,
their skirts are clean
نصف naṣafa u i (naṣf) to reach its midst (day),
become noon II to divide in the middle,
bisect, halve ( ھ s.th.) III to share ( ه with
s.o.) half of s.th. ( ھ ), go halves ( ھ ه with
s.o. in), share equally ( ھ ه with s.o. s.th.)
IV to be just; to treat with justice ( ه s.o.),
be just ( ه with s.o.); to see that justice is
done ( ه to s.o.), see that s.o. ( ه) gets his
right; to treat without discrimination ( ه
s.o.); to establish s.o.’s ( ه) right ( من in the
face of a rival or oppressor); to serve ( ه
s.o.) V to submit, subordinate o.s. ( ه to
s.o.), serve ( ه s.o.); to demand justice VIII
to reach its midst, be in the middle, be
midway, be half over (day, night, month,
lifetime); to appeal for justice ( من to),
demand justice ( من from); to do justice ( ل
to s.o.); to take vengeance, revenge o.s. (
من on) X to demand justice
نصف niṣf, pl. انصاف anṣāf half, moiety;
middle │ نصف الدائرة semicircle; نصف
شھري šahrī semimonthly; انصاف العذارى a.
al-‘adārā demi-vierges; نصف القرد n. alqird
lemur; نصف القطر n. al-quṭr radius;
نصف الليل n. al-lail midnight; نصف النھار n.
an-nahār midday, noon; القسط نصف السنوي
al-qisṭ niṣf as-sanawī the semiannual
installment
نصف niṣf (uninfl.) medium, middling;
of medium size or quality; middle-aged
نصفي niṣfī half-, semi-, hemi-, demi- │
تمثال نصفي (timtāl) bust; شلل نصفي (šalal)
hemiplegia; عمى نصفي (‘aman) hemianopia
نصف naṣaf and نصفة naṣafa justice
نصيف naṣīf veil
تنصيف tanṣīf halving, bisection
مناصفة munāṣafatan half of it (of them),
by halves, half and half, by equal shares,
fifty-fifty
انصاف inṣāf justice, equity, fairness;
just treatment
ناصف nāṣif pl. نصاف nuṣṣāf, نصف naṣaf,
نصفة naṣafa servant
منصف munaṣṣif halving, bisecting,
dividing into two equal parts
منصف munṣif a righteous, just man;
equitable, fair, just
منتصف muntaṣaf middle │ في منتصف
الطريق halfway, midway; منتصف الساعة
العاشرة ٩:٣٠ , half past nine; منتصف الليل m.
al-lail midnight; منتصف النھار m. an-nahār
midday, noon
نصل naṣala a u ( نصول nuṣūl) to fall out, fall
off, fall to the ground, drop; to fade
(color); to get rid ( من of), free o.s. ( من
from) V to free o.s. ( من from), rid o.s. ( من
of); to renounce, disavow, shirk ( من s.th.),
withdraw ( من from); to wash one’s hands
of s.th. ( من ), vindicate o.s. clear o.s.,
justify o.s. │ تنصل من التبعة (tabi‘a) or تنصل
من المسؤولية (mas’ūlīya) to refuse to take
the responsibility, evade or shirk the
responsibility
نصل naṣl (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. نصال niṣāl,
انصل anṣul, نصول nuṣūl arrowhead,
spearhead; blade or a knife or sword; O
spread or surface of a leaf (bot.)
ناصل nāṣil falling, dropping; faded
نصمة naṣama icon, idol, graven image
ناصية nāṣiya pl. نواص nawāṣin forelock; fore
part of the head; (street) corner │ اخذ
بناصيته to seize, take by the forelock, tackle
properly ( ھ s.th.); ملك ناصيته to be or
become muter of s.th., have or get s.th,
under control. muter or control s.th.; امتلك
نواصيه (imtalaka) do.; كل الآمال معقودة بناصيته
all hopes are pinned on him; حجر الناصية
ḥajar an-n. cornerstone, quoin 971
نض naḍḍa i (naḍḍ, نضيض naḍīḍ) to ripple,
drip, percolate, ooze, leak, dribble, trickle
II to move, shake ( ھ s.th.)
نض naḍḍ cash, hard money, specie,
coin; نضا naḍḍsn in (hard) cash
مال ناض māl nāḍḍ cash, hard money,
specie, coin
نضب naḍaba u ( نضوب nuḍūb) to seep away in
the ground, be absorbed by the ground; to
dry up, run dry, peter out; to be exhausted,
be depleted, become less, diminish,
decrease; to dwindle, decline; to die │ لا
ينضب inexhaustible, incessant IV to
exhaust, drain, deplete, dry up ( ھ s.th.)
ناضب nāḍib pl. نضب nuḍḍab dried up,
dry; arid, barren, sterile
نضج naḍija a (naḍj) to be or become ripe,
ripen, mature (also fig., of an affair, of a
personality, or the like); to be wellcooked,
be or become well done (meat); to
maturate (tumor) IV to bring to ripeness
or maturity, make ripe, ripen ( ھ s.th.); to
let ( ھ s.th.) ripen; to cook well, do well ( ھ
s.th.)
نضج naḍj, nuḍj ripeness, maturity
نضوج nuḍūj ripeness, maturity
نضيج naḍīj ripe, mature; well-cooked,
well done (food)
ناضح nāḍij ripe, mature; well-cooked,
well done (food)
نضح naḍaḥa i (naḍḥ) to wet, moisten, sprinkle,
spray, splash ( ب ه s.th. with); to water ( ھ
plants); to slake, quench ( ھ thirst); to
defend, protect ( عن s.th.); to justify,
vindicate ( عن s.th.), answer ( عن for); -- a
(naḍḥ) to exude or ooze a fluid ( ب); to
sweat, perspire; to leak; to flow over ( ب
with); to shed, spill ( ھ s.th.); to effuse ( ھ
s.th.)
O نضاحة naḍḍāḥa sprinkler
منضح minḍaḥa shower, douche
منضحة minḍaḥa pl. مناضح manāḍiḥ2
watering can; shower, douche
نضد naḍada i (naḍd) to pile up, stack,
tier, arrange in layers ( ھ s.th.); to put in
order, array, arrange ( ھ s.th.) II do.; to
compose, set ( ھ s.th.; typ.)
نضد naḍad pl. انضاد anḍād, bedstead;
pile, stack, rows, tiers (e.g., of sacks)
نضد nuḍud tables
نضيد naḍīd arranged one above the
other, tiered, in rows, in layers; orderly,
tidy, regular
نضيدة naḍīda pl. نضائد naḍā’id2 cushion,
pillow, mattress
منضدة minḍada pl. -āt, مناضد manāḍid2
table; worktable, desk; bedstead;
framework, rack, stand
تنضيد tanḍīd typesetting, composition
(typ.)
منضد munaḍḍid pl. -ūn typesetter,
compositor (typ.)
منضح munaḍḍad forming a regular
string, regularly set (esp., of teeth)
نضر naḍara u, naḍira a and naḍura u ( نضرة
naḍra, نضور nuḍūr, نضارة naḍara) to be
flourishing, blooming, verdant, fresh,
beautiful; to be bright, brilliant, luminous,
radiant II to make ( ھ s.th.) shine; to make
ھ) s.th.) bloom V to be verdant, blooming,
in blossom
نضر naḍir flourishing, blooming,
verdant, fresh, radiant, glowing
نضرة naḍra bloom, dower, freshness;
glamour, splendor; beauty; health, vigor;
opulence, wealth
نضار nuḍār (pure) gold
نضارة naḍāra bloom, dower, freshness;
youthfulness; gracefulness, grace; health,
vigor 972
نضير naḍīr flourishing, blooming,
verdant, fresh, radiant, glowing; gold
ناضر nāḍir flourishing, blooming,
verdant, fresh, radiant, glowing, beautiful
نضف naḍaf wild marjoram
نضف naḍif dirty, unclean
نضيف naḍīf dirty, unclean
نضل naḍala u (naḍl) to surpass, beat, defeat ( ه
s.o.) III to try to surpass ( ه s.o.), vie,
compete, contend, dispute ( هwith s.o.); to
defend ( عن .o.)s stand up for s.o. ( عن ) VI to
vie with one another
نضال niḍāl struggle, strife, dispute,
controversy, fight, battle; contest,
competition: defense, defensive battle
نضالي niḍālī combative, pugnacious
مناضلة munāḍala struggle, strife,
dispute, controversy, fight, battle; contest,
competition; defense, defensive battle
مناضل munāḍil fighters combatant,
defender
نضناض naḍnāḍ hissing viciously, flicking its
tongue menacingly (snake)
نضا (نضو ) naḍā u (naḍw) to take off ( ھ a
garment, one’s clothes); to undress ( عن
s.o.), نضا عن نفسه to get undressed; (naḍw,
nuḍūw) to dwindles wane, decline; to fade
(esp., color) II to take off ( ھ a garment),
strip ( عن s.o.) of a garment ( ھ ) IV to
exhaust, jades make lean ( ھ a riding
animal); to wear out, wear thin ( ه s.th.)
VIII to unsheathe (s a sword)
نضو naḍw pl. انضاء anḍā’ a worn,
tattered garment
نضو niḍw pl. انضاء anḍā’ lean
نط naṭṭa u (naṭṭ) to spring, jumps leap; to skip,
hop
نط naṭṭ jumping, jump │ نط الحبل n. al-
ḥabl skipping the rope (children’s game);
نط طولي ṭūlī) broad jump
نطة naṭṭa (n. vic.) jump, leap
نطاط naṭṭāṭ jumper; a variety of
grasshopper; restless, ftighty, lightheaded
نطح naṭaḥa a (naṭḥ) to push, thrust
(with the head or horns), butt III to bump (
ھ on or against s.th.), ram ( ھ s.th.); to
touch ( ه s.th.) VI and VIII to thrust or butt
one another; to struggle (with one another)
نطح naṭḥ push(ing), thrust(ing), butting;
el Nath, a star in the horn of Aries, α
Arietis (astron)
نطحة naṭḥa (n. vic.) push, thrust, butt
نطاح naṭṭāḥ given to butting, a butter
نطيح naṭīḥ butted
مناطحة munāṭaḥa bullfight
ناطح nāṭiḥ: ناطحة السحاب n. as-saḥāb pl.
نواطح السحاب nawāṭiḥ as-s. skyscraper
نطر naṭara u (naṭr, نطارة niṭāra) to
watch, guard ( ھ s.th.)
نطر naṭr watch, guard, protection
نطارة niṭāra watch, guard, protection
نطار nuṭṭār scarecrow
ناطر nāṭir pl. نطار nuṭṭār, نطراء nuṭarā’2,
نطرة naṭara, نواطر nawāṭir2 guard, keeper,
warden (esp., of plantations and
vineyards), rural warden; lookout in a
ship’s crow’s-nest
ناطور nāṭūr pl. نواطير nawāṭīr2 guard,
keeper, warden (esp., of plantations and
vineyards), rural warden; lookout in a
ship’s crow’s-nest
ناطورة nāṭūra (syr.) (woman) chaperon
نطرون naṭrūn natron, esp., the native product
of Egypt which is extracted from the salt
lakes of Wādī Naṭrūn northwest of Cairo
نطس V to examine thoroughly, investigate
carefully, scrutinize ( عن s.th.); to possess
or employ much skill, be proficient ( ب in
s.th.) 973
نطس naṭs, naṭus well-informed,
knowledgeable, experienced, seasoned,
skilled
نطاسي naṭāsī, niṭāsī well-informed,
knowledgeable, experienced, seasoned,
skilled; (pl. نطس nuṭus) a skilled,
experienced physician
نطع pass. nuṭi’a to change colors, turn pale V
to be pigheaded, obstinate
نطع naṭ’, niṭ’ pl. انطاع anṭā’, نطوع nuṭū’
leather mat used as a tablecloth and
gaming boards in former times also during
executions
نطع niṭ’, niṭa’ pl. نطوع nuṭū’ hard palate
الحروف الناطعة al-ḥurūf an-nāṭi’a the
sounds ت، د and ط (phon.)
نطف naṭafa u i (naṭf, تنطاف tanṭāf, نطفان
naṭafān, نطافة niṭāfa) to dribble, trickle
نطفة nuṭfa pl. نطف nuṭaf drop; sperm
نطق naṭaqa u (nuṭq, نطوق nuṭūq, منطق manṭiq)
to articulate; to talk, speak, utter ( ب s.th.);
to pronounce ( ب s.th.) │ نطق بكلمة (bikalima)
to lay a word II to make ( ه s.o.)
speak or pronounce; to gird, girdle ( ه s.o.)
IV to make ( ھ s.o.) speak or talk V to gird
o.s.; to be surrounded X to question ( ھ
s.o.); to interrogate, examine, crossexamine
( ھ s.o.)
نطق nuṭq articulated speech;
pronunciation; word, saying, utterance;
order, ordinances decree │ صدر النطق
السامي ب it was decreed by order of His
Majesty that ...; نطق بالحكم (ḥukm)
pronouncement of sentence; فاقد النطق
dumfounded, speechless
نطقي nuṭqī phonetic(al)
نطا r niṭāq pl. نطق nuṭuq girths girdle,
belt; O garrison belt; circle, ring,
enclosure; limit, boundary; range, extent,
scope, compass, sphere, domain, purview;
cordon │ نطاق الجوزاء n. al-jauzā’ Orion’s
Belt (astron.); نطاق الحصار blockade ring;
واسع النطاق comprehensive; extensive, farreaching;
large-scale
منطق manṭiq (faculty of) speech;
manner of speaking, diction, enunciation;
eloquence; logic │ ليس من المنطق ان it is
illogical to …; علم المنطق ‘ilm al-m. logic
منطقي manṭiqī logical; dialectic(al); --
(pl. مناطقة manāṭiqa) logician; dialectician
منطق minṭaq pl. مناطق manāṭiq2 belt,
girdle
منطقة minṭaqa pl. مناطق manāṭiq 2 belt,
girdle; zone; vicinity, range, sphere,
district, area, territory; O (mil.) sector │ O
منطقة الاحتلال occupied territory; المنطقة الحارة
(ḥārra) the Torrid Zones the tropics; O
منطقة البترول oil area, oil fields; منطقة البروج
the zodiac (astron.); منطقة الجوزاء m. aljauzā’
Orion’s Belt (astron.); O منطقة حرام
(ḥarām) or منطقة ممنوعة prohibited area;
منطقة الحرب m. al-ḥarb war zone; O منطقة
حرة (ḥurra) free zone; O منطقة صماء
(ṣammā’) dead zone (of radio waves);
منطقة صناعية (ṣinā’īya) industrial area; O
منطقة الضرب m. aḍ-ḍarb field of fire; O
منطقة كروية (kurawīya) spherical zone;
المنطقتان المعتدلتان (mu’tadilatān) the two
Temperate Zones; O منطقة مجردة من
التجھيزات الحربية (mujarrada, ḥarbīya)
demilitarized zone; منطقة النفوذ sphere of
influence
منطقي minṭaqī zonal
منطيق minṭīq very eloquent
استنطاق istinṭāq examination,
interrogation, hearing; questioning
ناطق nāṭiq talking, speaking; endowed
with the faculty of speech; eloquent; plain,
distinct, clear; endowed with reason,
reasonable, rational (being); speaker (also,
e.g., in parliament); spokesman │ الناطقون
بالضاد the Arabic-speaking portion of
mankind (lit.: those who pronounce the
ḍād) حيوان ناطق (ḥayawān 974 nāṭiq)
rational being; دليل ناطق conclusive
evidence; شريط ناطق sound film; جريدة ناطقة
newsreel
منطوق manṭūq pronounced, uttered,
expressed; wording; text; statement;
formulation │ بالمنطوق according to the
text; expressly, explicitly, unequivocally;
منطوق الحكم m. al-ḥukm dispositive portion
of the judgment (jur.); منطوق العقد m.
al-’aqd the exact terms of the contract;
منطوق القانون text of the law, legal text;
منطوق الكلمة m. al-kalima literal meaning of
a word
مستنطق mustanṭiq examining magistrate
نطل naṭala u (naṭl) to squeeze out; to apply
warm compresses ( ھ to), foment, bathe
with warm water or medicated liquid ( ھ
s.th.)
نطول naṭūl warm compress;
fomentation, lavation or hath in a
medicated liquid
نطنط naṭnaṭa to hop up and down, skip
نظر naẓara u (naẓar, منظر manẓar) to perceive
with the eyes, see, view, eye, regard ( ھ، ه
or الى s.o., s.th.), look, gaze, glance ( ھ، ه or
الى at), watch, observe, notice ( ھ، ه or الى
s.o., s.th.), pay attention ( ھ، ه or الى to); to
expect ( ھ s.th.); to envisages consider,
contemplates purpose ( ھ or في s.th.); to
have in mind, have in view ( الى s.th.), put
one’s mind, direct one’s attention ( الى to
s.th.); to take up, try, hear ( في a case;
court), look into a case ( في ), examine ( ھ or
في a case); to judge, rule, decide ( بين
between two litigant parties); to take care
ل) of s.o.), help ( ل s.o.), stand by s.o. ( ,(ل
look after s.o. ( نظر اليه شزرا │ ( ل (šazran)
to give s.o. a sidelong glances look
askance at s.o.; (نظر القضية (في القضية
(qaḍīya) to try a case (jurs); نظر في طلب
فلان (ṭalabī f.) to process s.o.’s application,
take care of s.o.’s application; نظر من فرجة
المفتاح (فوھة المفتاح ) (furjat l-miftāḥ, fūhati lm.)
to peep through the keyhole; انظر بعده
unẓur ba’dahū see below! انظر ظھره
(ẓahrahū) see reverse! please turn over! II
to make comparisons, draw parallels ( بين
between) III to equal ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), be
equal ( ھ، ه to s.o., to s.th.); to equalize, put
on an equal footing ( ب ھ، ه s.o., s.th.
with), equate, liken, compare ( ب ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th. to); to vie, compete, be in
competition (s with s.o.), rival ( ه s.o.); to
argue, debate, dispute ( ه with s.o.), point
out ( ب ه to s.o. s.th.) by way of argument
or objection, confront ( ب ه s.o. with); to
superintend, supervise ( ھ s.th.) IV to grant
ه) s.o.) a delay or respite V to regard,
watch or observe attentively ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), look closely ( ھ، ه at s.o., at s.th.),
scrutinize ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to bide one’s
time, wait VI to face each other, lie
opposite; to he symmetrical (math.); to
dispute, argue (with one another); to
quarrel ( على about), fight ( على over s.th.);
to contend (with each other) ( على for s.th.),
contest each other’s right ( على to s.th.)
VIII to wait ( ه for s.o.), expect ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), await, anticipate ( ھ s.th.); to look
closely ( ه at s.o.); to look on expectantly,
bide one’s time,
wait │ انتظر الشيء الكبير من to expect
much of …; انتظر من ورائه كل خير (wara’ihi
kulla kairin) to set the greatest
expectations in s.th. X to wait, await,
expect; to have patience, be patient; to
request a delay or respite; to ask ( ه s.o.) to
wait, keep ( ه s.o.) waiting
نظر naẓar pl. انظار anẓār seeing,
eyesight, vision; look, glance, gaze; sight;
outlook, prospect; view; aspect;
appearance, evidence; insight,
discernment, penetration; perception;
contemplation; examination ( في of);
inspection, study, perusal; consideration,
reflection; philosophical speculation;
theory; handling ( في of a 975 matter); trial,
hearing ( في of a case in court);
supervision, control, surveillance;
competence, jurisdiction; attention, heed,
regard, notice, observance, respect,
consideration, care │ ( ل or) نظر in view
of, with a view to, in regard to, with
respect to, in consideration of, on the basis
of, due to, because of, for; بالنظر ل do.;
بصرف النظر عن (bi-ṣarfi n-n.) or بقطع النظر
عن (bi-qaṭ‘i n-n.) regardless of,
irrespective of; تحت النظر under
considerations being studied, being dealt
with; دون النظر الى irrespective of,
regardless of; في نظري in my eyes, in my
opinion; للنظر فى for the study of, for
consideration, for further examination of,
for handling …, for action on …; O النظر
الى الحياة (ḥayāh) weltanschauung; اعادة النظر
i‘ādat an-n. re-examination,
reconsideration, resumption, retrial,
revision; اھل النظر ahl an-n. speculative
thinkers; theoreticians, theorists; بعيد النظر
or طويل النظر farsighted; قصر النظر qiṣar
an-n. shortsightedness; قصير النظر
shortsighted; المحكمة ذات النظر (maḥkama)
the court of competent jurisdiction; مسألة
فيھا نظر (mas’ala) an unsettled, open
question, an unsolved problem; من له نظر
(man) s.o. noteworthy, a distinguished
man; the responsibles or authorized,
person; اخذ بالنظر to catch the eye; ادار نظره
في (adāra) to let one’s eyes roam over …;
تابع (راجع) بالنظر ل falling to the
responsibility of, under the jurisdiction of,
subject to the authority of; سارق النظر اليه or
سارقه النظر or استرق النظر اليه (naẓara) to
glance furtively at s.o., give s.o. a
surreptitious look; في ھذا الأمر نظر this
matter calls for careful study, will have to
be considered; قطع النظر عن to take no
account of, disregard s.th.; ھو تحت نظر فلان
he is under the protection of so-and-so, he
is patronized by so-and-so
نظر similar, like; equal │ عديم النظر
unparalleled, unequaled, matchless,
unique of his (its) kind
نظرة naẓra pl. naẓarāt looks glance;
sights view; viewings contemplation ( الى
of s.th.); pl. نظرات (philosophical)
reflections
نظرة naẓira delay, postponements
deferment (of an obligation)
نظري naẓarī optic(al); visual;
theoretic(al); speculative
نظرية naẓarīya theory; theorem;
reflection, meditation, contemplation
نظير naẓīr pl. نظراء nuẓarā’2, f. pl. نظائر
naẓā’r2 similar, like, same, equal,
matching, corresponding, comparable; an
equivalent; facings opposites parallel;
(with foll. genit.) in the manner of. in the
same manner as, just like, just as;
transcript, copy │ نظير naẓīra (prep.) as a
compensation for, in consideration of, in
return for, in exchange for, for, on, e.g.,
نظير دفع خمسين مليما (daf‘ k. malīman) on
paying 50 millièmes; نظراؤه people of his
kinds people like him; نظير السمت n. assamt
or النظير nadir (astr.); ( مقطوع (منقطع
النظير incomparable; ليس له نظير
unparalleled, unequaled, matchless,
unique of his (its) kind
نظيرة naẓīra head, foremost rank │ في
نظيرة (with foils genit.) at the head of
نظار naẓẓār keen-eyed; (pl. نظارة
naẓẓāra) spectator, onlooker
نظارة naẓẓāra pl. -āt field glass,
binocular; telescope, spyglass; (pair of)
eyeglasses, spectacles (occasionally also
pl. نظارات with singular meaning: a pair of
eyeglasses); (pair of) goggles │ نظارة فردية
(fardīya) or نظارة واحدة eyeglass, monocle;
O نظارة معظمة (mu’aẓẓima) magnifying
glass; نظارة الميدان n. al-maidān field glass
نظاراتي naẓẓārātī optometrist; optician
نظارة niẓāra supervision, control,
inspection, management, administration,
direction; ministry (now obsolete) 976
ناظور nāẓūr field glass
منظر manẓar pl. مناظر manāẓir2 sight;
view, panorama; look(s), appearance,
aspect; prospect, outlook, perspective; an
object soon or viewed, photographic
object; scene (of a play); spectacle; stage
setting, set, scenery; place commanding a
sweeping view; lookout, watchtower │
منظر عام (‘āmm) general view, panorama,
landscape, scenery; O مناظر خارجية
(kārijīya) shots on location (in motionpicture
making); مناظر طبيعية (ṭabī‘īya)
scenic views, scenery, landscapes
منظرة manẓara pl. مناظر manāẓir2 place
commanding a scenic view; view,
scenery, landscape, panorama;
watchtower, observatory; guestroom,
reception room, drawing room, parlor
O منظر minẓar (pair of) eyeglasses,
spectacles; telescope, spyglass
منظار minẓār pl. مناظير manāẓīr2
telescope, spyglass; magnifying glass;
mirror, speculum, -scope (e.g.,
laryngoscope) │ منظار معظم (mu‘aẓẓim)
magnifying glass; رقب بمنظار اسود (aswada)
to have a pessimistic outlook, look on the
dark side of everything
منا 􀀀 ظرة munāẓara emulation, rivalry,
competition; quarrel, argument.
altercation, debate, dispute, discussion,
controversy; supervision, control,
inspection
تناظر tanāẓur difference of opinion,
squabble, wrangle, altercation; symmetry
(math.)
انتظار intiẓār waiting, wait; expectation
│ على غير انتظار unexpectedly
ناظر nāẓir pl. نظار nuẓẓār observer,
viewer, spectator, onlooker; overseer,
supervisor; inspector; manager, director,
superintendent, administrator, principal,
chief, (cabinet) minister (now obsolete) │
ناظر الوقف n. al-waqf trustee of a wakf,
administrator of a religious endowment
ناظرة nāẓira administratress, directress,
manageress, headmistress, matron
ناظرة nāẓir and ناظرة nāẓira pl. نواظر
nawāẓir2 eye; look. glance │ بين ناظريه
(nāẓiraihi) before his eyes
منظور manẓūr seen; visible; foreseen,
anticipated, expected; supervised, under
supervision, controlled; envied, regarded
with the evil eye; under consideration
(case), pending (complaint, lawsuit; امام in
a court) │ منظور اليه one under supervision,
subordinate, underling, protégé, charge,
ward, pupil; غير منظور invisible;
unforeseen, unexpected; ادوات منظورة
(adawāt) visual training aids; دعوى منظورة
(da‘wā) pending lawsuit; الشخص المنظور في
أمره (šakṣ) person whose case is under
consideration
مناظر munāẓir similar, like, equal;
competitor, rival, adversary, opponent
(esp., in a discussion); interlocutor
نظف naẓufa u ( نظف naẓufa) to be clean,
cleanly, neat, tidy II to clean, cleanse,
polish ( ھ s.th.) V to clean o.s., become
clean
نظافة naẓāfa cleanness, cleanliness,
neatness, tidiness
نظيف naẓīf pl. نظفاء nuẓafā’ نظاف , 2 niẓāf
clean, neat, tidy; well-groomed, welltended
انظف anẓaf2 cleaner, neater
تنظيف tanẓīf pl. -āt cleaning, cleansing
│ تنظيف الأظفار manicure
نظلي naẓlī (eg.) delicate, feminine
نظم naẓama i (naẓm, نظام niẓām) and II to string
ھ) pearls); to put in order, to order ( ھ
s.th.); to array, arrange, classify, file ( ھ
s.th.); to adjust ( ھ s.th.); to set, regulate ( ھ
s.th.); to tune ( ھ an instrument); to layout,
get ready, prepare ( ھ s.th.); to set right,
rectify, correct ( ھ s.th.); to put together,
group, make up, 977 assemble ( ھ s.th.); to
organize ( ھ s.th.); to stage ( ھ s.th.); to
compose (one’s words) metrically,
poetize, versify, write poetry V and VI to
be strung; to be ordered, be in good order,
be well-arranged, be well-organized VIII
do.; to be classified; to affiliate ( في with);
to enter, join ( في an organization, a
corporation); to permeate, pervade ( ه s.o.,
ھ s.th.); to come over s.o. ( ه), seize, befall,
overcome ( ه s.o., ھ s.o.’s limbs, s.o.’s
body; of a sentiment, tremor, shudder,
etc.)
نظم naẓm order; arrangement; system;
institution, organization; string of pearls;
verse, poetry
نظام niẓām pl. -āt, نظم nuẓum, انظمة
anẓima proper arrangement, regularity;
conformity, congruity; methodical,
organic structure; organization; order;
method; system; rule, statute, law; system
of regulations │ على ھذا النظام along this
line, in this manner; نظام الأجانب alien
status; alien act; نظام الأحوال الشخصية
(šakṣīya) personal statute (jur.); نظام اساسي
(asāsī) (basic) constitutional law, statutes,
constitution; نظام اقتصادي (iqtiṣādī)
economic system; نظام البادية al-bādiya
agricultural system; نظام البوليس والإدارة n.
al-būlīs wa-l-idāra police and
administrative system; نظام جوازات السفر n.
jawāzāt as-safar passport system; نظام الحياة
n. al-ḥayāt (way of) life; النظام الرأسمالي
(ra’smālī) the capitalistic economic
system; النظام العام (‘āmm) public order; نظام
المرور traffic laws
نظامي niẓāmī orderly, regular, normal;
methodical, systematic; regular (army)
تنظيم tanẓīm arrangement; readjustment,
reorganization, reform; control,
regulation, adjustment; organization;
tactics; road construction (Eg.) │ تنظيم
المرور traffic control; اعادة التنظيم i‘ādat t-t.
reorganization
انتظام intiẓām order, regularity;
methodicalness, systematic arrangement │
بانتظام regularly, accurately; في انتظام
regular, fixed, ordered, methodical,
systematic, orderly, normal
ناظم nāẓim arranger; organizer, adjuster;
regulator; versifier, poet; (pl. نواظم
nawāẓim2) weir, barrage (Ir.)
منظوم manẓūm ordered, orderly, tidy;
metrical, poetical; poem; pl. -āt poetries,
poetical works
منظومة manẓūma treatise in verse,
didactic poem; row, rank
منظم munaẓẓim arranger, organizer;
promoter, sponsor
منظم munaẓẓam arranged, ordered, kept
in order, orderly, tidy; neat, welltended,
well-kept; systematically arranged,
systematized; regular │ جيش منظم (jaiš)
regular army; غير منظم irregular
منظم munaẓẓama pl. -āt organization │
منظمة التغذية والزراعة (m. at-tagdīya) Food
and Agriculture organization, F. A.O.
منتظم muntaẓim regular; even, uniform,
steady, orderly; methodical; systematic │
O موجات منتظمة (maujāt) uniform waves
(radio)
نعب na‘aba a i (na‘b, نعيب na‘īb) to croak, caw
(raven); -- a (na‘b) to speed along
نعاب nu‘āb croak(ing), caw (of a raven)
نعاب na‘‘āb croaking, cawing; ominous,
ill-boding
نعت na’ata a (na’t) to describe, characterize (
ھ، ه s.o. s.th.), qualify ( ھ s.th.)
نعت naft description, qualification,
characterization; -- (pl. نعوت nu’ūt)
quality, property, attribute, characteristic;
descriptive, qualifying word, qualifier;
attribute (gram.); epithet 978
نعتي na‘tī descriptive, qualifying,
qualificative
منعوت man‘ūt substantive accompanied
by as attribute
نعجة na‘ja pl. na‘ajāt, نعاج ni‘āj female sheep,
ewe
نعر na‘ara a i ( نعير na‘īr, نعار ni‘ār) to grunt; to
cry, scream, roar, bellow; to spurt, gush
forth (blood from a wound)
نعرة na‘ra Daile, din, clamor, roar
نعرة nu‘ara pl. -āt, نعر nu‘ar horsefly,
gadfly
نعرة na‘ara, nu‘ara pl. -āt haughtiness,
arrogance, pride │ نعرة اقليمية (iqlīmīya)
jingoism, chauvinism
نعار na‘‘ār noisy, uproarious,
vociferous, clamoring, shouting; agitator,
rabble rouser
نعير na‘īr noise, din, clamor, shouting;
bellowing, mooing, lowing (esp., of cattle)
نعارة na‘āra, na‘‘āra earthen jug
(sometimes with two handles), pot
ناعور nā‘ūr O hemophilia
ناعورة nā‘ūra pl. نواعر nawā‘ir2 noria,
Persian wheel
نعس na‘asa a u (na‘s) to be sleepy, drowsy; to
take a nap, to doze, slumber; to be dull,
listless, slack, stagnant (market, trade) II
and IV to make sleepy, put to sleep ( ه s.o.)
VI to pretend to be sleepy or asleep; to
doze, be sleepy, feel drowsy
نعسة na‘sa doze, nap, slumber
نعاس nu‘ās sleepiness, drowsiness;
lethargy
نعسان na‘sān2 sleepy, drowsy
ناعس nā‘is pl. نعس nu‘s sleepy, drowsy;
dozing, slumbering
نعش na‘aša a (na‘š), II and IV to raise, lift up;
to revive, reanimate; to refresh, invigorate,
animate, arouse, stimulate, enliven,
inspirit ( ه s.o.) VIII to rise from a fall; to
recover, recuperate from illness; to be
animated, be refreshed, be stimulated, be
invigorated, be strengthened, revive, come
to new life
نعش n‘š bier │ بنات نعش الصغرى banāt n.
a􀀀-ṣugrā Ursa Minor (astron.); بنات نعش
الكبرى b. n. al-kubrā Ursa Major (astron.)
نعشة na‘ša: نعشة الموت n. al-maut
euphoria; swan song, death song
انعاش in‘āš animation, reanimation,
resuscitation, restoration to life;
refreshment; reconstruction, restoration │
O انعاش اقتصادي (iqtiṣādī) economic boost
انتعاش inti‘āš resurgence, revival;
animation, invigoration, stimulation,
refreshment, recreation
منعش mun‘iš animating, refreshing,
invigorating, restorative
نعظ na‘aẓa a (na‘ẓ, na‘aẓ, نعوظ nu‘ūẓ) to be
erect (penis) IV to be sexually excited
ناعوظ nā‘ūẓ exciting sexual desire,
sexually stimulating, aphrodisiac
نعق na‘aq a i (na‘q, نعيق na‘īq) to croak, caw
(raven); to bleat (sheep); to cry, scream,
screech
ناعق nā‘iq: كل ناعق وناعر that is alive and
astir, everybody and his brother, every
Tom, Dick and Harry
نعل na‘ala a (na‘l), II and IV to furnish with
shoes ( ه s.o.), shoe ( ه s.o., ھ a horse); --
na‘ila a (na‘al) to be shod V = na‘ila VIII
to wear sandals; to wear shoes, be shod
نعل na‘l pl. نعال ni‘āl, انعل an‘ul sandal;
shoe; horseshoe
ناعل nā‘il shod; soled 979
نعم na‘ama u a and na‘ima a ( نعمة na‘ma, منعم
man‘am) to live in comfort, and luxury,
lead a life of ease, lead a comfortable and
carefree life; to be delighted ( ب by), be
happy, be glad ( ب about, at), be pleased (
ب with), delight, take pleasure ( ب in); to
enjoy, savor, taste, experience ( ب s.th.) │
نعم بالا ب (na‘ima bālan) to feel serene and
confident about ...; -- na‘ima a (na‘am) to
be green and tender (twig); to be or
become fine, powdery; -- na‘uma u ( نعومة
nu‘ūma) to be soft, tender, smooth II to
smooth, soften ( ھ s.th.); to pulverize,
powder ( ھ s.th.); to accustom to luxury ( ه
s.o.); to pamper, coddle, effeminate,
provide with a life of ease ( ه s.o.) IV to
make good, nice, comfortable, pleasant ( ھ
or ب s.th.); to give ( ب على s.o. s.th.),
bestow, confer ( ب على upon s.o. s.th.); to
bestow favors ( على upon s.o.), be
graciously disposed ( على toward s.o.); to
apply o.s., devote o.s. ( في to s.th.), take
great pains ( في with s.th.) │ انعم لله صباحك
(ṣabāḥaka) good morning! انعم النظر في
(naẓara) to look closely at, scrutinize s.th.,
regard s.th. attentively, pore over s.th.,
become engrossed in, ponder s.th. V to
live in luxury, lead a life of ease and
comfort; to enjoy ( ب s.th.)
نعم ni‘ma with foll. indeclinable noun
with article and nominative ending: what a
perfect ..., wonderful ...! truly, an
excellent ... │ نعم الرجل زيد n. r-rajulu
zaidun what an excellent man Zaid is! نعم
الشباب شبابھم n. š-šabābu šabābuhum what a
wonderful youth they have! انه نعم الخليل
innahū n. al-kalīlu he is a wonderful
friend indeed! فبھا ونعمت fa-bihā wa-ni‘mat
in that case it’s all right; نعم ما فعلت
(fa‘alta) well done!
نعم na‘am yes! yes indeed! certainly!
surely! (introducing a verbal clause:) to be
sure ... ; na’am’ (colloq.) I beg your
pardon? what did you say?
نعم na‘am pl. انعام an‘ām grazing
livestock (sheep, camels, cattle, goats)
نعمة na’ma life of ease, good living;
amenity, comfort; prosperity; happiness;
enjoyment, pleasure, delight
نعمة ni‘ma pl. نعم ni‘am, انعم an‘um, نعما
ت ni‘māt, ni‘imāt benefit, blessing, boon,
benefaction, favor, grace, kindness │ بنعمة
لله by the grace of God; واسع النعمة very
well off, wealthy, rich; النعم الثلاثة the Three
Graces; ولي نعمته (نعمه ) walīy ni‘matihī
(ni‘amihī) his benefactor
نعمى nu‘mā happiness
نعماء na‘mā’ favor, good will, grace │
في النعماء والبأساء (wa-l-ba’sā’) in good and
bad days
نعمان nu‘mān blood │ شقائق النعمان
anemone (bot.)
نعام na‘ām (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. نعائم
na‘ā’im2 ostrich (zool.)
نعيم na‘īm amenity, comfort, ease,
happiness, felicity; gentle, tranquil,
peaceful │ نعيم لله the grace of God, the
blessings of God
النعائم an-na‘ā’im name of several stars
in Sagitta (astron.)
نعومة nu‘ūma softness, smoothness,
tenderness, delicacy, fineness, finely
ground state, powdery consistency │ من
منذ) نعومة اظفاره ) from his earliest youth,
since his tender age
انعم an‘am2 sorter
منعام min‘ām munificent benefactor
مناعم manā‘im2 favors, blessings, boons;
amenities, comforts, pleasures, delights
تنعيم tan‘īm pampering, coddling,
effemination
انعام in‘ām act of kindness, favor,
benefaction; gift, donation, grant,
distinction, 980 bestowal, award │ انعام
النظر i. an-naẓar careful examination,
serious consideration
ناعم nā‘im soft; smooth; tender; fine,
powdery │ ناعم الظفر n. aẓ-ẓufr young,
youthful, tender; سكر ناعم (sukkar)
powdered sugar
منعم mun‘im donor, benefactor
نعنع na‘na‘ and نعناع na‘nā‘ mint (bot.);
peppermint
نعناعي na‘nā‘ī peppermint (adj.)
نعى na‘ā a (na‘y, na‘īy, نعيان na‘yān) to
announce the death ( ھ of s.o., الى to s.o.);
to hold s.th. ( ھ ) against s.o. ( ,(على
reproach, blame ( ھ على s.o. for); -- na‘ā i
to lament, wail; to deplore ( ھ s.th.)
نعي naīy one who announces s.o.’s
death; blame, reproach
نعية na‘ya pl. na‘ayāt news of s.o.’s
death, death notice
منعى man‘an and منعاة man‘āh pl. مناع
manā‘in news of s.o.’s death
نغبة nagba, nugba swallow, gulp, draught
نغبشة nagbaša noise
نغز nagaza a (nagz) to tickle ( ه s.o.); to prick ( ه
s.o., with a needle, or the like); to sow
dissension, stir up enmity ( بين between)
نغش nagaša a (nagš, نغشان nagašān) to be
agitated, be shaken III to play ( ه with s.o.),
tease ( ه s.o.), dally, flirt ( ه with s.o.) V = I
نغشة nagša pl. nagašāt motion; shaking
نغاش nugāš and نغاشي nugāšī very small;
midget, dwarf
نغاشة nagāša banter, raillery, teasing,
playfulness; elegance
نغص II and IV to disturb, ruffle, spoil ( على
s.o.’s ھ pleasure, joy, life, or the like),
make loathsome ( ھ على to s.o. s.th.) V to
be disturbed, be ruffled, be spoiled,
become loathsome
منغص munaggiṣ exciting
نغل nagila a (nagal) to fester, suppurate
(wound) │ نغل قلبه على (qalbuhū) to harbor
resentment against, hold a grudge against
نغل nagl, nagil illegitimate child;
bastard
نغيل nagīl illegitimate child; bastard
نغولة nugūla illegitimacy, bastardy
نغم nagama u i and nagima a (nagm, nagam)
to hum a tune; to ling II and V do.
نغم nagm and nagam pl. انغام angām
tune, air, melody; voice, part (mus., of a
contrapuntal composition); timbre, tone
color; sound, tone
نغمة nagima, nagama pl. nagamāt tone;
sound; musical note, tone (of the gamut;
mus.); inflection, intonation, melody;
song, chant
تناغم tanāgum symphonia, concord (of
sounds)
منغوم mangūm melodious (voice)
نغا (نغو ) nagā u (nagw) and نغى nagā i (nagy) to
speak ( الى to s.o.) III to whisper ( ه in s.o.’s
ear); to talk gently, kindly, tenderly ( ه to
s.o., esp., to a child); to flatter, court ( ه
s.o.); to twitter (bird); (eg.) to babble
(child)
نف naffa i to blow one’s nose; to snuff’
نفة naffa (tun.) pinch of snuff; snuff
نفاف naffāf snuffer
نفث nafata u i (naft) to spit, spit out,
expectorate, discharge, cough out ( ھ
s.th.); to squirt out ( ھ its venom; of a
snake); to exhale, puff out ( ھ the smoke;
of a smoker); to utter, voice ( ھ s.th.); to
exude and inspire ( في ھ with s.th. s.o.),
transfuse ( في ھ s.th. into s.o.) 981
نفث naft expectoration; saliva, spittle │
نفث الشيطان n. aš-šaiṭān erotic poetry
نفثة nafta pl. nafatāt expectoration;
saliva, spittle; pl. expectorated or ejected
matter, expectorations, discharge,
outpourings, emissions, effusions;
invectives, accusations │ نفثات الأقلام
literary productions
نفاثة nufāta saliva, spittle
نفاثة (طائرة ) naffāta jet plane
نفاثي naffātī jet- (in compounds) │ تسيير
نفاثي jet propulsion
نفاثة naffāta pl. -āt woman who spits on
the knots (in exercising a form of Arabian
witchcraft in which women tie knots in a
cord and spit upon them with an
imprecation; Kor. 113,4); sorceress
نفج nafaja u (nafj, نفجان nafajān, نفوج nufūj) to
spring up and take to flight (game); to
jump, leap, bound; to vaunt, brag, boast V
to brag, boast VIII = I
نفج nafj bragging, boasting
نفاج nafāj braggart, show-off; snob
نافجة nllftia pl. نوافج nawāfij2 musk bag;
container for musk
نفح nafaḥa a (nafḥ, نفحان nafaḥān, نفاح nufāḥ) to
spread, be diffused (fragrance), exhale a
pleasant smell, be fragrant; to blow
(wind); to make s.o. ( ه) a present of ( ,(ب
present ( ب ه s.o. with); to treat ( ھ ه s.o. to
s.th.) III to protect, defend ( عن s.th.)
نفحة nafḥa pl. nafaḥāt breeze, gust;
breath; diffusing odor; fragrance, perfume
scent; gift, present
منفحة manfaḥa rennet
نفخ nafaka u (nafk) to blow, puff; to
breathe; to blow up, inflate, fill with air ( ھ
or في s.th.); O to pump up, fill (a tire); O
to fill with gas (balloon); to blow ( ھ
tunes, في on an instrument); to breathe
s.th. ( ھ ) into s.o. ( في ). inspire ( ھ في s.o.
with); to inflate, puff up, elate, flush with
success, fill with pride ( ه s.o.) │ نفخ في البوق
(būq) to blow the trumpet; نفخ في روحه
(rūḥihī) to animate, inspirit s.o.; نفخ في
صورته (ṣūratihī) to bring s.th. into being,
give birth to s.th.; نفخ في زمارة روحه
(zammārati rūḥihī) to rouse s.o.’s temper;
نفخ الشمعة (šam‘a) to blowout a candle; نفخ
شدقيه (šidqaihi) to be puffed up, become
inflated VIII to be blown up, inflated,
filled with air; to swell; to puff up,
become inflated │ انتفخ سحره (saḥrahū) and
انتفخت مساحره (masāḥiruhū) his lungs
became inflated (out of fear or pride)
نفخ nafk blowing, blowing up, inflation,
pumping up, filling with air
نفخة nafka (n. vic.) blow, puff; breath;
gust; distention, inflation, swelling;
conceit, overweeningness, haughtiness │
نفخة كذابة (كاذبة ) (kaddāba) self-conceit,
vainglory, bumptiousness
نفاخ naffāk flatulent
نفانخ nuffāk swelling
نفاخة naffāka bladder; bubble
منفخ minfak pl. منافخ manāfik2 bellows
منفاخ minfāk pl. منافيخ manāfīk 2 bellows;
air pump, tire pump; blowpipe
تنفخ tanaffuk inflatedness, inflation;
bumptiousness, bumptious behavior
انتفاخ intifāk process of being inflated;
distention, inflation, swelling,
protuberance; flatulence, meteorism
(med.) │ انتفاخ الرئة int. ar-ri’a pulmonic
emphysema
نافخ nāfik blowing; blower; flatulent │
ما بالدار نافخ ضرمة (n. ḍarmatin) there is not
a soul in the house
منفوخ manfūk blown up, puffed up,
inflated; swollen; pumped up, inflated;
982 paunchy, obese, fat; conceited, selfconceited,
overweening, snobbish
منتفخ muntafik blown up, puffed up,
inflated; swollen
نفد nafida a (nafad, نفاد nafād) to be exhausted,
depleted, used up; to run out, come to an
end, dwindle away; to be out of print │ نفد
لديه معين الصبر (ma‘īn aṣ-ṣabr) to be at the
end of one’s patience IV and X to use up,
consume, spend, exhaust, drain, deplete ( ھ
s.th.); to taste thoroughly, enjoy to the full
ھ)
s.th.) │ استنفد كل وسع (kulla wus‘in) to
exhaust, or avail o.s. of, every possibility
نفدة nafda pl. nafadāt entry (in an
account book), booked item
نفاد nafād exhaustion, consumption,
depletion (of stores), dwindling, wastage,
waste
النفود an-nafūd Nafud (desert in N Nejd)
نافد nāfid: نافد الصبر n. aṣ-ṣabr impatient
نافدة nāfida void, vacuum
نفذ nafada u ( نفاذ nafād, نفوذ nufūd) to pierce,
bore ( ھ s.th. or من through s.th.), penetrate
ھ، من) s.th.), go or pass ( ھ، ب through
s.th.); to penetrate ( الى into), get through,
pass through ( الى to); O (mil.) to break
through, fight one’s way through the
enemy ( من or في ); to get ( الى to s.o.), arrive
الى) at s.o.’s place), reach ( الى s.o.); to lead
الى) to), give, open ( الى on; of a door or
window); to communicate, be connected (
الى with; of a building, lot, premises), join;
to be carried out, be executed, be legally
valid, be effective, be operative, be
enforceable, be executable, be executory;
to do well or skillfully ( في s.th.) II and IV
to cause ( ھ s.th.) to pierce or penetrate; to
carry out, execute, accomplish, effect ( ھ
s.th., also, an idea), do, perform, fulfill,
discharge ( ھ a duty); to realize,
implement, carry into effect ( ھ a plan, a
project, ideas); to enforce ( ھ a resolution);
to carry through ( ھ a program); to
execute, carry out ( ھ a sentence; في
against s.o.); to transmit, convey, send,
dispatch, forward ( الى ھ s.th. to s.o.) V to
be executed, be carried out
نفذ nafad pl. انفاذ anfād opening,
aperture, orifice, hole, vent, outlet, escape,
way out
نفاذ nafād penetration, permeation;
implementation, realization, effectuation;
effectiveness; execution │ نفاذ البصيرة
perspicacity, acute discernment,
penetration
نفاذ nafād piercing, penetrating;
effective, effectual; permeable, pervious
نفوذ nufūd penetration, permeation;
effectiveness, effect, action; influence,
prestige, authority │ نفوذ مطلق (muṭlaq) full
powers, free hand, unlimited authority; ذو
نفوذ influential; نطاق النفوذ sphere of
influence
منفذ manfad, manfid pl. منافذ manāfid2
opening in a wall, air hole, window;
passage, passageway, exit; outlet; way
out, escape; entrance, access; gateway,
gate; loophole, dodge; O electrode (el.) │
O منفذ المياه m. al-miyāh flood gate, lock
gate, sluice gate; المنفذ البحري (baḥrī) access
to the sea
تنفيذ tanfīd carrying out,
implementation, effectuation. realization;
discharge, accomplishment, fulfillment,
performance, execution; distraint, legal
execution (jur.) │ دخل في طور ( دور) التنفيذ
(ṭauri, dauri t-t.) to become effective,
come into force; عون التنفيذ ‘aun at-t. minor
executory officer, bailiff (tun.); قسم التنفيذ
qism at-t. executive division (of a court);
احكام قابلة للتنفيذ executory decisions,
precepts, executions, writs of fieri facias
(jur.) 983
تنفيذي tanfīdī executory, executive │ لجنة
تنفيذية (tanfīdīya) executive committee
انفاذ infād sending, dispatch,
conveyance, delivery, transmission;
carrying out, execution, discharge,
performance
نافذ nāfid piercing, penetrating;
effective, operative, effectual; legally
valid │ اصبح نافذا (aṣbaḥa) to become
operative, become effective, come into
force (law); الحكم نافذ فيه (ḥukmu) the
sentence will be carried out, has legal
force; نافذ الكلمة n. al-kalima influential,
powerful; نافذ المفعول valid, effective, in
force; امر نافذ (amr) strict order
نافذة nāfida pl. نوافذ nawāfid2 opening in
a wall, air hole; window; O wicket │ O
نافذة الإطلاق n. al-iṭlāq loophole, embrasure
منفذ munaffid executant, executer,
executioner │ منفذ الوصية m. al-waṣīya
executor (jur.); عون منفذ (‘aun) minor
executory officer, bailiff (tun.)
متنفذ mutanaffid influential
نفر nafara u i ( نفور nufūr, نفار nifār) to shy,
bolt, stampede (animal); -- (nafar) to flee,
run away; to have an aversion ( من to),
have a distaste ( من for); to avoid, shun,
eschew ( عن or من s.th.), keep clear ( عن or
من of), turn away, flee ( عن or من from); to
hurry, rush, hasten ( ل or الى to); -- i ( نفور
nufūr) to swell, bulge out, protrude, jut
out, stick out II to startle, frighten, scare
away, chase away, drive away ( ھ s.th.); to
fill ( ه s.o.) with an aversion ( من to), arouse
a distaste ( من ه in s.o. for), make
loathsome ( من ه to s.o. s.th.), alienate,
estrange, deter ( من ه s.o. from), spoil s.o.’s
ه) ) pleasure ( من in), make ( ه s.o.)
dissatisfied ( من with) III to avoid ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), keep away ( ه from s.o.), have an
aversion ( ه to s.o.); to contradict ( ھ s.th.),
be incompatible ( ھ with) VI to avoid each
other; to conflict, clash; to disagree, he
incongruous, incompatible, mutually
repellent X to he frightened away; to call
upon s.o. ( ه) to fight ( على against), call out
ه) s.o.) to go to war ( على against)
نفر nafar pl. انفار anfār band, party,
group, troop; troops; person, individual;
(mil.) soldier, private; man (as a
numerative)
نفرة nafra aversion, distaste, dislike,
antipathy
نفور nufūr shying, flight; bolting,
stampede (of an animal); aversion,
distaste, dislike, displeasure, alienation,
estrangement
نفور nufūr shy, easily frightened, scary,
fearful, timid; reticent, diffident, bashful,
coy, reserved
نفير nafīr pl. انفار anfār, انفرة anfira band,
party, group, troop; departure into battle;
trumpet │ نفير عام (‘āmm) general call to
arms, levy en masse; general alarm
نافورة nāfūra pl. نوافير nawāfīr2 fountain
نوفرة naufara pl. نوافر nawāfir2 fountain
تنفير tanfīr estrangement, alienation,
repulsion, deterrence
تنافر tanāfur mutual aversion or
repulsion, disagreement, disunion,
dissension, conflict, strife, incongruity,
discord
نافر nāfir pl. نفر nafr, nuffar fleeing,
fugitive, shy, fearful, timid; having an
aversion ( من to) or a distaste ( من for);
swelling, protuberant, bulging, protruding,
projecting, jutting out; relief-like, in relief;
three-dimensional, 3-D (film)
منفر munaffir, munfir repulsive,
repellent
نفس nafusa u (nafas, نفاس nifās, نفاسة
nafāsa) to be precious, valuable, priceless;
-- nafisa a (nafas) to be sparing, niggardly
ب) 984 with s.th.); -- ( نفاسة nafāsa) to
envy, begrudge ( ه على s.o. s.th.); -- nafisa
a and pass. nufisa ( نفاس nifās) to he in
childbed II to cheer up, comfort, appease,
reassure ( ه s.o.); to relieve ( عن s.o., of
s.th., esp., of sorrow, cares), dispel, banish
عن) s.o.’s ھ worries, anxieties); to air ( عن
one’s secret feelings), give vent ( عن to
one’s emotions), uncover, reveal, voice,
get off one’s chest, get out of one’s
system, abreact ( عن one’s suppressed
desires, frustrations, fears, etc.); to desist (
عن from), cease ( عن doing s.th.); pass.
nuffisa to get lost ( عن to s.o.); to let out
air, leak; to be in childbed III to compete,
vie ( عن ه with s.o. in); to compete, fight,
struggle ( على for), seek. try to obtain,
desire ( على s.th.), strive, be out ( على for),
aspire ( على to) V to breathe, inhale and
exhale; to take breath, pause for breath.
have a breather, have a break, take a rest
│ تنفس الحسرات المؤلمة (al-ḥasarāti lmu’lima)
to heave painful sighs; تنفس
الصعداء (ṣu‘adā’a) to sigh deeply; to
breathe a sigh of relief, breathe again; تنفس
النفس الأخير (nafasa) to be at one’s last
gasp, be dying; تنفس عن الحياة (ḥayāh) to
breathe one’s last, die VI to rival,
compete, vie, contend ( على for, في in s.th.)
نفس nafs f., pl. نفوس nufūs, انفس anfus
soul; psyche; spirit, mind; life; animate
being, living creature, human being,
person, individual (in this sense, masc.);
essence, nature; inclination, liking,
appetite, desire; personal identity, self
(used to paraphrase the reflexive pronoun;
see examples below) │ بنفسه he himself;
personally, in person; نحن بنفسوسنا we
ourselves; في نفس الأمر (n. il-amr) in reality,
actually, in fact; في نفس الواقع do.; عند انفسھم
in their own opinion; (جأءني ھو نفسه (بنفسه
he himself came to me, he came
personally to see me; جاء من نفس he came
of his own accord; ما وعدت به فيما بيني وبين
نفسي what I had promised myself; نفس الأمر
n. al-amr the essence of the matter, the
nature of the affair; نفس الشيء the thing
itself; the same thing, the very thing;
الاعتماد على النفس and الثقة بالنفس (tiqa) selfconfidence,
self-reliance; بشق النفس bi-šiqqi
n-n. or بشق الأنفس (following لا ... لا ) with
(the greatest) difficulty, barely; صغير النفس
base-minded, low-minded; عفيف النفس
unselfish, selfless, altruistic; علم النفس ‘ilm
an-n. psychology; كبير النفس high-minded,
proud; محبة النفس maḥabbat an-n. amour
propre, selfishness; بذل النفس والنفيس to
make every conceivable sacrifice,
sacrifice all, give up all one’s possessions
نفسي nafsī spiritual, mental, psychic(al);
(pl. -ūn) psychologist │ التحليل النفسي
psychoanalysis; حالة نفسية state of mind,
mood
نفسية nafsīya mental life, inner life,
psyche; frame of mind; mentality, mental
attitude, disposition; psychology
نفس nafas pl. انفاس anfās breath; whiff;
puff (from a smoking pipe, from a
cigarette); swallow, gulp, draught; style of
an author; freedom, liberty, convenience,
discretion │ حتى النفس الأخير to the last
breath; ذو نفس enough to slake the thirst;
refreshing (drink); ضيق النفس ḍīq an-n.
labored breathing, asthma; ھو في نفس من
اموره he acts according to his own desires;
انت في نفس من امرك (amrika) you can do as
you please! امسك نفاسه (anfāsahū) to hold
one’s breath; فاضت انفاسه (anfāsuhū) to
give up the ghost
نفسة nufsa respite, delay
نفساء nafsā’2 pl. نوافس nawāfis2 confined,
in childbed; a woman in childbed
نفساني nafsānī psychic(al), mental │ طب
نفساني (ṭibb) psychiatry; طبيب نفساني
psychiatrist; عالم نفساني psychologist 985
O نفسانية nafsānīya psychology
نفاس nifās parturition; delivery,
childbirth, confinement, accouchement;
childbed, puerperium; see also below │
حمى النفاس ḥummā n-n. or حمى نفاسية
puerperal fever, childbed fever
نفاسة naffāsa preciousness, costliness
نفيس nafīs precious, costly, valuable,
priceless
نفيسة nafīsa pl.. نفائس nafā’is2 gem,
object of value, precious thing
منفس manfas pl. منافس manāfis2
breathing hole, air hole, valve
تنفيس tanfīs airing, ventilation
منافسة munāfasa pl. -āt emulation;
competition (also com.); rivalry; athletic
event, contest, match
نفاس nifās emulation; competition (also
com.); rivalry; athletic event, contest,
match
تنفس tanaffus respiration
تنفسي tanaffusī: جھاز تنفسي (jahāz)
respiratory system
تنافس tanāfus mutual competition,
rivalry; fight, struggle ( على for) │ تنافس
حيوي (ḥayawī) struggle for existence
منافس munāfis competitor; rival
متنفس mutanaffas place to breathe
freely; breathing space, free scope (for
s.th.), free atmosphere; relief, escape, way
out
نفش nafaša u (nafš) to tease ( ھ wool); to swell
out, puff up; to swell, become swollen; to
ruffle its feathers (bird) II to comb or card
ھ) cotton) V to puff up, become inflated;
to ruffle the feathers, bristle the hair VIII
do.
نفش nafaš wool
نفاش naffāš a variety of large lemon
منفوش manfūš puffed up, inflated;
ruffled, bristling; disheveled (hair); fluffy
(hair, wool)
نفض nafaḍa u (nafḍ) to shake ( ھ s.th.),
shake off ( عن ھ s.th. from), shake out,
dust, dust off ( ھ s.th.); to knock the ashes
from a cigarette ( ھ ); to make ( ه s.o.)
shiver (fever); -- u ( نفوض nufūḍ) to
recover, recuperate ( من from) │ نفض عنه
الكسل (kasala) or نفض غبار كسله (gubāra
kasalihī) to shake off one’s laziness; نفض
غباره (gubārahū) lit.: to shake off its dust,
i.e., to have reached the end of, be
finished with; نفض عنه الھم (hamma) to
shake off one’s sorrows, shed one’s
anxiety; نفض في لعب الأوراق (la‘ibi l-aurāq)
to gamble away at cards; نفض يده من الأمر
(yadahū, amr) to chuck s.th., shake off
s.th., rid o.s. of, refuse to have anything to
do with; نفض يده من يد فلان to break with s.o.
dissociate o.s. from, go back on s.o. II to
shake violently, shake out, dust off ( ھ
s.th.) IV to use up completely, exhaust ( ھ
provisions, stores); to be devoid of all
means, be reduced to poverty, be
impoverished, be depleted; to shake off (
عن ه s.o. from); to remove, dismiss ( عن ه
s.o. from) VIII to be shaken off, be dusted
off; to shake; to shudder, shiver, tremble (
من with) │ انتفض واقفا (wāqifan) to jump
up, jump to one’s feet
نفض nafaḍ that which is shaken off or
falls off
نفضي nafḍī: O غابة نفضية deciduous
forest, leafy forest
نفضة nafaḍa scouting party,
reconnaissance patrol
نفضة nufaḍa ague fit, feverish shiver
نفاض nufāḍ ague fit, feverish shiver
نفاضة nufāḍa that which is shaken off or
falls off 986
نفيضة nafīḍa pl. نفائض nafā’iḍ2 scouting
party, reconnaissance patrol
منفض minfaḍ sieve; winnow
منفضة minfaḍa pl. منافض manāfiḍ2
ashtray; feather duster; O vacuum cleaner
انتفاض intifāḍ shaking, shiver, shudder,
tremor
انتفاضة intifāḍa (n. vic.) shiver, shudder,
tremor
نفط nafṭ naphtha, petroleum
نفطي nafṭī of naphtha, soaked in
naphtha; oil-, petroleum- (in compounds) I
مصباح نفطي (miṣbāḥ) oil lamp
نفطة nafṭa blister
نفطة nufaṭa irritable, touchy, thinskinned;
hot-tempered
منفط munaffiṭ blistering, vesicatory
نفع nafa‘a a (naf‘) to be useful, beneficial,
advantageous, be of use ( ه to s.o.), avail,
help ( ه s.o.); to be usable, to do, serve ( ل
for) │ لا ينفع of no use II to utilize, turn to
use, put to use ( ھ s.th.); to use ( ھ s.th.),
make use ( ھ of) VIII to turn to advantage,
turn to good account, put to use, utilize,
use ( من or ب s.th.), take advantage, avail
o.s., make use ( من or ب of); to profit, gain,
benefit ( من or ب by s.th.); to enjoy ( من or
ب s.th.) X=II
نفع naf‘ use, avail, benefit, advantage,
profit, gain; good, welfare
نفع naf‘ out for one’s own advantage,
self-interested, selfish; profiteer
نفاع naffā‘ very useful, of good use
نفوع nafū‘ pl. نفع nufu‘ very us نفع eful, of
good use
منفعة manfa‘a pl. منافع manāfi‘2 use,
avail, benefit; beneficial use, useful
service; advantage, profit, gain; (Isl. Law)
yield of a utilizable thing or of a right,
produce; interest; public establishment,
public-service facility │ (منافع عامة (عمومية
(‘āmma, ‘umūmīya) public-service
facilities, specif., property set aside, or
available, for public use; منافع صحية
(ṣiḥḥīya) sanitary facilities
انتفاع intifā‘ use, employment,
utilization, exploitation, usufruct; benefit,
advantage, profit, gain
نافع nāfi’ useful, beneficial,
advantageous, profitable, usable,
serviceable; wholesome, salutary
نافعة nāfi’a public works │ وزير النافعة
minister of public works
منتفع muntafi’ beneficiary, usufructuary
نفق nafaqa u ( نفاق nafāq) to sell well, find a
ready market (merchandise); to be brisk,
active (market); -- nafaqa and nafiqa a
(nafaq) to be used up, he spent, run out
(stores, provisions, money), be exhausted;
-- nafaqa u ( نفوق nufūq) to die, perish
(esp., of an animal) II to sell III to
dissemble, dissimulate, play the hypocrite
│ نافق ضميره (ḍamīrahū) to act contrary to
the dictates of one’s conscience IV to
spend, expend, layout, disburse ( على ه
money for); to use up, consume, spend,
exhaust, waste, squander, dissipate ( ھ
s.th.); to spend, pass ( ھ time); to provide (
على for s.o., esp., for s.o.’s means of
support), support ( على s.o.), bear the cost
of s.o.’s ( على ) maintenance V تنفق بكذبة على
(bi-kidbatin) to tell s.o. a fib X to spend,
waste ( على ھ money for)
نفق nafaq pl. نفاق anfāq tunnel,
underground passageway
نفقة nafaqa pl. -āt, نفاق nifāq expense;
cost; outlay, expenditure, disbursement;
cost of living, maintenance, support; (Isl.
Law) adequate support, esp., of the 987
wife; charitable gift, handout (to the poor)
│ على نفقة at s.o.’s expense; قليل النفقات
inexpensive, cheap
نفاق nafāq brisk trade, good business;
salability (of a commodity)
منفاق minfāq squanderer, wastrel,
spendthrift, profligate
منافقة munāfaqa hypocrisy,
dissimulation, dissemblance
نفاق nifāq hypocrisy, dissimulation,
dissemblance
انفاق infāq spending, expenses, outlay,
expenditure, disbursement
نافق nāfiq selling well, easily
marketable, in demand (commodity)
منافق munāfiq hypocrite, dissembler
نفل V and VIII to do more than is required by
duty or obligation, to supererogate
(specif., prayers, charity, or the like)
نفل nafl supererogatory performance,
specif., a work of supererogation
نفل nafal pl. انفال anfāl, نفول nufūl, نفال
nifāl booty, loot, spoil; present
نفل nafal clover
نافلة nāfila pl. نوافل nawāfil2
supererogatory performance; work of
supererogation; gift, present; booty, loot,
spoil │ من نافلة القول ان (n. il-qaul) it goes
without saying that ...
نفنف nafnaf pl. نفانف nafānif2 air, atmosphere;
steep hillside, precipitous cliff
نفنوف nafnūf (ir.) a woman’s dress
نفو ) and نفا (نفي nafā u (nafw) and نفى nafā i
(nafy) to expel, eject, oust, ostracize,
exclude ( عن or على ه s.o. from), remove,
evict, banish, exile, expatriate ( ه s.o.); to
deport ( ه s.o.); to refute, disprove, rebut,
controvert, repudiate ( ھ s.th.); to deny ( ھ
s.th.); to reject, dismiss, discard, disclaim,
disavow, decline, refuse, disallow ( ھ
s.th.); to exclude, preclude ( ھ s.th.); to
negate (gram.) III to hunt, chase, pursue,
track down ( ه s.o.); to exclude, preclude (
ھ s.th.); to contradict ( ھ s.th.), be contrary
ھ) to); to be incompatible, be inconsistent
ھ) with) VI to be mutually exclusive or
contradicting, cancel each other out, be
incompatible VIII to be banished, be
exiled, be expelled; to be refuted, be
disproved, be controverted, be
contradicted, be denied; to fall off, fall
away, be dropped, be omitted, be absent,
be nonexistent X to reject as worthless,
useless, unacceptable ( ھ s.th.)
نفي nafy expulsion; banishment, exile,
expatriation; ejection, ousting, eviction,
ostracism; deportation; denial, disclaimer,
disavowal, repudiation, disproof,
refutation, rebuttal, refusal, rejection,
disallowance, prohibition, ban; negation
(gram.) │ حرف النفي ḥarf an-n. particle
of negation (gram.); شاھد نفي witness for
the defense (as opposed to شاھد اثبات š.
itbāt)
نفيي nafyī negative
نفي nafīy denied; rejected, discarded
نفاء nafā’, نفاة nafāh and نفاوة nafāwa
s.th. discarded as worthless or useless;
dross, refuse, waste, scrap, offal,
sweepings, garbage
نفاية nufāya pl. -āt s.th. discarded as
worthless or useless; remnant, remains;
discard, castoff; reject, throwout; dross,
refuse, waste, scrap, offal, sweepings,
garbage; O نفايات excretions (biol.)
منفى manfan pl. مناف manāfin place of
exile; banishment, exile
منافاة munāfāh contradiction,
incompatibility, inconsistency
تناف tanāfin mutual incompatibility
انتفاء intifā’ absence, lack 988
منفي manfīy turned down, denied,
rejected, discarded; negated, negative;
banished, exiled, expatriated; deported
مناف munāfin incompatible
نق naqqa i ( نقيق naqīq) to croak (frog); to
cackle, cluck (hen)
نقاق naqqāq surly person, gruff man,
grumbler; griper, carper, faultfinder
نقاقة naqqāqa frog
نقيق naqīq croaking, croak; cackling,
cackle
نقب 1 naqaba u (naqb) to bore, pierce,
perforate, breach ( ھ s.th.), make a hole or
breach ( ھ in), punch or drill a hole ( ھ
through); to dig, dig up, dig out, excavate,
hollow out ( ھ s.th.); to traverse ( في a
country), pass, travel ( في through); to
inquire, ask, look, search ( عن for),
examine thoroughly, investigate, explore,
search into, delve into; -- naqiba a
(naqab) to be perforated, be full of holes
II to drill ( عن for, e.g., for oil); to examine
thoroughly, study, investigate ( عن s.th.),
penetrate, delve, s8&roh ( عن into), look,
s8&roh ( عن for); to travel ( في through) III
to vie in virtues ( ه with s.o.) V to examine,
study, investigate ( عن s.th.), look, search (
عن for); to veil her face (woman); to be
perforated, he full of holes VIII to put on a
veil, veil one’s face
نقب naqb digging, excavation; piercing,
perforation; -- (pl. انقاب anqāb, نقاب niqāb)
hole, opening, breach; boring, bore; tunnel
نقاب naqqāb punch
نقاب niqāb pl. نقب nuqub, انقبة anqiba
veil │ كشف النقاب عن to uncover, reveal,
disclose s.th.
نقابة niqāba pl. -āt cooperative society;
union, association, guild; corporation;
syndicate; trade union, labor union │ نقابة
العمال n. al-‘ummāl trade-union, labor
union
نقابي niqābī cooperative; syndicalistic;
syndicalist; trade-unionist
نقابية niqābīya syndicalism; tradeunionism
نقيب naqīb pl. نقباء nuqabā’2 leader,
head, headman; director, principal, chief;
chairman of a guild; president; syndic,
corporation lawyer; (mil.) captain (army),
lieutenant (navy) (Eg. 1939 and U.A.R.);
tongue of a balance │ نقيب الأشراف head of
the Alids, head of the descendants of the
Prophet
نقيبة naqība pl. نقائب naqā’ib2 soul,
spirit, mind, intellect; natural disposition,
nature, temper, character
منقب manqib, minqab and منقبة manqaba
pl. مناقب manāqib2 mountain trail, defile,
pass
منقب minqab and منقبة minqaba punch,
perforator, drill; lancet
مناقب manāqib2 virtues, outstanding
traits; glorious deeds, facts, exploits
تنقيب tanqīb pl. -āt drilling (esp., for
oil); digging, excavation; investigation,
examination, inquiry, search, exploration,
research
منقب munaqqib investigator, researcher,
scholar, explorer
النقب 2 an-naqab Negev (desert region in S
Israel)
نقح naqaḥa a (naqḥ) to prune, lop ( ھ a tree),
trim, clip ( ھ s.th.) II do.; to review, revile,
read over carefully, correct ( ھ a writing),
improve, polish, refine (the style) IV to
check, go over, re-examine, revise, correct
ھ) s.th.)
تنقيح tanqīḥ checking, (re-)examination;
revision; correction 989
نقد naqada u (naqd) to pay in cash ( ھ ه to s.o.
s.th.); to peck ( ھ at); to examine critically
ھ) s.th.); to criticize ( ھ على s.o. for) III to
call to account ( ه s.o.) IV to pay ( ھ ه to
s.o. s.th.) VIII to criticize ( ھ s.th.), find
fault ( ھ with), take exception ( ھ to),
disapprove ( ھ of); to show up the
shortcomings ( على of s.o.), criticize ( على
s.o.); to receive payment in cash
نقد naqd criticism; -- (pl. نقود nuqūd)
cash, ready money; pl. specie, coins,
change; نقدا in cash; for cash, cash down │
بالنقد in cash; for cash, cash down; ورق النقد
waraq an-n. banknotes, paper money;
حافظة النقود change purse
نقدي naqdī monetary, pecuniary;
numismatic, of coin; cash (adj.) │ تضخم
نقدي (taḍakkum) inflation; جزاء نقدي (jazā’)
a monetary fine
نقدية naqdīya ready money, cash
نقاد naqqād critic; reviewer
نقادة naqqāda captious critic, caviler,
carper
منقد manqad (eg.) brazier
منقاد minqād pl. مناقيد manāqīd2 beak,
bill (of a bird)
انتقاد intiqād pl. -āt objection, exception;
criticism, censure, reproof, disapproval;
review, critique
ناقد nāqid pl. -ūn, نقاد nuqqād, نقدة
naqada critic
منتقد muntaqid critic
منتقد muntaqad blameworthy,
reprehensible, objectionable,
exceptionable
نقذ naqada u (naqd) to deliver, save, rescue ( من
ه s.o. from); -- naqida a (naqad) to be
saved, be rescued, save o.s., escape IV to
deliver, save, rescue ( من ه s.o. from); to
salvage, recover ( ھ s.th.) X = IV
انقاذ inqād deliverance, salvation,
saving, rescue; salvaging, recovery; relief
استنقاذ istinqād deliverance, salvation,
saving, rescue; salvaging, recovery; relief
منقذ munqid rescuer, savior, deliverer
نقر naqara u (naqr) to dig; to pierce, bore,
hollow out, excavate ( ھ s.th.), make a
cavity or hole ( ھ in); to cut, carve ( ھ s.th.,
esp., atone or wood); to engrave, inscribe (
في in); to peck up ( ھ a grain; of a bird); to
peck ( ه at s.o.); to strike, bang, knock, rap
على) at, on); to drum ( ھ on s.th.); to snap
one’s fingers; to offend, annoy, vex, hurt,
insult, revile, malign, defame ( ه s.o.), cast
a slur ( ه on s.o.), make insinuations ( ه
against s.o.); to investigate, examine ( عن
s.th.); -- naqira a (naqar) to be offended,
annoyed, miffed ( على at) II to peck, peck
up ( ھ s.th.); to investigate, examine ( عن
s.th.) III to have an argument, to quarrel,
wrangle, bicker ( ه with s.o.)
نقر naqr excavation, hollowing out,
carving out, engraving; hollow, cavity,
hole; snap(ping) of the fingers
نقر naqir annoyed, offended, hurt,
miffed
نقرة naqra pl. naqarāt blow, knock,
bang, rap; drumbeat; pluck(ing) (of
strings)
نقرة nuqra pl. نقر nuqar, نقار niqār pit,
hollow, cavity, hole; depression; orbit, eye
socket; neck furrow, nape
نقرة niqra bickering, wrangle,
argument, quarrel
نقار naqqār carver, engraver │ نقار
الخشب n. al-kašab woodpecker (zool.)
نقارية nuqqārīya pl. -āt (eg.) a
percussion instrument resembling a
kettledrum
نقير naqīr tiny spot on a date pit; an
utterly worthless thing │ لا يجدي شروى نقير
٩٩٠ lā yujdī šarwā n. it won’t help the
least bit, it won’t get you anywhere at all;
لا يملك شروى نقير he has absolutely nothing,
he hasn’t got a red cent to his
name; ...}’ ":I~ J,:i ":I nothing at an,
not
the l....t little bit
;~ naqlra pl. ;W naq<!",.a corvette
;~W naqqara sman drum having a
hemispheric body of copper or wood
~,,;~ niiqUr pl. .;:il; naWliqlr’
(Koranic)
a wind instrument
;~~ naqilra (eg.) prattle, idle talk,
rigmarole
~LA:.. m,nqar pl. .;:il:.. manclqlr’
beak.
bill (of a bird); pickax
;.)L:... mutuiqara bickering, wrangle,
argument, quarrel
;;~ tuiq,ra pl. ;s.,; naWliq,r’ bickering,
wrangle, argument, quarrel; misfortune,
calamity
نقرزان naqrazān (eg.) small drum; drummer
نقرس niqris gout; skilled and experienced
(physician)
نقريس niqrīs skilled and experienced
(physician)
نقز naqaza u i (naqz, نقاز niqāz, نقزان naqazān)
to bound, leap, skip, hop II to rock, dandle
ه) a child)
نقزة naqza jump, leap, start
ناقوس nāqūs pl. نواقيس nawāqīs2 (church)bell;
gong; hand bell (used, e.g., in Coptic
liturgy); bell jar, globe
نقش naqaša u (naqš) to variegate, dapple,
make many-colored, daub with various
colors, bedaub ( ھ s.th.); to paint; to chisel,
sculpture, carve out; to engrave ( ھ s.th.,
على on, in) II to paint; to engrave; to
sculpture III to argue, dispute ( ه with s.o.);
to discuss ( ھ s.th.); to debate ( ھ a
question); to criticize ( ھ s.th.), object,
raise an objection ( ھ to), raise a protest ( ھ
against); to bear, examine, interrogate ( ه
s.o.; jur.) VI to carry on a dispute, to
debate ( في about) VIII to extract, pull out (
ھ a prick or thorn)
نقش naqš pl. نقوش nuqūš painting,
picture, drawing; engraving; inscription;
sculpture, figure
نقاش naqqāš painter; house painter;
artist; sculptor
نقاشة niqāša (art of) painting or
sculpture
منقش minqaš pl. مناقش manāqiš2 chisel
منقاش minqāš pl. مناقيش manāqīš2 chisel
مناقشة munāqaša argument, controversy,
dispute, debate, discussion;
contestation, opposition, objection, protest
نقاش niqāš argument, controversy,
dispute, debate, discussion
منقوش manqūš colored, dappled,
variegated; painted; engraved; sculptured;
inscribed
مناقش munāqiš opponent in a dispute;
disputant
نقص naqaṣa u (naqṣ, نقصان nuqṣān) to
decrease, become less, diminish, be
diminished, be reduced ( ھ by an amount;
of a number); to decrease, diminish,
lessen, reduce, impair ( ھ s.th.), prejudice (
ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), be prejudicial ( ھ، ه to),
detract ( ھ، ه from); to lower, peg down ( ھ
s.th.); to be deficient, lacking, incomplete,
insufficient, inadequate, defective, faulty,
imperfect; نقصه الشيء (šai’u) he lacked,
needed the thing, was in want of the thing;
to fan short ( عن of), be less, be lower ( عن
than) │ عاما تنقص شھرا واحدا 13 (‘āman,
šahran) 13 years minus one month II and
IV to decrease, diminish, lessen ( ھ s.th.);
to reduce, lower, peg down ( ھ s.th.); to
curtail, cut ( ھ s.th.) III to invite bids ( ھfor
a project, 991 etc., so as to determine
the lowest bidder) VI to decrease
gradually, diminish slowly, grow less or
smaller by degrees VIII to decrease,
diminish, become less; to wane; to impair,
diminish, lessen ( ھ s.th.) │ انتقص من قدره
(qadrihī) to disparage s.o., detract from
s.o., degrade s.o. X to ask for a reduction (
ھ of s.th.); to find ( ھ s.th.) decreased,
deficient, short, defective, imperfect,
inferior; to discover the absence ( ھ of),
miss ( ھ s.th.)
نقص naqṣ decrease, diminution; deficit,
loss, damage; wantage, lack, want,
shortage ( في of); gap, blank, omission;
defect, shortcoming, failing, fault,
blemish; deficiency, imperfection,
inferiority │ نقص المواليد falling birth rate;
مركب نقص murakkab n. inferiority complex
نقصان nuqṣān = نقص naqṣ
نقيصة naqīṣa pl. نقائص naqā’iṣ2
shortcoming, failing, fault, defect
تنقيص tanqīṣ diminution, lessening,
decrease, reduction, lowering
مناقصة munāqaṣa pl. -āt competition to
determine the lowest bidder, public
invitation to submit bide (for public
works), notice to bidders; award of
contract to the lowest bidder
انقاص inqāṣ diminution, lessening,
decrease, reduction, lowering, curtailment
تناقص tanāquṣ decrease, diminution,
decrement
انتقاص intiqāṣ impairment, lessening
ناقص nāqiṣ pl. نقص nuqqaṣ decreasing,
diminishing; diminished, lowered,
decreased, reduced; faulty, defective;
deficient, lacking, imperfect, incomplete;
short of supply, scarce; less ( عن than);
growing lighter; defective (gram.)
منقوص manqūṣ deficient, incomplete;
insufficient, inadequate
نقض naqaḍa u (naqḍ) to destroy, demolish,
tear down, wreak, raze ( ھ s.th.); to tear
apart, take apart, undo ( ھ s.th.); to break,
violate, infringe ( ھ s.th., esp., a contract
or similar legal obligation); to cancel,
abolish, repeal, abrogate, revoke, nullify,
declare void, annul ( ھ s.th.); to invalidate,
refute ( ھ a suspicion); to quash, rescind,
reverse ( ھ a sentence) │ نقض الولاء (walā’)
to renounce allegiance, to revolt; لا ينقض
yunqaḍu irrefutable; incontestable,
irrevocable III to be in disagreement ( ھ
with), be contradictory, contrary, opposite
ھ) to), contradict ( ھ s.th.), be
incompatible, inconsistent ( ھ with) V to
be destroyed, be demolished, be tom
down, be wrecked, be razed; to be broken,
be violated; to be undone; to disintegrate,
decay, fall down, break down, collapse; to
disappear, wear off, fade away, die away
VI to contradict each other; to be mutually
exclusive VIII = V; to rise, mutiny, rebel,
revolt ( على against); to attack ( على s.o.),
take the field, go to war ( على against s.o.)
نقض naqḍ destruction, demolition;
breach, violation, infringement; infraction,
offense; refutation, invalidation; veto
(pol.); contradiction, logical
incompatibility │ نقض الحكم n. al-ḥukm
reversal of a sentence; نقض السلام n. assalām
breach of the peace; محكمة النقض
والإبرام maḥkamat an-n. wa-l-ibrām Court
of Cassation (Eg.); لا يجوز نقضه (yajūzu) (it
is) no longer open to an appeal, incapable
of revision, irrevisable, legally valid, final
(sentence); حق النقض ḥaqq an-n. right of
veto
انقاض anqāḍ (pl. of نقض nuqḍ) debris;
rubble
نقيض naqīḍ opposed, opposite, contrary,
antithetical, contradictory; antithesis,
opposition, contrast, opposite │ على نقيض
contrary to, in opposition to, in
contradistinction to, unlike; على النقيض on
the 992 contrary; انتقل من النقيض الى نقيضه
(intaqala) to go from one extreme to the
other, move in extremes
نقيضة naqīḍa pl. نقائض naqā’iḍ2 polemic
poem; contrast
مناقضة munāqaḍa sharp contrast,
contradiction; opposition; contestation of
a right
تناقض tanāquḍ mutual contradiction,
incompatibility; inconsistency, contrariety
انتقاض intiqāḍ collapse, breakdown;
uprising, revolt, rebellion
منقوض manqūḍ destroyed, demolished,
wrecked; broken, violated; undone,
repealed, abrogated, annulled; refutable,
disprovable
مناقض munāqiḍ contradictory, contrary,
incompatible, inconsistent │ مناقض ذاته
(dātahū) self-contradictory
مناقض mutanāqiḍ mutually
contradicting, contradictory, conflicting,
mutually incompatible; pl. متناقضات
contrasts, contrarieties, contradictions,
oppositions
نقط naqaṭa u (naqṭ) to point, provide with
diacritical points ( ھ a letter) II do.; to
spot, dot, dab, stain, speckle ( ھ s.th.); to
fall in drops, drip; to cause ( ھ s.th.) to
drip, let ( ھ s.th.) fall in drops, drop ( ھ
s.th.); to distribute ( ب or ھ s.th.) as a
present ( على to s.o.); to give a wedding
present (la to the bride)
نقطة nuqṭa pl. نقط nuqaṭ, نقاط niqāṭ point,
dot; diacritical point; period, full stop;
drop; jot, title, speck; trifle, tiny piece;
part (esp., of motors, of machines); matter,
affair, subject, point; detail, particular;
item; spot, location, site; place, village,
hamlet, market town
(geogr.); branch, post (adm.); base,
position, outpost (mil.); (eg.) wedding
present; النقطتان colon (typ.) │ نقطة الاتصال
n. al-ittiṣāl junction (of traffic lanes); O
نقط الارتكاز fortified position, pocket of
resistance (mil.); O نقطة اساسية (asāsīya)
key position; نقطة الاستفھام interrogation
mark; نقطة الاطفاء n. al-iṭfā’ or نقطة المطافئ
fire station; نقطة البوليس police station,
station house; نقطة التحول n. at-taḥawwul
turning point, turn of events, turn of the
tide; نقطة التشحيم grease nipples (of motors);
نقطة جمركية (gumrukīya) customs station,
customhouse; O نقطة خارجية (kārijīya)
outpost; نقطة الذنب n. ad-danab aphelion
(astron.); نقطة الرأس n. ar-ra’s perihelion
(astron.); نقطة العنبر n. al-‘anbar mole;
beauty spot; نقطة العين n. al-‘ain leucoma
(med.); O نقطة القتال combat area, zone of
action; داء النقطة epilepsy; فوز بالنقط (fauz)
victory on points (in sports)
نقوط nuqūṭ (syr., eg.) wedding present
to the bride
نقيطة nuqaiṭa droplet
نقاطة naqqāṭa dropping tube, dropper,
pipette
منقوط manqūṭ having one (diacritical)
point; pointed, having (diacritical) points;
spotted, dotted, speckled │ فصلة منقوطة
(faṣla) semicolon
منقط munaqqaṭ pointed, having
(diacritical) points; spotted, dotted,
speckled
نقع naqa‘a a (naq‘) to soak, steep ( فى ھ
s.th. in); to infuse, brew ( ھ tea, etc.); to
slake, quench ( ھ thirst); to stagnate, be
stagnant, gather in a pool (water) IV to
soak, macerate ( ھ s.th. in a liquid); to
slake, quench ( ھ thirst) X to stagnate, be
stagnant; to become impure and foul by
stagnation (water); to be swampy (ground)
نقع naq‘ maceration, soaking, steeping;
infusion; (pl. انقع anqu‘) stagnant water,
quagmire, swamp, bog; (pl. نقاع niqā‘, نقوع
nuqū‘) dust 993
نقع nuqā‘a infusion
O نقاعيات nuqā‘īyāt infusoria
نقيع naqī‘ infusion; that with which s.th.
is soaked or permeated; (eg.) juice
obtained from dried fruits soaked in water
نقوع naqū‘ dried fruit, dried apricots
منقع manqa‘ pl. مناقع manāqi‘2 quagmire,
swamp, bog;, sump, place where water
gathers │ منقع الدم m. ad-dam place of
execution
منقوع manqū‘ macerated, soaked;
infusion
مستنقع mustanqa‘ pl. -āt quagmire,
swamp, bog; moor, morass, marsh, fen │
حمى المستنقعات ḥummā l-m. swamp fever,
malaria
نقف naqf, niqf chick
نقل naqala u (naql) to move from its place,
move away, displace ( ھ s.th.); to remove,
take away, carry away, carry, transport (
الى ھ s.th. to); to transfer, transplant, shift,
translocate, relocate ( ھ من ... الى، ه s.o.,
s.th. from ... to); to transmit, convey,
communicate, bring, deliver, make overt
pass on, hand over ( الى ه s.th. to s.o.); to
remove, dismiss ( ه s.o.); to move, remove
الى) to); to copy ( من from); to translate ( من
الى ... from one language into the other); to
hand down, pass on, report, relate ( الى ھ
s.th. to s.o., عن from, or baaed. on, s.o. or
a source); to quote ( عن an author or a
literary work); to render ( ھ a text); to
enter, post ( ھ an item; in bookkeeping); to
communicate, spread ( الى ھ a disease to
s.o.), infect ( ھ الى s.o. with); to transfer,
assign, convey, cede ( الى ھ s.th., esp. a
right, to s.o.) II to move, move away,
displace, move on, move forward,
advance, transport, move about, let
wander, let roam ( ھ s.th., esp., a great deal
of s.th. or a great number of things, s.th.
successively, one thing after the other) │
نقل خطاه (kuṭāhu) to stride along, move
along III to exchange ( ھ ه with s.o.
words); to cast, shoot ( ھ ه at s.o. glances);
to report ( ھ ه to s.o., s.th.), inform ( ھ ه s.o.
of); to hand, pass ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.) V to be
carried, be carried away, be removed, be
transported; to be transferred, be
conveyed, be assigned; O to be
transmitted (by radio); to shift, change its
locality; to change one’s residence,
remove, go elsewhere; to change position
(mil.); to move about; to walk about; to
rove, roam, migrate, wander, travel about
│ تناقل في منازل البلاغة (m. al-balāga) to be
versed in rhetoric VI to carry, transport ( ھ
s.th.); to report to one another, relate or
tell each other ( ھ s.th.); to exchange ( ھ
s.th.); to spread, report, relate ( ھ a story,
etc.), pass on, hand down ( ھ s.th.); to
spread by word of mouth ( ھ s.th.) │ تناقلته
الألسن (alsun) to pass from mouth to
mouth, be on everybody’s lips, be the talk
of the town; تناقلته الأيدي (aidī) to pass from
hand to hand, change hands; تناقلت الجرائد
الخبر (kabara) the report was taken up by
the entire press; تناقل الكلام (kalama) to talk
with one another, have a talk VIII to be
carried, be carried away, be removed, be
transported; to be transferred, be
conveyed, be assigned; O to be
transmitted (by radio); to shift, change its
locality; to change one’s residence,
remove, go elsewhere; to change position
(mil.); to walk about; to rove, roam,
migrate, wander, travel about; to be
transferred (official); to be turned over, be
delivered, be transferred (ship); to be
communicated (disease), spread ( الى to); to
be spread, circulate, make the rounds
(rumor); to be transplanted ( الى into or to);
to move, move along, travel; 994 to
betake o.s., proceed, go, take the road ( الى
to). head ( الى for), turn ( الى to); to apply
o.s., turn ( الى to a field of interest); to turn,
make a turn ( الى into another street; of an
automobile); to pass ( من from one owner
الى to the other); O to be propagated,
spread (waves, etc.; الى to, occasionally
also في ); O to jump across (el. spark); to
shift (from attack to defense); to go away,
depart ( من and عن from), leave a place ( من
and عن ); to go around ( في in or among),
make the round ( في of), visit (one after the
other) │ انتقل به الى to shift, translocate,
relocate s.th. to; انتقل الى رحمة لله (raḥmati
llāh) lit.: to pass away into God’s mercy,
i.e., to die; انتقل الى جوار ربه (j. rabbihī) lit.:
to be transferred into the presence of the
Lord, i.e., to die, pass away
نقل naql carrying, carriage; conveyance,
transportation, transport; removal;
translocation, relocation, transplantation;
transfer (also, e.g., of an official); change
of residence, move, remove; transmission
(also by radio); translation; transcription,
transcript, copy; tradition; report, account;
entry, posting (in an account book);
conveyance, transfer, assignment, cession
│ نقلا عن based on, according to; نقل الدم n.
ad-dam and نقل الدماء blood transfusion; O
نقل الصور باللاسلكي n. aṣ-ṣuwar bi-l-lā-silkī
radio-photography; نقل ميكانيكي motor
transport (of passengers and cargoes); اجرة
النقل ujrat an-n. cartage, carriage, freight;
سيارة النقل sayyārat an-n. truck, lorry; معالم
النقل transfer fees, assignment fees; وسائل
النقل means of transportation, conveyances
نقلي naqlī traditionary, traditional; of or
pertaining to transportation, transport- (in
compounds) │ سيارة نقلية (sayyāra) truck,
lorry
نقليات naqlīyāt transport services,
transportation system, transportation;
transports
│ نقليات عسكرية (‘askarīya) troop
transports
نقل naql, nuql pl. نقول nuqūl candied
almonds or nuts, candy, sweets, dried
fruits, etc., as a dessert
نقل naqal rubble, debris
نقلة nuqla migration
نقلة nuqla pl. نقل nuqal gossip; pattern,
model
نقال naqqāl portable, transportable
نقالة naqqāla pl. -āt stretcher;
ambulance; transport, transport vessel;
truck, lorry
نقيل naqīl (yem.) mountain trail, defile,
pass
منقل manqal and منقل manqala pl. مناقل
manāqil2 brazier
منقلة manqala a day’s march; way
station, stopping place; O protractor
تنقل tanaqqul change of locality; change
of residence; (mil.) change of position,
station or garrison; traveling, roving,
roaming, wandering, migration;
conveyance, transportation, transport;
transmission (radio); transfer; reshuffle,
shake-up, reorganization, change of
personnel; regrouping, shifting,
rearrangement
انتقال intiqāl change of locality;
locomotion; change of residence, move,
remove, removal; translocation,
relocation; transfer; conveyance,
transportation, transport; transition (– من
الى from -- to); transmission;
communication, infection; transit, passage
(of the sun through the zodiac); demise,
death │ طور الانتقال ṭaur al-int. transition
period; فترة الانتقال fatrat al-int. interim
period, interim stage, stage of transition;
عيد انتقال العذراء ‘īd int. al-‘adrā’ Day of the
Assumption of the Virgin (Chr.) 995
انتقالي intiqālī: عھد انتقالي (‘ahd) transition
period
ناقل nāqil pl. -ūn, نقلة naqala, نقال nuqqāl
carrying; carrier; bearer; translator;
copyist; -- conductor (el.) │ ناقل السرعة n.
as-sur‘a gear-shift lever (of an
automobile)
ناقلة nāqila pl. -āt transport, transport
vessel │ ناقلة البترول n. al-betrōl and ناقلة
الزيت n. az-zait tanker; ناقلة الجنود troopship,
transport; ناقلة الطائرات aircraft carrier
ناقلية nāqilīya conductivity (el.)
منقول manqūl carried, conveyed,
transported; transferred; transmitted;
translated; copied, transcribed; movable,
mobile, portable; handed down,
traditional; traditional stock; (pl. -āt) a
movable thing │ منقولات or ( اموال (املاك
منقولة movable property, movables, effects,
personal property; منقولات المنزل m. almanzil
household furniture, household
effects
متنقل mutanaqqil movable, mobile;
portable; ambulant, itinerant, migrant,
roving, roaming; nomad; inconstant,
changing │ مستشفى منتقل (mustašfā)
temporary field hospital, ambulance
منتقل muntaqil ambulatory; movable,
mobile; contagious, infectious,
communicable │ الأعياد المنتقلة the movable
feasts; علة منتقلة (‘illa) contagious disease
نقم naqama i (naqm) and naqima a (naqam) to
revenge o.s., avenge o.s., take revenge ( من
on s.o.), take vengeance; to be hostile ( على
to), be full of rancor or vindictiveness,
have a spite, be resentful ( على against s.o.),
be mad, angry ( على at s.o., ھ for, because
00; to hate, loathe, detest ( على s.o.); to
hold s.th. ( ھ ) against s.o. ( على ) VIII to
revenge o.s., avenge o.s. take revenge ( من
on); to take vengeance ( ل for)
نقمة naqma revenge, vengeance; rancor,
spite, grudge, resentment; misfortune,
adversity, punishment, trial, affliction,
heavy blow; retribution
نقمة niqma, naqima pl. نقم niqam, نقمات
niqamāt revenge, vengeance; rancor,
spite, grudge, resentment; misfortune,
adversity, punishment, trial, affliction,
heavy blow
انتقام intiqām revenge, vengeance
ناقم nāqim avenger; hostile ( على to);
indignant, angry ( على at or about)
منتقم muntaqim avenger; vindictive,
revengeful
نقنق 1 naqnaqa to croak (frog); to cackle, cluck
(hen); to gnaw, nibble
نقانق 2 naqāniq2 small mutton sausages (syr.)
نقه naqaha a ( نقوه nuqūh) and naqiha a (naqah)
to be on the road to recovery, to
convalesce; to recover, recuperate ( من
from) VIII do.
نقه naqah and نقھة naqha recovery,
convalescence
نقه naqih recovering, convalescent
نقاھة naqāha recovery, convalescence │
دار النقاھة rest center, convalescent home
ناقه nāqih a convalescent
نقو) and نقي) نقي naqiya a ( نقاء naqā’, نقاوة
naqāwa, nuqāwa) to be pure II to purify,
cleean, cleanse ( ھ s.th.); to rid of
extraneous matter ( ھ s.th.); to &elect, pick
out, cull, sift, sort ( ھ s.th.); to hand-pick (
ھ s.th.) IV to purify, clean, cleanse ( ھ
s.th.) VIII to pick out, select ( ھ s.th.)
نقاء naqā’ purity
نقاوة naqāwa, nuqāwa purity; O
fineness (of a precious metal); selection,
culling; elite; pick, best
نقاية nuqāya selection, elite, pick 996
J naqly pl. .W "iqd', .\,.ill aRqiyil"
pure, clean, imm&CWate, unstained i
clear,
limpid, free of dirt or .xtraneous matter
~ taRqiya cleaning, cle&lllling, purifl.
cation; sifting, BOrting
pun, play on wards; the point of a joke
I
0:::.11 ~l.- quick.witted, quick at
repartee
.;,15::; Rakkdt witty; humoroua,
piquant;
mocker, scoffer
.Li:ll ifIJiqij' eel.ction I 0 .Li::l)ll Jo
'Jol'
(q'Ild,a) eel.ctivity (radic)
.;::... m"fIJaqa" eel.cted; eelect
ts:.; Ral:a'a a (s.!ll Rak') to scrape the
scab
(. off a wound)
..,.s:.; Ral:aba " (Ra.l:l>, Ral:ab) to
make un·
happy, miserabl., aftlict, distress (. s.a.;
of fate); to drop (. s.th.); to put (. s.a.)
out of favor; - (y~ ""k/lb) to blow
sid.ways; to veer, shift (wind); -
(Ra.l:l>,
""k/lb) to d.viate, sw.rv. (.:r from, esp.,
from a path, road, route, courae) II to
avert, divert, deBect, tum away,
remove
(. s.th.) V to d.viate, swerve (. or .:r
from); to avoid, shun, eschew (A or .:r
s.th.); to refrain (.:r from), steer clear
(.:r of); to take upon one's should....
ta shoulder, take upon o.8., assume (A
s.th.) l.:r "'! ..,.s:::; to make s.o. d.viate
or
swerve from
..,.s:.; Ral:b pl. y ~ "dub and ~
Rakba pl. Ral:aMt misfortune,
calamity;
disaster, catastrophe
منكب mankib pl. مناكب manākib2
shoulder; side, flank; highland, upland │
دفع بمنكبيه الھواء (mankibaihi, hawā’)
approx.: to race along, dash along
منكوب mankūb fate-stricken, afflicted
with disaster; unhappy, unfortunate, illfated,
miserable; victim (of a catastrophe)
نكت nakata u (nakt) to scratch up ( ھ the
ground) II to crack jokes ( على about s.o.),
poke fun ( على at), ridicule ( على s.o.)
نكتة nukta pl. نكت nukat, نكات nikāt jot,
title, speck, spot; witty remark, witticism,
wisecrack, joke; anecdote; pun, play on
words; the point of joke │ حاضر النكتة
quick-witted, quick at repartee
نكات nakkāt witty; humorous, piquant;
mocker, scoffer
تنكيت tankīt chaffing, legpulling;
teasing, banter, raillery, mockery; joking,
jesting, fun-making
منكت munakkit mocker, scoffer
نكث nakata u i (nakt) to break, violate, infringe
ھ) a contract or similar legal obligation)
VIII to be broken, be violated
نكث nakt breach, violation (of a
contract, etc.)
ناكث nākit perfidious, faithless, false,
disloyal
نكح nakaḥa u i a ( نكاح nikāḥ) to marry ( ھا a
woman), get married ( ھا with) III to
become related by marriage ( ه to s.o.) IV
to give in marriage ( ھا ه to s.o. a girl)
نكاح nikāḥ marriage; marriage contract;
matrimony, wedlock
مناكح manākiḥ2 (pl.) women
نكد nakida a (nakad) to be hard, harsh,
difficult; to be unhappy, miserable; --
nakada u (nakd) to give little ( ه to s.o.); to
torment, pester, molest ( ه s.o.) II to make
life hard, difficult, miserable ( ه for s.o.),
embitter s.o.’s ( ه) life III to torment,
harass, pester, molest ( ه s.o.) V to be made
miserable, be embittered (life)
نكد nakd pl. انكاد ankād misfortune;
hardship, adversity; molestation, trouble,
nuisance; worry, concern │ نكد الطالع
misfortune
نكد nakid pl. انكاد ankād, مناكيد manākīd2
hard, troublesome, laborious; unhappy;
peevish, cross, bad-tempered
انكد ankad2 troublesome, painful,
excruciating 997
مناكدة munākada pl. -āt inconvenience,
discomfort, trouble, burden
منكود mankūd unhappy, unfortunate; illfated
│ منكود الحظ m. al-ḥaẓẓ pl. مناكيد الحظ
manākīd al-ḥ. ill-starred, unlucky,
unfortunate
نكر nakira u (nakar, nukr, نكور nukūr, نكير
nakīr) not to know ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), have
no knowledge, be ignorant ( ھ of s.th.); to
deny, disown, disavow, renege ( ھ s.th.) II
to disguise, mask ( ه s.o.); to use in its
indefinite form ( ھ a noun; gram.) III to
disapprove ( ه of s.o.), reject ( ه ه s.o.) IV to
pretend not to know ( ه s.o.), refuse to have
anything to do ( ھ، ه with s.o., with s.th.);
to refuse to acknowledge, disown,
disavow, disclaim, deny ( ھ s.th.); to
renounce, renege ( ھ s.th.); to refuse, deny
على ھ) s.th. to s.o.), dispute, contest ( على ھ
s.th. of s.o.); to reject ( على ھ s.th. with
regard to s.o.), disapprove ( على ھ of s.th.
with regard to s.o.); to censure, blame,
rebuke ( على ه s.o. for), criticize ( من ھ s.th.
in s.o.); to hold s.th. ( ھ ) against s.o. ( ,(على
reproach ( ھ على s.o. for) │ انكر ذاته
(dātahū) to deny o.s. ; انكر نفسه (nafsahū)
to harbor self-doubts; انكرت اني اراه I
pretended not to see him V to be in
disguise, be disguised, disguise o.s.; to
change for the worse, change beyond
recognition; to become estranged, be
alienated ( ل from s.th.); to .nub ( ل s.o.),
treat ( ل s.o.) with hostility, deal
ungraciously ( ل with s.o.); to deny o.s. ( ,ل
e.g., a feeling), shut out from one’s heart (
ل s.th.) VI to have no knowledge, be
ignorant ( ھ of s.th.); to pretend not to
know ( ھ s.th.), feign ignorance, make as if
one doesn’t know; to refuse to have
anything to do ( ه with), snub, cut, ignore,
pretend not to know ( ه s.o.) X not to know
ھ، ه) s.o., s.th.), have no knowledge, be
ignorant ( ھ of s.th.); to disapprove ( ھ of
s.th.), reject ( ھ s.th,); to detect, loathe ( ھ
s.th.)
نكر nukr denial, disavowal
نكر nakir unknown, little known
نكرة nakira indefinite noun (gram.);
unknown person
نكران nukrān denial │ لا نكران lā
nukrāna it is incontestable; نكران الجميل
ingratitude; نكران الذات self-denial
نكير nakīr denial, disavowal;
disapproval, rejection; negation;
reprehensible, repugnant, disgusting, vile,
revolting, loathsome, abominable,
atrocious; one of the Angels of Death (see
شد عليه النكير │ ( منكر (šadda) to reproach
s.o. severely
انكر ankar2, f. نكراء nakrā’
reprehensible, abominable, disgusting,
vile, revolting, loathsome │ ابتسامة نكراء
vicious smile
انكار inkār denial, disavowal, negation,
contestation; refusal, rejection, nonacceptance
│ انكار الذات self-denial,
selflessness, unselfishness; انكار لجميله (lijamīlihī)
ingratitude toward s.o.
انكاري inkārī denying, disaffirmative;
negative
تنكر tanakkur disguise, masquerade │
محفل التنكر maḥfil at-t. fancy-dress party,
costume ball
تنكري tanakkurī: حفل تنكري (ḥafl)
masked ball, costume ball
استنكار istinkār disapproval; horror,
aversion, loathing
ناكر nākir denying, disavowing;
unfriendly, hostile, forbidding │ ناكر الجميل
ungrateful
منكر munakkar indeterminate; indefinite
(gram.)
منكر munkar denied; not recognized,
unacknowledged, disowned, disavowed,
disclaimed; disagreeable, shocking,
detestable, abominable; abomination,
atrocity; pl. منكرات objectionable,
forbidden, 998 or reprehensible, actions │
منكر ونكير the two angels who examine the
dead in their graves as to their faith
متنكر mutanakkir disguised, in disguise;
incognito │ رقص متنكر (raqṣ) masked ball,
costume ball
مستنكر mustankar objectionable,
reprehensible; odd, strange
نكز nakaza u (nakz) to prick; to goad, egg on ( ه
s.o.)
نكس nakasa u (naks) to turn around, turn over,
invert, reverse, turn upside down
ھ) s.th.); to lower, withdraw, retract,
pull in ( ھ s.th.); to bow, bend, tilt ( رأسه
ra’sahū or برأسه one’s head); to cause a
relapse ( ھ of an illness); pass. nukisa, to
suffer a relapse II = I; to hang at half-mast
ھ) a flag) VIII to be turned over, be
inverted, be reversed; to sink, drop
forward (head); to relapse, suffer a relapse
نكس nuks and نكسة naksa relapse;
degeneration, degeneracy; decadence
تنكس tanakkus degeneration (biol.)
انتكاس intikās relapse
منكوس mankūs inverted, reversed;
relapsing, suffering a relapse
منكس munakkas inverted, reversed │
منكس الرأس m. ar-ra’s with bowed head
منتكس muntakis relapsing, suffering a
relapse
نكش nakaša i a (nakš) to clear out, dredge,
clean ( ھ s.th., esp., a well); to stir up, rout
up, turn up, hoe up, rake up, dig up, break
ھ) the ground); to rummage, ransack,
search ( ھ s.th.); to disorder, ruffle, tousle,
dishevel ( ھ s.th.); to shake ( ھ trees)
منكش minkaš pl. مناكش manākiš hoe,
mattock; rake
منكاش minkāš pl. مناكيش manākīš2 O
dredger; poker, fire iron; (eg.) pickax
نكص nakaṣa i u (nakṣ, نكوص nukūṣ, منكص
mankaṣ) to withdraw, turn away ( عن
from); to recoil, shrink ( عن from) │ نكص
على عقبيه (‘aqibaihi) to retreat, climb
down, give up one’s intention II to cause (
ه s.o.) to retreat VIII to fall back, recoil,
retreat
نكف nakafa u (nakf) to stop, arrest ( ھ s.th.); to
disdain, scorn, spurn ( عن s.th.); to
reject ( عن s.th.) │ لا ينكف (yunkafu)
irresistible, resistles8; immeasurable,
unfathomable III to vex, annoy, trouble,
pester, harass, torment ( ه s.o., ھ with) X to
be proud, haughty; to disdain, scorn,
spurn, reject ( عن or من s.th.), look down
upon ( عن or من ), have an aversion ( عن or
من to), loathe, detest ( عن or من s.th., also
ھ ); to refrain ( ان from doing s.th.)
نكفة nakafa parotid gland
نكفي nakafī parotid (adj.) │ التھاب الغدة
النكفية (gudda) inflammation of the parotid
gland, parotitis, mumps (med.)
نكاف nukāf O parotitis, mumps (med.)
نكل 1 nakala i u ( نكول nukūl) and nakila a
(nakal) to recoil, shrink ( من or عن from),
flinch, shirk ( من or عن s.th.), desist,
refrain, abstain, draw back, withdraw ( من
or عن from); -- nakala ( نكلة nakla) and II to
make an example ( ب of s.o.), punish
severely ( ب s.o.), teach s.o. ( ب) a lesson;
to maltreat, torture ( ب s.o.) II and IV to
repel, force back, drive back, hold off,
deter ( عن ه s.o. from)
نكل nikl pl. انكال ankāl, نكول nukūl fetter,
shackle, chain; bit (of a bridle)
نكال nakāl exemplary punishment,
warning example, warning
نكول nukūl refusal to testify in court
(Isl. Law)
تنكيل tankīl exemplary punishment;
forcing back, driving back. containment;
maltreatment, torture 999
نكل 2 nikl nickel
نكه nakaha i u (nakh) to blow, breathe ( على or
ل in s.o.’s face)
نكھة nakha smell of the breath;
fragrance, smell, scent, aroma
نكى nakā i ( نكاية nihāya) to cause damage, to
harm; to hurt, injure ( في or ه s.o.); to vex,
annoy, offend ( ب s.o.)
نكاية nikāya wrong, harm, damage,
prejudice; vexation, annoyance, grievance,
offense, outrage, chicanery │ نكاية فيه
nikāyatan fīhi in defiance of him, to spite
him; اغلظ فيه النكاية (aglaẓa, nikāya) to beset
s.o. grievously, ride roughshod over s.o.
انكى ankā worse; causing more damage,
more harmful, hurting or offending more
grievously
نم 1 namma u i (namm) to betray, reveal,
disclose, bespeak, indicate, show ( على or
عن s.th.); to give evidence ( عن of s.th.); to
report in a libelous manner ( على ھ s.th.
about s.o.), sow dissension ( بين among or
between)
نم namm slander, calumniation,
calumny; (pl. -ūn, انماء animmā’2)
talebearer, scandalmonger, slanderer,
calumniator
نمة nimma louse
نمام nammām (eg.) a variety of mint
(Mentha sativa L.; bot.)
نمام nammām slanderer, calumniator
نميمة namīma pl. نمائم namā’im2 slander,
defamation, calumny
نامة nāmma stir, bustle, life
نمي 2 nummī pl. -āt coin │ علم النميات ‘ilm an-n.
numismatics
نموذج look up alphabetically
نمر 1 V to become angry, furious ( ل with s.o.),
turn into a tiger; to bluster, swagger
نمر namir pl. نمر numur, انمار anmār
leopard; tiger
نمر namir clean, pure, healthy,
wholesome (esp., water)
نمرة namira leopardess; tigress
نمرة numra pl. نمر numar speck, spot
انمر anmar2, f. نمراء namrā’2, pl. نمر
numr spotted, striped, brindled
منمر munammar spotted, striped,
brindled
نمر 2 II to mark with numbers, to number,
provide with a number ( ھ s.th.)
نمرة numra, nimra pl. نمر numar, nimar
number, numero; figure │ نمرة واحد nimrat
w. first-class, first-rate, A-1, excellent
نمارة nammāra pl. -āt numberer,
numbering machine, date stamp
تنمير tanmīr numbering, numeration,
count
منمر munammar numbered, counted
نمرسي numrusī pl. نمارسة namārisa (eg.)
chinaware dealer
نمرق numruq and نمرقة numruqa pl. نمارق
namāriq2 cushion, pad; pillow; panel,
saddle pad
نمس namasa i (nams) to keep secret, hide,
conceal ( ھ s.th.); to confide a secret ( ه to
s.o.), confide in s.o. ( ه), let ( ه s.o.) in on a
secret, make ( ه s.o.) one’s confidant III to
confide a secret ( ه to s.o.)
نمس nims (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. نموس
numūs ichneumon, mongoose; ferret,
marten, weasel
ناموس nāmūs pl. نواميس nawāmīs2 sly,
cunning, wily; confidant; (coll.; n. un. (ة
mosquito(es); see also alphabetically │
الناموس الأكبر the Archangel Gabriel
ناموسية nāmūsīya mosquito net 1000
نمسا nimsā, النمسا an-nimsā Austria
نمساوي nimsāwī Austrian (adj. and n.)
نمش namiša a (namaš) to be freckled, have
freckles
نمش namaš (cols.; n. un. ة) freckles;
discolored spots on the skin
نمش namiš freckled
انمش anmaš2, f. نمشاء namšā’2, pl. نمش
numš freckled
نمط namaṭ pl. نماط nimāṭ, انماط anmāṭ way,
manner, mode, fashion; form, shape; sort,
kind │ على نمط in the manner of; على ھذا
النمط in this manner, this way, after this
fashion; حديث النمط new-fashioned, modem;
عتيق النمط old-fashioned, outmoded; ھم على
نمط واحد they are of the same stamp, they
are all alike
نمطي namaṭ formal, rigid, stiff
نمق II to embellish, decorate, ornament, adorn
ھ) s.th.); to write in an elegant, lofty style
ھ) s.th.); to compose ( ھ a text)
تنميق tanmīq ornamentation,
embellishment; glorification, exaltation,
ago grandizement; elaborate
embellishment (with figures of speech);
composition (of a text, in elegant style)
منمق munammaq adorned, embellished;
elegant, in good style, ornate, flowery
(text, language)
نمل namila a (namal) to tingle, prickle, be
numb, be benumbed (a limb)
نمل naml (cols.; n. un. ة) pl. نمال nimāl
ant
نمل namlī antlike; ant- (in compounds);
formic
نملية namlīya meat safe, food safe
نمل namal itching, tickling sensation;
tingle, prickle, pricking sensation
نمل namil creeping, crawling; teeming
with ants; nimble, deft
نمل anmula pl. انامل anāmil2 fingertip
تنميل tanmīl itching, tickling sensation;
tingle, prickle, pricking sensation
منمول manmūl teeming with ants
نمنم namnama to stripe, streak ( ھ s.th.); to
adorn, embellish, ornament ( ھ s.th.)
نمنم nimnim streaks or ripples in the
sand (caused by the wind)
نمنمة namnama, nimnima wren (zoo.)
O منمنمة munamnama miniature
نما (نمو ) namā u ( نمو numuw) to grow; to
increase; to rise
نمو numuw growth; progress
نموذج namūdaj, numūdaj pl. -āt and نماذج
namādij2 model; type; pattern; sample,
specimen; exemplar, example; blank, form
نموذجي namūdajī exemplary, model
نمى namā i (namy, نماء namā, نمية
namīya) to grow; to increase, augment,
multiply; to rise; to progress, make
progress, advance; to thrive, prosper,
flourish; to be ascribed, be attributed ( الى
to s.o.); to ascribe, attribute ( الى ھ s.th. to
s.o.); to be told, be reported ( الى to s.o.; of
an event), reach ( الى s.o.; news), come to
s.o.’s knowledge II and IV to make grow,
increase, augment, promote, further,
advance ( ھ s.th,)VIII to trace one’s origin
الى) to s.o.), descend, be descended ( الى
from), be related ( الى to); to be affiliated,
be associated, have connections ( الى with);
to depend, be dependent ( الى on); to
belong ( الى to, esp., to an organization), be
a member ( الى of an organization)
نماء namā’ growth, expansion, increase,
augmentation, increment, accretion
نمي namīy growth, expansion, increase,
augmentation, increment, accretion 1001
نماة namāh pl.   small louse
تنمية tanmiya expansion, promotion,
furtherance, advancement; increase,
augmentation; raising, stepping up,
intensification, boost
انماء inmā’ expansion, promotion,
furtherance, advancement, increase,
augmentation; raising, stepping up,
intensification, boost; cultivation,
breeding (of plants)
انتماء intimā’ membership
نامية nāmiya pl. نوام nawāmin growth;
morbid growth, morbid formation,
excrescence, tumor (med.) │ النوامي
السرطانية (saraṭānīya) cancerous
formations (med.)
منتم muntamin belonging, pertaining
منتمى muntaman descent, origin,
relationship, affiliation. membership
نھب nahaba a u and nahiba a (nahb) to
plunder, rifle, take by force ( ھ s.th.) │ نھب
nahaba l-arḍa and نھب الطريق (ṭarīqa) to
cover the distance ( الى to) quickly or at
tremendous speed IV to let ( ه s.o.) rifle ( ھ
s.th.); to leave, surrender as booty ( ھ ه to
s.o. s.th.) VI to grip, seize ( ھ the soul, the
heart) │ تناھب الأرض عدوا (arḍa ‘adwan) to
race along at a tearing pace VIII to grip,
seize ( ھ the soul, the heart); to rifle,
snatch away ( ھ s.th.); to take in eagerly,
devour ( ھ s.th.; said of the eyes) │ انتھب
الطريق (ṭarīqa) to cover the distance ( الى
to) quickly or at tremendous speed
نھب nahb robbery, plundering, pillage,
looting, spoliation; gallop; (pl. نھاب nihāb)
plunder, spoils, booty, loot; نھبا nahban by
robbery
نھبة nuhba booty, plunder, spoils, loot
نھبى nuhbā booty, plunder, spoils, loot
نھاب nahhāb robber; plunderer,
marauder, looter
نھبرة nahbura abyss; hell
نھج nahaja a (nahj) to proceed, act; to enter ( ھ
upon a road), take ( ھ a route or course),
follow, pursue ( ھ a way, a road); to make
clear, clarify ( ھ s.th.); to be open, plain,
distinct; -- nahaja i and nahija a (nahaj)
to be out of breath, gasp for breath, pant │
نھج خطة (kiṭṭatan) to pursue a plan; to
assume an attitude; نھج على منواله
(minwālihī) to follow s.o.’s example II to
put out of breath, make breathless, cause
to pant ( ه s.o.) IV do.; to be clear (matter,
affair); to make clear, clarify, explain ( ھ
s.th.) VIII to enter ( ھ upon a road), take (
ھ a route or course), follow, pursue ( ھ a
way, a road) │ انھج سبيله (sabīlahū) and X
استنھج سبيله to follow s.o.’s example, follow
s.o.’s footsteps, imitate s.o.
نھج nahj pl. نھوج nuhūj open way; road;
method, procedure, manner │ نھج نھجه
(nahjahū) to follow s.o.’s method; النھج
القويم the straight path, the right way, the
proper manner
نھج nahaj quick breathing, panting;
breathlessness
نھيج nahīj quick breathing, panting;
breathlessness
ناھج nāhij open, plain road
منھج manhaj, minhaj pl. مناھج manāhij2
open, plain, easy road; manner, procedure,
method; program; course │ منھج التعليم
curriculum; مناھج البحث m. al-baht
methodology of research, research
methods
منھاج minhāj pl. مناھيج manāhīj way,
road; method; program
نھد nahada a u ( نھود nuhūd) to become
round and full, swell (breasts); to be
buxom, have round, swelling breasts V to
sigh VI to share the expenses; to distribute
among each other in equal shares ( ھ s.th.)
1002
نھد nahd pl. نھود nuhūd female breast,
bosom; elevation, rise, hump, bump
تنھد tanahhud pl. -āt sigh
ناھد nāhid full, round, swelling (breast);
in the bloom of youth; buxom
نھر nahara a (nahr) to flow copiously, stream
forth, gush forth; to chide, scold, reproach
ه) s.o.); to turn away with angry words,
brush off, rebuff, reject, repulse, drive
away, chase away ( ه s.o.) VIII to chide,
scold ( ه s.o.); to drive away, chase away ( ه
s.o.)
نھر nahr pl. انھر anhur, انھار anhār, نھور
nuhūr, stream, river; -- (pl. anhur and
anhār) column (of a newspaper) │ ما بين
النھرين (nahrain) Mesopotamia; ما وراء النھر
Transoxiana; نھر اردن Eridanus (astron.);
n. urdunn the Jordan river; نھر السلام n. assalām
the Tigris; نھر الشريعة the Jordan
river
نھري nahrī river- (in compounds),
riverine, fluvial, fluviatile
نھار nahār pl. انھر anhur, نھر nuhur
daytime, day (from dawn to dusk, as
distinguished from يوم yaum = day of 24
hours) │ نھارا وليلا nahāran wa-lailan by
day and by night; ليل نھار laila nahāra day
and night; نھار انھر (anhar) a wonderful
day
نھاري nahārī relating to day or daytime,
diurnal; نھاريات news of the day,
miscellany (heading of a newspaper
column)
انھر anhar2 see nahr
نھير nahīr copious, ample, abundant,
plentiful, much
نھير nuhair pl. -āt little river, creek,
brook; a tributary, an affluent
انتھار intihār rebuke, scolding,
reprimand, reproof; rejection, rebuff,
repulse, repulsion
نھز nahaza a (nahz) to push, thrust,
shove ( ه s.o.); to drive, urge on ( ه s.o.); to
repulse, hold off, ward off ( ه s.o.) III to be
near s.th. ( ھ , esp., fig.), approach, attain,
reach ( ھ s.th.); to seize ( ھ s.th.) │ ناھز
البلوغ to attain (the age of) majority; ناھز
الخمسين he was close to fifty, he was
pushing fifty VIII انتھز الفرصة (al-furṣata)
to seize or take the opportunity, take
advantage or avail o.s. of the opportunity;
انتھز ھ فرصة ل (furṣatan) to use s.th. as an
opportunity for
نھزة nuhza opportunity, occasion
نھاز nahhāz: نھاز الفرص n. al-furaṣ quick
to seize an opportunity, an opportunist
انتھاز intihāz: انتھاز الفرص int. al-furaṣ
exploitation of opportunities, opportunism
انتھاز intihāzī timeserver, opportunist
انتھازية intihāzīya opportunism
نھش nahaša i (nahš) to bite, snap, grab
with the teeth ( ھ s.th.); to tear to pieces,
mangle (.s.o.)
نھاش nahhāš snappish, biting,
mordacious, sharp
نھض nahaḍa a (nahḍ, نھوض nuhūḍ) to
rise, get up ( عن from a seat, from bed); to
take off, start (airplane); to pounce ( الى on
s.o., on s.th.); to raise, lift, hoist, heave,
carry ( ب s.o., s.th.); to carry on, practice,
pursue, attack resolutely, tackle. handle,
take in one’s hands, further, promote,
encourage ( ب s.th.), give a boost, give
impetus ( ب to s.th.), bring new life ( ب into
s.th.), bring about an upswing ( ب of s.th.);
to stand up ( ب for), take up the cause of (
ب), espouse, support, endorse, champion (
ب s.th.); to rise, revolt, rebel ( على against
s.o.); to get ready, prepare ( ل for a piece of
work, a task, or the like), begin, start,
undertake ( ل s.th.), enter, embark ( ل
upon); to be apposite, pertinent, apropos
(argument) │ نھض قائما (qā’iman) he got
on his 1003 feet, he got up; نھض بالأمر (bil-
amr) to assume power, take the
command; نھضت الحجة ب (ḥujja) proof bee
been established for …; نھض بالخسائر
والضحايا (ḍaḥāyā) to take losses and
sacrifices readily upon o.s. III to offer
resistance ( ه to), resist, oppose, defy (s.o.);
to argue, dispute ( ه with s.o.) IV to tell ( ه
s.o.) to rise, lift up, raise, help up ( ه s.o.),
awaken, (a)rouse, stir up, animate, inspire,
stimulate, excite, incite ( ه s.o.) VI to get
up, stand up, rise, draw o.s. up VIII do. X
to awaken, (a)rouse, stimulate, animate,
encourage, incite, instigate, egg on ( ه s.o., ا
لى to)
نھض nahḍ awakening, rise, growth,
boom, upswing, advancement, progress
نھضة nahḍa pl. -āt getting up, rising;
awakening (esp., national), rise, growth,
boom, upswing, advancement, progress;
resurgence, revival, rebirth, renaissance;
(spiritual) movement; ability, capability,
power │ عيد النھضة ‘īd an-n. Day of
National Awakening (of Iraq, celebrated on
the 9th of Shaban)
نھوض nuhūḍ raising, boosting, revival,
restoration, promotion, advancement,
furtherance, encouragement, activation ( ب
of s.th.)
مناھضة munāhaḍa resistance, opposition
انھاض inhāḍ awakening, arousing,
stimulation, animation; promotion,.
advancement, encouragement, initiation of
an upswing, of a boom
استننھاض istinhāḍ awakening, arousing,
stimulation, animation; promotion,
advancement, encouragement, initiation of
an upswing, of a boom
ناھض nāhiḍ rising, getting up; active,
diligent, energetic │ دليل ناھض conclusive
proof, cogent evidence
نھق nahaqa, nahiqa a (nahq, نھاق nuhāq, نھيق
nahīq) to bray (donkey)
نھك nahaka a ( نھاكة nahāka) to wear off, wear
out, use up, consume ( ھ s.th.); to grind
down, crush ( ھ s.th.); -- (nahk) and nahika
a (nahk, نھكة nahka) to exhaust, weaken,
enfeeble, debilitate, sap the strength of,
wear out, wear down, enervate, unnerve,
waste, emaciate ( ه s.o.); nahika and pass.
nuhika to be worn off, worn out, run down,
used up, spent, exhausted, enervated, gaunt,
emaciated │ نھك عرضه (‘irḍahū) to injure
s.o.’s honor IV to exhaust, wear out,
enervate, ruin ( ه s.o.) VIII to waste,
emaciate, enervate, exhaust ( ه s.o.); to
violate, abuse, defile, profane, desecrate ( ھ
s.th.); to infringe, violate ( ھ a law), offend
against ( ھ ); to rape, ravish ( ھا a woman); to
insult, defame, malign, slander, abuse,
brutalize ( ه a man) │ لا ينتھك yuntahaku
inviolable, sacrosanct, sacred, consecrated
نھك nallk weakening, exhaustion,
enervation, attrition; consumption,
depletion, exhaustion; abuse, misuse;
infraction, violation; profanation,
desecration; sacrilege
نھكة nahka exhaustion; emaciation,
wasting away
انھاك inhāk exhaustion
انتھاك intihāk weakening, exhaustion,
enervation, attrition; consumption,
depletion, exhaustion; abuse, misuse;
infraction, violation; profanation,
desecration; sacrilege; rape │ انتھاك الحرمة
int. al-ḥurma sacrilege: انتھاك العورة int.
al-‘aura offense involving moral turpitude
منھك munhik grueling, exhausting
نھل nahila a (nahal, منھل manhal) to
drink
نھلة nahla pl. nahalāt drink, draught,
gulp, swallow
منھل manhal pl. منھل manāhil watering
place, spring, pool 1004
نھم nahima a (naham, نھامة nahāma) to have a
ravenous appetite, be insatiable; to be
greedy, covetous ( في of)
نھم naham, ravenous appetite, voracity;
greed, greediness, avidity
نھمة nahma burning desire, craving,
greed, avidity
نھيم nahim greedy, avid; insatiable,
voracious; glutton, gourmand
نھيم nahīm greedy, avid; insatiable,
voracious; glutton, gourmand
منھوم manhūm greedy, avid; insatiable;
covetous, desirous ( ب of s.th.)
نھنه nahnaha to restrain, hold back, keep,
prevent ( عن s.o. from); to sob
نھو ) and نھا (نھي nahā u (nahw) and نھى
nahā a (nahy) to forbid ( عن s.o. s.th., to do
s.th.), prohibit, ban ( عن s.o. from doing
s.th.), interdict, proscribe ( عن ه to s.o. s.th.);
to restrain, hold back, keep, prevent ( عن
s.o. from); pass. نھي nuhiya to come, get (
الى to s.o.; of news), reach ( الى s.o.), come to
s.o.’s knowledge IV to get ( الى ھ s.th. to
s.o.), make s.th. ( ھ ) reach s.o. ( الى ); to
communicate, transmit, make known ( الى ھ
s.th. to s.o.), bring ( ھ s.th.) to s.o.’s ( (الى
knowledge, inform, apprise ( ھ الى s.o. of
s.th.); to bring to an end, terminate, finish,
end, wind up, conclude, complete ( ھ s.th.);
to put an end to s.th. ( ھ ), settle, decide ( ھ
s.th.) VI to come to an end, run out, expire
(period of time); to attain a high degree; to
come, get ( الى to s.o.), reach ( الى s.o.); to
desist, refrain, abstain ( عن from), give up,
renounce, forgo, abandon ( عن s.th.), cease,
stop ( عن doing s.th.) │ تناھى الى اسماعھم
(asmā‘ihim) to come to s.o.’s hearing, to
s.o.‘s knowledge VIII to be concluded,
terminated, finished, done with, settled,
decided, be over; to run out, expire, come
to an end (appointed time); to end, end up,
wind up ( ب by, in or with); to finish,
terminate, conclude, wind up ( عن s.th.), be
or become finished, done, be through ( ب
with s.th.); to wind up, land eventually ( الى
at), get ultimately ( الى to); (with الى ان ) to
come or lead to the point where ..., end at
the point where, get eventually so that ...,
result in; to come to s.o.’s ( الى ) knowledge;
to lead, lead up, bring ( الى ب s.o. to); to
desist, refrain, abstain ( عن from s.th.), give
up, renounce, forgo, abandon ( عن s.th.),
cease, stop ( عن doing s.th.) │ انتھى الأمر الى
ان the upshot was that, the long and short of
it was that …; انتھى به الأمر الى ان he got to
the point where ...
نھي nahy prohibition, ban, interdiction,
proscription │ النھي والأمر (amr) unlimited,
absolute authority, dictatorial power,
command
نھيي nahyī prohibitory, prohibitive,
prohibitionary
نھى nuhan intelligence, understanding,
reason, mind, intellect
نھية nuhya mind, intellect
نھاء nihā’ utmost degree, limit
نھاية nihāya pl. -āt end; termination,
conclusion; outcome, result, upshot; the
utmost; limit, utmost degree, extreme,
extremity; nihāyatan in the end, at last,
finally, ultimately, eventually │ في النھاية in
the end, at last, finally, ultimately,
eventually; الى النھاية to the end; بلا نھاية (bilā)
unending(ly); الى غير نھاية or الى ما لا نھاية
له ( ١ ā nihāyata) unendingly, to infinity, ad
infinitum; للنھاية to the greatest extent,
extremely; نھاية الأرب n. al-arab the ultimate
goal; النھاية الصغرى (ṣugrā) minimum; النھاية
الكبرى ( العظمى ) (kubrā, ‘uẓmā) maximum;
النھاية العليا (‘ulyā) the best grade, the highest
rating (in a system of school marks); اعلى
درجة في النھاية الكبرى (a‘lā darajatin) absolute
maximum (of temperature); اعلى درجة 1005
في النھاية اصغرى (aqṣā d.) absolute
minimum; حد النھاية ḥadd an-n. utmost limit,
last step; كان نھاية في الحذق (nihāyatan, ḥidq)
to be the ne plus ultra of skill, be extremely
skillful
نھائي nihā’ī extreme, utmost, last, final;
ultimate, eventual; final, decisive,
conclusive, definitive; نھائيا at last, finally │
انذار نھائي (indār) or بلاغ نھائي (balāg)
ultimatum; حكم نھائي (ḥukm) final decision,
final judgment (jur.); علاج نھائي extreme
remedy, last resource; فوز ي (fauz) ultimate
triumph, eventual success; مباران نھائي a
final match, final (in sports)
لا نھائي lā-nihā’ī infinite, unending
لانھائية lā-nihā’īya infinity
انھاء inhā’ finishing, termination,
completion, conclusion; settlement;
suspension, stop
تناه tanāhin finity, finitude, limitedness;
expiration (of a period of time)
انتھاء intihā’ end, termination,
completion, conclusion, close; expiration │
انتھاء الأجل int. al-ajal end of life, death
ناه nāhin interdictory, prohibitory,
prohibitive │ ھذا رجل ناھيك من رجل (rajulun
nāhīka) here is a man to fill any man’s
shoes; ناھيك من (also عن or ب) how excellent
is! how remarkable is …! suffice it to …!
let it be enough to …! to say nothing of ...,
not to mention …, let alone ...; above all, in
the first place, primarily; take, for
instance, ...! ناھيك ب it is enough to mention
ناھيك بأن ;… (bi-an) let it be enough to …;
let it suffice you to know that ...; not to
mention the fact that ...; to say nothing of
the fact that ...; aside from the fact that ...
ناھية nāhiya pl. نواه nawāhin ban,
prohibition, proscription
منھي manhīy forbidden, prohibited,
interdicted, illicit
متناه matanāhin finished, terminated,
expired; limited, bounded, finite; utmost,
extreme; excessive, exaggerated │ غير متناه
unlimited, boundless, infinite, unending,
endless; متناه في الدقة (diqqa) extremely thin,
of the greatest fineness; متناه في الصغر
(ṣigari) extremely tiny, minute
منته muntahin ceasing, running out;
finished, done; expired (validity)
منتھى muntahan finished, terminated;
end; the utmost, extreme; highest degree,
utmost limit │ بمنتھى الشدة bi-m. š-šidda with
extreme force; في منتھى الدقة (m. d-diqqa)
extremely thin; بلغ منتھاه to reach its highest
degree
ناء (نوء ) nā’a u (nau’) to fall down, sink
down, break down, collapse, succumb ( ب
under a burden); to weigh heavily ( ب upon
s.o.) │ ناء بالحمل (ḥaml) to bear a burden
with difficulty; to be weighed down by a
burden; ناء بكلكله (bi-kalkalihī) to oppress
s.o. grievously, weigh heavily upon s.o. III
to offer resistance ( ه to s.o.), resist, oppose,
withstand, defy ( ه s.o.); to vie, compete ( ه
with s.o.); to fight, struggle, contend ( ه with
s.o.) │ ناوأه العداء (‘adā’a) to be hostile to
s.o., treat s.o. with hostility IV to weigh
down, crush ( ه s.o.)
نوء nau’ pl. انواء anwā’, نوآن nau’ān,
tempest, storm; gale, hurricane
مناوأة munāwa’a resistance, opposition,
recalcitrance, insubordination; struggle,
contention, strife
ناب (نوب 2 ) nāba u (naub, مناب manāb, نيابة
niyāba) to represent ( عن s.o.), act as
representative ( عن of s.o.), deputize,
substitute ( عن for s.o.), act as deputy,
substitute, or proxy ( عن of s.o.), take s.o.’s
عن) ) place, replace ( عن s.o.), perform
s.o.’s ( عن ) office, act in s.o.’s ( عن ) behalf;
to return from time to time ( الى to s.o.),
visit periodically ( الى s.o.), 1006 frequent (
الى s.o.’s place); -- (naub, نوبة nauba) to
afflict, hit, strike, befall ( ه s.o.; of
misfortune), happen, occur ( ه to s.o.), fall
to s.o.’s ( ه) lot or share, descend ( ه upon
s.o.) II to appoint ( ه s.o.) as deputy or
agent ( عن of), commission, depute, or
delegate ( ه s.o.) to act in behalf of ( عن ) III
to take turns, alternate ( ه with s.o.) IV to
depute, deputize ( ه s.o.), commission or
delegate ( ه s.o.) to act in behalf of ( عن ), in
s.o.’s ( عن ) place; to empower, authorize ( ه
s.o.) to act in behalf of ( عن ); to come from
time to time ( الى to s.o.), visit frequently (
الى s.o.), frequent ( الى s.o.’s place) │ اناب
􀍿 الى to turn repentantly to God VI to take
turns, alternate ( في or على in, also ھ in
some activity), do s.th. ( في or على , also (ھ
by turns; to visit, befall or afflict ( ه s.o.)
successively or alternately │ تناوبته الخطوب
he has suffered one misfortune after the
other VIII to befall, beset, afflict ( ه s.o.),
happen, occur ( ه to s.o.)
نوبة nauba pl. نوب nuwab change,
alternation, shift, rotation; (one’s) turn;
time, instance (= مرة marra); case,
instance, occasion; -- (pl. -āt) fit, attack,
paroxysm (path.); crisis; change (or relief)
of the guard, guard duty, guard; bugle
call; (syr.) troupe of musicians, small
orchestra of native instruments │ بالنوبة
alternately, in rotation, by turns,
successively, one by one, one alter the
other; نوبة عصبية (‘aṣabīya) nervous crisis;
نوبات غضبه n. gaḍabihī his fits of rage; نوبة
قلبية (qalbīya) heart attack; نوبات المطر n. almaṭar
rainy spells, periods of rain; جاءت
نوبته it was his turn
نوبتجي naubatjī on duty; commander of
the guard, officer on duty
نوبة nauba pl. نوب nuwab misfortune,
calamity, mishap, misadventure, accident,
reverse, heavy blow
نيابة niyāba representation, replacement,
substitution, proxy, deputyship; branch
office, branch, agency; delegation;
prosecution, office of the district attorney
│ نيابة عن niyābatan ‘an in place of,
instead of, in lieu of; بالنيابة acting, deputy,
by proxy; مدير المصلحة بالنيابة (mudīr almaṣlaḥa)
the deputy director of the
department; بالنيابة عن in the name of, in
behalf of; نيابة عمومية (‘umūmīya)
prosecution, office of the district attorney;
رئيس النيابة chief prosecutor; وكيل النيابة
representative of the prosecution,
prosecuting attorney; النيابات المالية (mālīya)
the financial delegations (in Algeria)
نيابي niyābī vicarious, deputed,
delegated; representative; parliamentary │
حكومة نيابية representative (parliamentary)
government; مجلس نيابي (majlis) parliament
مناب manāb replacement, substitution,
proxy, deputyship; substitute; office
performed by proxy, place taken as
deputy; share, portion, allotment │ ناب
منابه to represent s.o., substitute for s.o., act
in s.o.’s behalf
مناوبة munāwaba alternation, rotation;
munāwabatan alternately, in rotation, by
turns, successively, one by one, one after
the other │ بالمناوبة do.; مناوبة الري m. ar-rīy
(Eg.) periodic rotation in irrigation انابة
ināba authorization; deputation,
delegation, appointment as authorized
agent or deputy │ انابات قضائية (qaḍā’īya)
requests for legal assistance (from court to
court)
تناوب tanāwub alternation, rotation,
periodic change; O alternation (el.) │ بالتناو
ب successively, one after the other, one by
one, by turns, alternately, in rotation 1007
نائب nā’ib pl. نواب nuwwāb
representative, agent, proxy, substitute,
alternate; delegate; deputy; (with foll.
genit.) vice-; authorized agent; sergeant
(formerly, Syr.; mil.); authorized
representative of a cadi, assistant
magistrate (Isl. Law), also نائب شرعي
(šar‘ī) │ نائب الرئيس vice-president; vicechairman;
نائب عام (‘āmm) or نائب عمومي
(‘umūmī) public prosecutor; نائب العريف
corporal (Ir.); نائب القنصل n. al-qunṣul viceconsul;
نائب الملك n. al-malik viceroy; نائب
مالي (mālī) financial delegate (Alg.); مجلس
النواب majlis an-n. house of
representatives, parliament
نائب nā’ib share, portion; allotment;
contingent, quota; distributive share in
estate, statutory portion
نائبة nā’iba pl. -āt, نوائب nawā’ib2
vicissitudes, ups and downs (of luck, of a
battle, etc.); heavy blow, disaster,
calamity, misfortune
منوب munawwib mandator (jur.);
constituent, voter
منوب munawwab: ضابط منوب officer on
duty, commander of the guard
مناوب munāwib on duty (esp. officer)
منيب munīb repentant
متناوب mutanāwib alternating, alternate,
rotating, successive │ تيار متناوب (ṭayyār)
alternating current (el.)
بلاد النوبة 2 bilād an-nūba Nubia
نوبي nūbī Nubian (adj. and n.)
نات (نوت 1 ) (naut) to away, real, totter, stagger
نوت 2 nōt and نوتة nōta notes (mus.), also نوت
الموسيقى n. al-mūsīqā
نوتة nōta note, remark
نوتي 3 nūtī pl. نواتي nawātīy, نوتية nūtīya
seaman, mariner, sailor; skipper │ نوتي اول
seaman apprentice, نوتي ممتاز (mumtāz)
seaman (mil.; Eg. نواتي السفينة ;( 1939 ship’s
crew
نوح 1 nūḥ Noah
ناح (نوح 2 ) nāḥa u (nauḥ, نواح nuwāḥ, نياح niyāḥ,
نياحة niyāḥa, مناح manāḥ) to wail, weep,
lament; to mourn, bemoan, bewail ( على
s.o.); to coo (pigeon) ill to be opposite
s.th. ( ھ ), lie face to face ( ھ with), face ( ھ
s.th.) V to awing; to pendulate, dangle; to
sway VI to howl, whine (wind)
نوح nauḥ and نواح nuwāḥ loud loud
weeping, wailing, lamentation (for the
dead)
نواح nawwāḥ mourner
نواحة nawwāḥa hired female mourner
نائحة nā’iḥa pl. نوائح nawā’iḥ نائحات , 2
nā’iḥa hired female mourner
مناحة manāḥa lamentation, wailing,
mourning
نوخ II to halt for a rest; to take up residence IV
to make ( ھ a camel) kneel down; to stay,
remain ( ب at a place) │ اناخ عليه البؤس بكلكله
(bu’su bi-kalkalihī) to be in great distress,
be in a gray, plight X to kneel down
مناخ manāk pl. -āt halting place, way
station; residence, abode; -- munāk,
manāk climate
مناخي munākī, manākī climatic
ناد (نود ) nāda u (naud, نواد nuwād, نودان
nawadān) and V to away; to awing back
and forth; to pendulate
نور 1 II to flower, blossom, be in bloom; to put
forth or bear ( ھ blossoms); to light,
illuminate, fill with light, furnish with
lights ( ل or ه s.th.); to shed light ( ل or ه on
s.th.); to enlighten ( ل or ه s.o.); to light ( ھ
a lamp) IV انار anāra to light, illuminate,
fill with light, furnish with 1008 lights ( ھ
s.th.); to throw light ( ھ on a problem),
elucidate, explain, clarify ( ھ a problem);
انور anwara to come to light, show,
appear, be uncovered, be disclosed, be
revealed V to be lighted, be lit, be
illuminated; to receive enlightenment, be
enlightened X to seek enlightenment,
insight, or an explanation; to receive light,
be lighted, be lit, be illuminated; to obtain
enlightenment, gain insight, get an
explanation, receive information
نار nār f., pl. نيران nīrān fire; rifle fire,
gunfire; conflagration; النار Hell │ جبل النار
jabal an-n. volcano; شريط النار slow match,
fuse; شيخ النار šaik an-n. the Devil; اشھر من
نار على علم (‘alam) very famous; كان على نار
to be on pins and needles; نيران حامية
(ḥāmiya) heavy fire, drumfire (mil.)
ناري nārī fiery, igneous, fire- (in
compounds); burning, blazing, red-hot │
آلة نارية (in popular usage) motor, any
motor-driven device; دراجة نارية (darrāja)
motorcycle; سلاح ناري firearm; شھم ناري
(sahm) rocket; طلق ناري (ṭalaq) shot (from
a firesrm), rifleshot, gunshot; العاب نارية
fireworks; مقذوف ناري projectile (of a
firearm), bullet, shell
نور naur (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اانوار anwār
blossom(s), flower(s)
نور nūr pl. انوار anwār light; ray of
light, light beam; brightness, gleam, glow;
illumination; light, lamp; O head-light (of
an automobile); lantern │ O نور براق
(barrāq) blinker, flashing light; O نور ثابت
steady light; نور الدلالة ad-dalāla leading
light (naut.); نور كشاف (kaššāf) or نور كاشف
searchlight (mil.); O انوار خفية (kafīya)
indirect lighting; ام النور umm an-n. the
Virgin Mary; سبت النور sabt an-n. Easter
Saturday (Chr.); عليك نور bravo! excellent!
well done! رأى النور to come into being,
come into the world, be born
نوري nūrī luminary, luminous, like
light; light-, lighting- (in compounds);
bright, shining, brilliant, radiant
نوراني nūrānī luminous
نورانية nurānīya luminosity, brilliance
نور nawar (coll.) gypsies; vagabonds,
tramps
نوري nawarī gypsy; vagabond, tramp
 نور nūra lime; depilatory agent
نير nayyir luminous; shining, brilliant;
lighted, illuminated, brightly lit, full of
light; clear, plain, distinct; النيران sun and
moon
نوار nuwwār (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. نواوير
nawāwīr2 blossom(s), flower(s)
منار manār and منارة manāra pl. مناور
manāwir منائر , 2 manā’ir2 lighthouse;
minaret
منور manwar pl. مناور manāwir2 light
hole (in a wall); skylight
تنوير tanwīr flowering, blossoming,
bloom, efflorescence; lighting,
illumination; enlightenment; التنوير and
تنوير العقول the Enlightenment
مناورة see below
انارة ināra lighting. illumination;
enlightenment
نائرة nā’ira hatred, flame of war
منور munawwar lighted, illuminated;
enlightened; shining, brilliant; bright │
المنورة epithet of Medina
منير munīr luminous, radiant, brilliant,
shining; enlightening, illuminative │ جسم
منير (jism) luminous body, luminary,
illuminant
متنور mutanawwir lighted, illuminated
مستنير mustanīr lighted, illuminated;
enlightened; educated; an educated person
1009
مناورة 2 munāwara maneuver; trick; shunting
(railroad); مناورات military maneuvers │
مناورات جوية (jawwīya) air maneuvers;
مناورة دبلوماسية diplomatic maneuver; عامل
المناورة shunter
نورج nauraj pl. نوارج nawārij2 threshing
machine, thresher
نورز nauraz (coll.; n. un. ة) sea gull(s) (zool.)
نورستانيا nūrastāniyā neurasthenia
نوروز naurūz Persian New Year’s Day
ناس (نوص 1 ) nāsa u (naus, نوسان nawasān) to
dangle, swing back and forth, bob
نواس nawwās dangling, bobbing,
swinging; O pendulum (Syr.)
ناووس 2 nāwūs, ناءوس na’ūs pl. نواويس nawāwīs2
sarcophagus
ناس 3 nās people, see انس
نوسر nausara to form a fistula ( (ناسور
نوش III to skirmish, engage in a skirmish ( ه
with s.o.); to brush ( ھ against s.th.), play (
ھ around or about s.th.)
نوشة nauša (eg.) typhoid fever
مناوشة munāwaša skirmish,
engagement, encounter │ مناوشة حربية
(ḥarbīya) engagement, armed clash; pl.
hostilities
مناويش munāwīš and مناويشي manāwīšī
(eg.) bluish purple
نوشادر nūšādir ammonia
نوص) ناص) nāṣa u (nauṣ, مناص manāṣ, منيص
manīṣ) to avoid, shirk, evade, dodge ( عن
s.th.), flee, draw hack ( عن from) VIII to
grow dim, die down (light, lamp)
نوص nauṣ wild ass, onager
مناص manāṣ and منيص manīṣ
avoidance, shirking, evasion; escape, way
out │ لا مناص منه (manāṣa) inevitable,
unavoidable
ناط ( نوط ) nāṭa u (nauṭ, نياط niyāṭ) to hang,
suspend ( ب ھ s.th. on); to entrust ( ب ھ
s.th. to s.o., ھ ب s.o. with), commission ( ھ
ب s.o. to do s.th.), charge ( ھ ب s.o. with);
to make dependent, conditional ( ب or على ه
s.th. on); pass. نيط nīṭa to depend, be
dependent, be conditional ( ب on), he
linked ( ب to), be connected ( ب with),
belong ( ب to); to be entrusted ( ب to s.o.);
to hang, be suspended ( على on) II and IV =
I │ اناطه بشرط (bi-šarṭin) to make s.th.
dependent on (or subject to) a condition,
make s.th. conditional; اناطه بعھدته
(bi-‘uhdatihī) to entrust s.o. with the
responsibility for s.th., make s.o.
responsible for s.th.
نوط nauṭ pl. انواط anwāṭ, نياط niyāṭ s.th.
suspended, hanging, or attached;
decoration, medal, order, badge of honor
│ نوط الجدارة n. al-jadāra order of merit
نيط naiṭ pl. نياط niyāṭ sorta │ منظر يشق له
نياط القلوب (manẓarun yušaqqu) a heartrending
light; قطع نياط القلوب to break the
heart
مناط manāṭ place where s.th. is
suspended; object, butt (e.g., of mockery);
anchor (of hope) │ مناوط الثريا m. atturayyā
or مناط الجوزاء m. al-jauzā’ the
highest heavens, as high, or as far, as the
Pleiades (or Gemini, respectively)
تنوط tanawwuṭ, tunawwiṭ weaverbird
منوط manūṭ dependent, conditional ( ب
on)
منوط munawwaṭ entrusted,
commissioned ( ب with), in charge of ( (ب
مناط munāṭ entrusted, commissioned ( ب
with), in charge of ( (ب
نوع II to divide into various kinds,
classify ( ھ s.th.); to make different,
diversify, vary, variegate ( ھ s.th.), give
variety ( ھ to); to change, alter, vary,
modify, alter in its outward appearance ( ھ
s.th.), 1010 change the appearance ( ھ of)
V to be of various kinds or forms; to be
manifold, diverse, varying, variegated,
multiform, complex
نوع nau’ pl. انواع anwā’ kind, sort, type,
species; variety; way, manner, mode,
fashion; form; nature, character, quality,
grade; نوعا nau’an somewhat, a little; to a
certain extent, in some measure, in a
certain way, so to speak, as it were │ نوعا
ما somehow or other, in a way, after a
fashion, somewhat; نوعا وكمية (wakammīyatan)
in nature and quantity,
qualitatively and quantitatively; بنوع خاص
(kāṣṣ) in particular, especially; الأول من
نوعه the first of his (its) kind; ظالمون على
انواعھم oppressors of all kinds, all sorts of
oppressors; نوع الإنسان or النوع الإنساني the
human race
نوعي nau’ī relative to the nature or
type; characteristic, peculiar, proper;
essential; specific │ ثقل (وزن) نوعي (tiql,
wazn) specific gravity
تنويع tanwī’ change, alteration,
modification
تنوع tanawwu’ diversity, variety,
multiplicity; change, change-over,
readjustment
منوع munawwa’ different, diverse,
various, miscellaneous, sundry, manifold,
multifarious, complex
متنوع mutanawwi’ different, diverse,
various, miscellaneous, sundry, manifold,
multifarious, complex; متنوعات miscellany
(heading of a newspaper column)
نوف 1 ) and ناف (نيف nāfa u (nauf) to be high,
lofty, exalted, sublime; to exceed ( عن or
على s.th., esp., a number), be above ( عن or
على ), be more than ( عن or على ), go beyond
عن) or ما ينوف على الحمسين │ ( على more than
fifty II نيف nayyafa and IV to go beyond (
عن or على ), be more than ( عن or ,(على
exceed ( عن or على s.th.) │ ما ينيف عن ثلاث
سنوات (talāt sanawātin) more than three
years, over three years
ناف nāf yoke
نوف nauf pl. انواف anwāf that which
exceeds a number or measure, excess,
overplus, surplus
نيف nayyif excess, overplus, surplus │
نيف و or ونيف together with round figures:
some ..., ... and some, ... odd, e.g., نيف
وعشرون some twenty, twenty and some,
twenty odd
نيافة niyāfa Excellency, Eminence
(Copt.-Chr.; title of cardinals and bishops)
منيف munīf high, tall, lofty; exalted,
sublime; outstanding, excellent
منوفي 2 manūfī a brand of Egyptian cotton
نوفمبر nūfimbir, novembir November
نوق V تنوق tanawwaqa and تنيق tanayyaqa to be
squeamish, fastidious, finical, dainty,
choosy ( في in) X استنوق istanwaqa: استنوق
الجمل (jamala) he mistook the he-camel for
a she-camel (proverbially of a mistake)
ناقة nāqa pl. نوق nūq, نياق niyāq, ناقات
nāqāt she-camel │ لا ناقة لي في الأمر ولا جمل
(nāqata, jamala) I have no hand in this
matter, I have nothing to do with it
نيق nayyiq squeamish, finical,
fastidious, choosy, dainty, overnice
انواك anwāk2 foolish, silly, stupid
نال ( نول ) nāla u (naul) to give, donate, present,
offer, hold out, grant, award ( ل ب or ه to
s.o. s.th.), confer, bestow ( ب ل or ه upon
s.o. s.th.) II to let ( ه s.o.) obtain ( ھ s.th.),
give, afford, bring, yield ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.)
III to give, hand, pass, present, offer,
extend, serve, hand over, deliver ( ھ ل or ه
to s.o. s.th.) │ ناوله القربان (qurbāna) to
administer the Communion to 1011 s.o.
(Chr.) VI to reach ( ھ for s.th.), take ( ھ
s.th.); to accept ( ھ s.th.; to receive, get,
obtain ( ھ s.th.); to take, eat ( ھ food), have
ھ) a meal, tea, coffee, etc.); to take s.th. (
ھ ) out of ( من ), derive, draw, obtain ( من ھ
s.th. from); to take in, grasp, comprehend
ھ) the meaning of s.th.); to take up, treat,
discuss ( ھ a subject), deal with ( ھ ); to
extend ( ھ to), include, encompass ( ھ
s.th.); to reach ( ه s.o.; of a glance); to
partake of the Communion, communicate
(Chr.)
نول naul pl. انوال anwāl gift; way,
manner, mode, fashion; loom; freightage,
freight
نوال nawāl gift, s.th. received; favor,
benefit; that which is proper, right,
incumbent, a duty │ نوالك ان تفعل كذا you
must do this; ليس ذلك بنوال that’s improper,
that isn’t right
منول minwal and منوال minwāl loom
منوال minwāl way, manner, mode,
fashion; method, procedure; form │ على
ھذا المنوال in this manner, this way; ھم على
منوال واحد they are of one stamp, they are
all alike; منوالك ان تفعل كذا you must do it
this way
مناولة munāwala presentation, offering,
handing over, delivery; Communion
(Chr.)
تناول tanāwul taking of food, eating,
drinking; comprehension, grasp,
receptivity; Communion (Chr.)
متناول mutanāwil reaching out, taking,
seizing, grabbing; partaking of the Lord’s
Supper, communicating; communicant
متناول mutanāwal attainable, available,
within reach; attainableness, availability;
reach, range │ اعسر متناولا difficult to
reach, hard to get at; تحت (في) متناول يده (m.
yadihī) available, at s.o.’s disposal, within
reach, handy, on hand; في متناوله attainable
to s.o., within s.o.’s reach; في متناول الجميع
within everybody’s means; في متناول كل
الأفھام comprehensible to all, understood by
all; جعل ھ في متناول to bring s.th. within
s.o.’s reach, make s.th. attainable,
available to s.o.
نولون naulūn and ناولون nāwulūn pl. نوالين
nawālīn2 freightage, freight
نام (نوم ) nāma (1st pers. perf. nimtu) a (naum,
نيام niyām) to sleep, slumber; to go to bed;
to go to sleep; to abate, subside, let up,
calm down, be calm (wind, sea, etc.); to
be inactive, dull, listless (market); to be
benumbed, be numb (limb); to neglect,
omit, overlook ( عن s.th.), forget ( عن about
s.th.), fail to think of ( عن ); to be reassured
الى) by s.th.), accept ( الى s.th.), assent ( الى
to), acquiesce ( الى in); to place confidence
الى) in s.o.), trust ( الى s.th.) │ ينام ملء جفنه
(mil’a jafnihī) he sleeps the sleep of the
just II to lull ( ه s.o.) to sleep, make ( ه s.o.)
sleep, put to bed ( ه, esp., a child); to
anesthetize, narcotize, put to sleep ( ه s.o.)
IV = II; VI to pretend to be asleep; to
place confidence, put trust ( الى in s.o.) X
to let o.s. be lulled to sleep or narcotized (
ل by s.th.); to accede ( ل to s.th.), comply (
ل with); to trust ( الى s.o.), have confidence
الى) in s.o.), rely, depend ( الى on s.o.); to
entrust ( ب الى s.th. to s.o.); to be reassured
الى) by s.th.), accept tacitly ( الى s.th.),
acquiesce ( الى in s.th.), content o.s. be
content ( الى with)
نوم naum sleep, slumber │ غرفة النوم
gurfat an-n. bedroom; قميص النوم night,
gown, nightshirt
نومي naumī of or pertaining to sleep,
somn(i)-, sleeping- (in compounds)
نومة nauma sleep, nap
نومة nuwama one who sleeps much,
sleeper
نوام nawwām one given to sleep, sleeper
نؤوم na’ūm sound asleep; one given to
sleep, sleeper; late riser, slugabed 1012
منام manām sleep; (pl. -āt) dream
منام manām place to sleep; bedroom,
dormitory
منامة manāma place to sleep; bedroom,
dormitory; nightwear, nightgown, nightshirt;
-- المنامة Manama (capital of Bahrein
Islands)
تنويم tanwīm lulling to sleep;
narcotization, anesthetization; hypnotism,
hypnosis
نائم nā’im pl. نيام niyām, نوم nuwwam, نيم
nuyyam, نوام nuwwām, نيام nuyyām
sleeping; asleep; numb, benumbed (limb);
calm, tranquil, peaceful (night)
منوم munawwim sleep-inducing,
somniferous, soporific; narcotic;
hypnotist; (pl. -āt) a soporific,
somnifacient │ جرعة منوم (jur‘a) soporific
potion, sleeping draught, nightcap; دواء
منوم (dawā’) a soporific, somnifacient
نون II to add a final nūn ( ھ to a noun), provide
with the nunnation ( ھ a noun; gram.)
نون nūn pl. -āt name of the letter -- ;ن
(pl. نينان nīnān, انوان anwān) large fish,
whale │ ذو النون the Prophet Jonah
نوني nūnī shaped like a ن, crescentshaped
نونة nūna dimple in the chin
تنوين tanwīn nunnation (gram.) │ ھما
كالتنوين والإضافة (iḍāfa) they are like day
and light, they are diametrically opposed,
they are as unlike as they could be
نوه II to raise, elevate ( ھ s.th.); to praise, laud,
extol, acclaim ( ب s.o.), speak highly ( ب
of); to commend, cite ( ب s.o. or s.th.); to
.trees, emphasize ( ب s.th.); to make
mention, speak ( ب of s.o. or s.th.), refer ( ب
to, also عن to s.th.), name, mention ( عن
s.th.); to hint ( عن or ب or الى at). allude ( عن
or ب or الى to), intimate, imply ( عن or ب or
الى s.th.)
نوه tanwīh encomium, tribute, praise;
mentioning, mention; reference; hint,
allusion
نوى nawā i ( نية nīya, نواة nawāh) to intend,
propose, purpose, plan, have in mind,
make up one’s mind ( ھ to do s.th.),
resolve, determine ( ھ on s.th. or to do
s.th.); -- i ( نوى nawan) to absent o.s., go
away ( عن or من from) II to miaow (cat) III
to make an enemy of s.o. ( ه), fall out with
s.o. ( ه), be hostile, antagonistic ( ه to),
declare o.s. the enemy ( ه of) VIII to
propose, purpose, intend ( ھ to do s.th.)
نوى nawan remoteness, distance;
destination
نوى nawan (coll.) date pits; fruit
kernels, atones
نواة nawāh (n. un.) pl. نويات nawayāt
date pit; fruit kernel, stone; core; center;
atomic nucleus; nucleus (fig., from which
s.th. will grow), central point, starting
point │ نوة الذرة n. ad-darra atomic
nucleus
نووي nawawī nuclear, nucleal, nuclei-,
nuclea- (in compounds); of or pertaining
to nuclear physics, nuclear, atomic │ اسلحة
نووية (asliḥa) nuclear weapons
ني nayy fat; see also under نئ
نية nīya pl. -āt, نوايا nawāyā intention,
intent, design, purpose, plan, scheme;
determination, will, volition, direction of
will; tendency, inclination, desire │ على نية
with the intention to ...; في نية ان it is
intended to ...; حسن النية ḥusn an-n. good
intention, good will, sincerity, honesty;
سلامة النية salāmat an-n. guilelessness,
innocence, sincerity; bona fides, good
faith (jur.); سليم النية undesigning, guileless,
artless, sincere; simplehearted, ingenuous,
simple-minded; سوء النية sū’ an-n. evil
intent, insincerity, malice, 1013 cunning,
deceit; (jur.) bad faith, mala fides, dolus
malus; بسوء النية against one’s better
judgment; (jur.) in bad faith, mala fide;
صافي النية ṣāfī an-n. sincere, candid, frank,
openhearted; اخلص له النية (nīyata) to be
loyally attached to s.o. or s.th.; اخلص له النية
ل or حسنت نيته في ḥasunat nīyatuhū li do.;
to have good intentions, be wellintentioned
toward ...; اصلح نيته (nīyatahū)
to evoke the right intention in one’s heart
(ethical and religious); عقد النية على to
determine on s.th., resolve to do s.th.,
direct one’s intention to
مناو munāwin hostile, unfriendly
ناء (نيء ) nā’a i ( نيء nay’, نيوء nuyū’,
نيوءة nuyū’a) to be raw, uncooked (esp.,
meat)
نيء nī’, ني nīy raw; unripe; gross
(weight); see also under نوى
ناب nāb pl. انياب anyāb, نيوب nuyūb, اناييب
anāyīb2 canine tooth, eyetooth; tusk; fang
│ كشر عن انيابه (kaššara) to bare one’s teeth
ناب nāb pl. انياب anyāb, نيوب nuyūb, نيب
nīb old she-camel
نيتروجين nitrōžé nitrogen
متنيح mutanayyaḥ late lamented, deceased
(Chr.; eg.)
نير 1 nayyir see نور
نير 2 nīr pl. انيار anyār, نيران nīrān yoke
نيرة nīra gums (of the teeth)
نيروز nairūz New Year’s Day (Chr.-Copt.)
نيزك naizak pl. نيازك nayāzik2 short lance;
shooting star, meteor
نيس nīs Nice (seaport in S France)
نيسان nīsān 2 April (Syr., leb., Jord., Ir.)
نيشان nīšān see (نشان (نشن
نيص nīṣ porcupine
نيط، نياط see نوط
نيف see نوف
نيق see نوق
نيقوسيا nīqōsiyā Nicosia (capital of Cyprus)
ناك (نيك ) nāka i to have sexual intercourse ( ھا
with a woman)
نيكل nikl nickel
نال (نيل 1 ) nāla (1st pers. perf. niltu) a (nail, منال
manāl) to obtain, attain, achieve ( ھ s.th.),
get hold, get possession ( ھ of); to win,
gain, acquire, earn ( ھ s.th.); to get, obtain,
procure ( ل ھ s.th. for s.o.); to accomplish (
من ھ s.th. with s.o.), succeed ( من ھ in s.th.
with s.o.), get s.th. ( ھ ) from s.o. ( من ); to
affect, influence ( من s.o., s.th.), bear upon
s.th. ( من ); to cause damage, do harm ( من to
s.o., to s.th.), prejudice, impair, harm ( من
s.th.) │ نال من عرضه (‘irḍihī) to decry,
depreciate, discredit, defame, malign,
slander s.o.; نال منه اوفر منال (aufara
manālin) to do s.o. untold damage, harm
s.o. most grievously; ناله بسوء (bi-sū’in) to
harm s.o. or s.th.; ناله بضر (bi-ḍurrin) do.;
نال من نفسه ابلغ منال see منال below IV to
make or let ( ل or ه s.o.) obtain ( ھ s.th.),
procure, get ( ل ھ or ه s.th. for s.o.)
نيل nail obtainment, attainment,
acquisition; a favor received
منال manāl obtainment, attainment,
achievement, acquisition │ بعيد المنال
unattainable; intangible, impalpable, far
from reality; صعب المنال ṣa‘b al-m.
unattainable; قريب (سھل) منال (sahl) easy to
get, attainable; ممكن المنال mukmin al-m.
attainable; نال من نفسه ابلغ منال (ablaga
manālin) it made the deepest impression
on him
نائل nā’il acquirer, earner, obtainer,
gainer, winner; a favor received, a boon,
benefit, gain 1014
نيل 2 II to dye with indigo ( ھ s.th.)
نيل nīl, نيلة nīla indigo plant, indigo
منيل munayyal dyed with indigo
نيل 3 II (eg.) to channel Nile water onto the
fields for the purpose of alluviating the
soil
النيل an-nīl the Nile │ زمن النيل zaman
an-nīl time of the Nile inundation; عرائس
النيل flowers of the European white water
lily (nenuphar)
نيلي nīlī of the Nile, Nile (adj.), Nilotic
منيل manyal Nilometer
تنييل tanyīl (eg.) allviation of the soil by
irrigation or inundation
نيلج nīlaj indigo
نيلوفر nīlūfar European white water lily,
nenuphar
نيلون nailōn, nīlōn nylon
نينة nīna mother
نية see نوى
نيورالجيا niyūraljiyā neuralgia
نيزيلاندا niyūzīlandā New Zealand
ضوء نيوني ḍau’ niyūnī neon light
ھ
ھا hā ha! look! there! ھا ھو hā huwa look, there
he is! ھا انتم hā antum you there! as a
prefix (mostly written defectively): ھذا
hādā, f. ھذه hādihī, ھذي hādī, pl. ھؤلاء
hā’ulā’i, dual m. ھذان hādānī, f. ھاتان
hātāni this one, this; see also
alphabetically; -- ھذاك hādāka, f. ھاتيك
hātīka pl. ھؤلائك hā’ulā’ika that one, that;
ھكذا -- hākadā so, thus; وھكذا wa-hākadā
and so forth; -- ھاھنا hāhunā here; -- ، ھاءناذا
ھأنذا hā’anādā, ھا انت ذا، ھأنتذا hā’antadā, ھا
ھو ذا، ھا نحن اولاء I (emphatic form); you
there; this one, that one, that; we here,
etc.; here I am! there you are! etc.; -- with
suffix: ھاك hāka pl. ھاكم hākum, here, take
it! there you are! there you have ...!
following (below) is (are) ...; ھاكه hākahū
there he is
ھاء hā’ pl. -āt name of the letter ھ
ھابيل hābīl2 Abel
ھات hāti pl. ھاتوا hātū give me (us) ...! bring me
(us) ...! let me (us) have ...!
ھاتان see under ھا
ھاتور hātōr Hator, the third month of the
Coptic calendar
ھارب (Engl.) harb harp (musical instrument)
ھاشمي see ھشم
الھافر al-hāvir le Havre (seaport in N France)
ھاك، ھاكم and ھاكه see ھا
ھؤلاء see ھا
ھأنذا، ھأمتذا see ھا
ھانم hānum pl. ھوانم hawānim2 lady, woman
ھوانمي hawānimī ladylike, womenlike,
feminine
ھأھأ ha’ha’a to burst into laughter
ھاھنا see ھا
ھاواي hāwāy Hawaii
ھاون hāwun, ھاوون hāwūn pl. ھواوين hawāwīn2,
اھوان ahwān mortar (vessel) │ مدفع الھاون
midfa’ al-hā. mortar (mil.) 1015
ھايتي haitī Haiti
ھب 1 hab imperative of وھب
ھب 2 habba u (habb) to get in motion, start
moving; to approach, attack, tackle ( الى or
ل s.th.), embark ( الى or ل upon), begin ( الى
or ل with), start doing s.th. ( الى or ل); (with
foll. imperf.) to proceed abruptly to do
s.th., set out to do s.th.; to rush, fly ( الى at
s.o.); to wake up; to rise, get up ( من from,
esp., from sleep); to revolt, rebel, rise ( على
against s.o.); -- (habb, ھبوب hubūb, ھبيب
habīb) to blow (wind); to rage (storm); to
break out (fire); to waft, drift ( على in s.o.’s
direction; of a scent), meet ( على s.o.; of a
pleasant smell) │ ھب للحرب (ḥarb) to take
up arms, enter the war; ھب للمقاومة
(muqāwama) to take up arm, in
opposition, rise in arms; ھب واقفا (wāqifan)
to plant o.s., station o.s, stand; ھبت ريحه
(rīḥuhū) he is in clover, he is in luck'.
way, he has a lucky hand with everything;
ھب فيه الكلب (kalb) the dog attacked him,
fell upon him; كل من وھب ودب (man,
dabba) everybody and his brother, every
Tom, Dick and Harry II to tear, rend ( ھ
s.th.); to blacken with soot ( ھ s.th.); to
besmut ( ھ s.th.); to botch, bungle, do in
slipshod manner ( ھ s.th.) IV to wake up,
awaken, rouse ( من ه s.o. from sleep) V to
be torn
ھبة habba gust, squall
ھبة hiba see وھب
ھباب habāb fine dust
ھباب hibāb soot, smut
ھبوب habūb strong wind, gale
ھبوب hubūb blowing (of the wind)
مھب mahabb pl. مھاب mahābb2 place
where or from which the wind blows;
windy side, weather side, direction of the
wind; blowing of the wind; draft │ في مھب
الريح storm-swept, exposed to storms,
threatened by storms
ھبت habata i (habt) to knock out, fell, throw to
the ground ( ه s.o.); pass. hubiṭa to be
despondent, faint-hearted; to be dimwitted
ھبيت habīt despondent, faint-hearted,
cowardly; dim-witted
ھبر habara u (habr) to mangle (with the teeth;
ه s.o.); to carve into large pieces ( ھ meat)
ھبر habr boned meat
ھبرة habra piece or slice of meat
ھبيرة hubaira hyena │ ابو ھبيرة abū h.
frog
ھبش habaša i (habš) to gather up, gather,
collect ( ھ s.th.); to seize, grab, clutch ( ب
with the hand or with the claws)
ھبط habaṭa u i ( ھبوط hubūṭ) to descend, go
down, come down; to fall down, drop; to
settle down; to sink; to dip, slope down; to
fall to the ground; to fall in, come down,
collapse (roof); to set down, land, alight
(airplane, travelers, ھ in a country); to
lose weight, become lean (body); to abate,
subside, let up, stop, die down (wind, fire,
etc.); to fall, drop, slump (prices); to go,
come ( ھ to a place); -- u (habṭ) and IV to
cause to sink or descend, lower, let down,
bring down, take down, send down, fling
down, throw down ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
lower, out down, reduce ( ھ the price); to
come ( ھ to a place)
ھبط habṭ reduction, lowering; decrease,
diminution
ھبطة habṭa decent, decline, fall, drop;
depression (geogr.)
ھبوط hubūṭ sinking; fall, drop, decline,
decent; diminution, lessening, lowering,
reduction (of the price); decrease;
weakness, feebleness; slump (on the stock
market); (airborne) landing │ ھبوط 1016
اضطراري (iḍṭirārī) emergency landing;
ھبوط الخم h. ar-raḥim prolapse of the
uterus, hysteroptosis
ھبوط habūṭ slope, declivity, drop, cliff,
bluff
ھبيط habīṭ emaciated, skinny, enervated,
worn out
O اھبوطة uhbūṭa pl. اھابط ahābiṭ2
parachute
مھبط mahbiṭ pl. مھابط mahābiṭ2 place of
a fall, of descent; landing place, airstrip,
runway; falling, faU. drop; place of origin,
birth place, cradle (fig.); O cathode (el.) │
مھبط الوحي m. al-waḥy the cradle of Islam;
في مھبط الغروب at (the time of) sunset
ھابط Ilabil descending, falling,
dropping, sinking │ O ھابط بالمظلة الواقية
(miẓalla, wāqiya) paratrooper
مھبوط mahbūṭ emaciated, skinny,
enervated, worn out
ھبل habila a (habal) to be bereaved of her son
(mother) V to take a vapor bath VIII to
avail o.s., take advantage ( ھ of an
opportunity); to intrigue. scheme │ اھتبل
ھبلك ihtabil habalaka watch out for your
own interests! take care of your own
affairs! mind your own business!
ھبل hiball a tall, husky man
ھبيل habīl dolt, fool
اھبل ahbal2, f. ھبلاء hablā’2, pl. ھبل hubl
dim-witted, weak-minded, imbecilic,
idiotic
مھبل mahbal, mahbil pl. مھابل mahābil2
vagina
مھبلي mahbalī vaginal
مھبل mihbal nimble
مھبول mahbūl stupid, imbecilic, idiotic;
dolt, dunce, fool
ھبھب habhaba to bark, bay
ھبھاب habhāab mirage, fata morgana;
swift, nimble
ھبا (ھبو ) habā u ( ھبو hubuw) to rise in the air
(dust, smoke); to run away, bolt, take to
sight
ھبوة habwa pl. habawāt swirl of dust
ھباء habā’ pl. اھباء ahbā’ fine dust; dust
particles floating in the air │ ھباء منثصور
atoms scattered in all directions; ذھب ھباء
(habā’an) to vanish. dissolve into nothing,
end in smoke; ذھب ھباء منثورا (habā’an) or
ضاع ھباء منثورا (ḍā‘a) to go up in smoke,
fall through, come to nought, dissolve into
nothing; ذھب به ھباء (habā’an) to ruin,
thwart s.th.; to scatter s.th. in all directions
ھباءة hbā’a (n. un.) dust particle; mote
ھتر 1 hatara i (hatr) to tear to pieces ( ھ s.th.)
III to abuse, revile, insult, call names ( ه
s.o.) IV (also pass. uhtira) to become
feeble-minded, childish (old man) VI to
revile each other, fling accusations at each
other; to be contradictory, conflicting
(testimonies; Isl. Law) X to be negligent
and careless; to act in a reckless,
irresponsible manner; to make light ( ب of
s.th.), attach little importance ( ب to),
slight, disdain, despise ( ب s.th.); to jeer,
scoff (y at s.o.), deride, ridicule, mock ( ب
s.o.); pass. ustuhtira to be infatuated ( ب
with), dote ( ب on)
ھتر hitr pl. اھتار ahtār drivel, twaddle,
childish talk; lie, untruth, falsity,
falsehood
ھتر hutr feeble-mindedness, dotage
مھاترة muhātara abuse, revilement,
vituperation, insult; pl. -āt wrangle,
bickering
تھاتر tahātur confrontation of similar
evidence (Isl. Law) 1017
استھتار istihtār recklessness,
thoughtlessness; wantonness, unrestraint,
licentiousness; disdain, scorn
مھتر muhtar driveling, twaddling,
raving; childish old man
مستھتر mustahtir heedless, careless;
reckless, thoughtless, irresponsible;
wanton, unrestrained, uninhibited
مستھتر mustahtar blindly devoted ( ب
to), infatuated ( ب with), doting ( ب on)
ھاتور 2 look up alphabetically
ھتف hatafa i (hatf) to coo (pigeons); -- ( ھتاف
hutāt) to shout; to rejoice, shout with joy;
to acclaim, hail, cheer, applaud ( ل or ب
s.o.); to jeer, boo ( ضد s.o.); to praise
highly, extol ( ب s.th.) │ ھتف به to call out
to s.o.; ھتف به ھاتف (hātifun) a voice called
out to him, an invisible force told him,
made him (do s.th.); ھتف بحياته (bi-
ḥayātihī) to cheer s.o.; ھتف ثلاثا (talātan) to
give ( ل s.o.) three cheers VI to shout
encouragement to one another, encourage
one another ( على to do s.th.)
ھتفة hatfa shout, cry, call
ھتاف hutāf pl. -āt shout, cry, call;
exclamation of joy; hurrah; acclamation,
acclaim, applause; cheer ( ل to s.o.) │ ھتاف
الحرب h. al-ḥarb battle cry, war cry; عاصفة
الھتاف storm of applause, thundering
applause
ھاتف hātif shouting, calling loudly; (in
earlier Sufism) invisible caller, voice; (pl.
ھواتف hawātif) telephone; O loudspeaker;
pl. ھواتف exclamations, shouts, cries, calls
│ ھاتف القلب h. al-qalb inner voice; بالھاتف
by telephone
ھاتفي hātifī telephonic, telephone- (in
compounds)
ھتك hataka i (hatk) to tear apart, rip apart ( ھ
s.th., esp., a curtain, a veil); to unveil,
uncover, discover, disclose, reveal ( ھ
s.th.); to disgrace, rape, ravish ( ھا a
woman) │ ھتك عرضه (‘irḍahū) to disgrace
s.o. II to tear to shreds, rip to pieces, tatter
ھ) s.th.) V to get torn; to be exposed,
shown up, discredited, disgraced,
dishonored, ravished, raped; to give o.s.
over ( في to s.th. disgraceful); to be
disgraceful, dishonorable, shameless,
impudent VIII pass. of hataka
ھتك hatk tearing, rending, ripping apart;
disclosure, exposure, exposé; dishonoring,
disgracing, degradation, debasement, rape,
ravishing │ ھتك الأسرار disclosure,
uncovering of s.th. hidden
ھتكة hutka dishonoring, disgracing,
degradation, debasement
ھتيكة hatīka disgrace, scandal
تھتك tahattuk shamelessness,
immorality; impudence, insolence
متھتك mutahattik insolent, impudent;
shameless, dishonorable
مستھتك mustahtik insolent, impudent;
shameless, dishonorable
ھتامة hutāma s.th. broken off, fragment,
breakage
اھتم ahtam2 f. ھتماء hatmā’2, pl. ھتم hutm
having no front tooth; toothless
ھتن hatana i (hatn, ھتون hutūn) to discharge a
pouring rain (sky)
ھتون hatūn rain-fraught, heavy with rain
(cloud)
ھج hajja u ( ھجيج hajīj) to burn, be on fire, be
aflame; to flame, blaze, be ablaze II to set
ablaze, stir up, stoke ( ھ the fire)
ھجأ haja’a a ( ھجء liar, ھجوء hujū’) to be
appeased (hunger) IV أھجأ جوعه (jū‘ahū) to
appease s.o.’s hunger
ھجد hajada u ( ھجود hujūd) and V to stay awake
at night, keep a night vigil; to spend the
night in prayer 1018
ھجر hajara u (hajr, ھجران hijrān) to emigrate;
to dissociate o.s., separate, part, secede,
keep away ( ھ، ه from), part company ( ه
with ); to give up, renounce, forgo, avoid (
ھ s.th.); to abandon, surrender, leave
behind ( الى ھ s.th. to s.o.), relinquish,
leave, give up, vacate ( ھ s.th., الى in favor
of s.o.) II to induce ( ه s.o.) to emigrate in
to emigrate IV to leave, abandon, give up
ھ) s.th.); to talk nonsense, talk through
one’s hat VI to desert one another, part
company, separate, break up
ھجر hajr abandonment, forsaking,
leaving, separation; avoidance, abstention;
separation from the beloved one; hottest
time of the day
ھجر hujr obscene language
ھجرة hijra departure, exit; emigration,
exodus; immigration ( الى to); الھجرة the
Hegira, the emigration of the Prophet
Mohammed from Mecca to Medina in 622
A.D. │ دار الھجرة Medina
.sA "'in of the Hegira. pertaining
to Mohammed’s emigration │ سنة ھجرية
(sana) a year of the Hegira., a year of the
Muslim era (beginning with Mohammed’s
emigration)
ھجرة hujra, hijra pl. ھجر hujar, hijar
agricultural settlement of the Wababi
Ikhwan in Nejd
ھجراء hajrā’ obscene language ھجر
ھجير hajīr midday heat
ھجيرة hajīra midday heat, midday, noon
مھجر mahjar pl. مھاجر mahājir2 place of
emigration, retreat, refuge, sanctuary;
emigration; settlement, colony
مھاجر mahājir obscenities
مھاجرة multajara emigration
ھاجرة hājira pl. ھواجر hawājir2 midday
heat, midday, noon; -- (pl. -āt, ھواجر
hawājir2) obscene language, obscenity
ھاجري hājirī midday (adj.); excellent,
outstanding
مھجور mahjūr abandoned, forsaken,
deserted; lonely, lonesome; in disuse, out
of use, obsolete, antiquated, archaic
مھاجر muhājir emigrant, émigré;
المھاجرون those Meccans who emigrated to
Medina in the early period of Islam
ھجس hajasa u i (hajs) to occur all of a sudden (
في نفسه to s.o.), come to s.o.’s mind ( في
نفسه ); to mumble, mutter, talk to o.s.
ھجس hajs idea, thought; foolish talk
ھجسة hajsa pl. hajasāt idea, thought;
notion, concept; fear, apprehension,
anxiety, concern, misgiving, scruple; pl.
fixed ideas, apprehensions, misgivings
ھجاس hajjās braggart, boaster, show-off
ھاجس hājis pl. ھواجس hawājis2 idea,
thought; notion, concept; fear,
apprehension, anxiety, concern,
misgiving, scruple; pl. fixed ideas,
apprehensions, misgivings
ھجص (eg.) hagaṣ mischief, nuisance,
horseplay
ھجع haja‘a a ( ھجوع hujū‘) to sleep peacefully;
to be or become calm, quiet, still; to be
silenced, calm down, subside (uproar,
excitement, and the like); -- (haj‘) to
appease ( ھ the hunger) IV to allay,
appease ( ھ the hunger)
ھجعة haj‘a slumber
ھجوع hujū‘ slumber; lull, calming
down; subsidence, abatement, letup,
remission, ebbing (e.g., of a disease)
مھجع mahja‘ pl. مھاجع mahāji‘2 bedchamber;
quarters, barracks room (Syr.,
mil.) │ رئيس المھجع approx.: barracks
orderly, barrack sergeant (Syr., mil.) 1019
ھجل hajala u (hajl) to cast amorous glances,
make sheep’s eyes
ھجم hajama u ( ھجوم hujūm) to make for s.o. (
على ), rush, pounce ( على upon s.o.); to
attack, assail, charge ( على s.o., s.th.); to
raid ( على s.th.); to take by surprise, capture
in a surprise attack, storm ( على s.th.); to
enter without permission ( على s.th.), force
one’s way ( على into), intrude, tresspass (
على on), invade ( على s.th.); to keep quiet II
to make ( ه s.o.) attack, order s.o. ( ه) to
attack III to attack, assail, charge ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to launch an attack ( ھ on); to
make for s.th. ( ھ ), rush, pounce ( ھ upon);
to raid ( ھ s.th.); to assault ( ه s.o.), fall
upon s.o. ( ه); to intrude, trespass ( ھ on),
invade ( ھ s.th.) IV = II; V to fall upon (
على ) VI to attack one another VII to fall
down, collapse (house); to be in poor
health, be frail; to flew down (tears); to
shed tears (eye)
ھجمة hajma pl. hajamāt attack, charge;
assault, onset, onslaught, raid, surprise
attack, coup de main; severity (of
winter)│ O ھجمة معاكسة (mu‘ākisa)
counterattack
ھجمي hajmī aggressive, violent,
outrageous, brutal
ھجوم hajūm violent wind
ھجوم hujūm attack, charge, assault,
onset, onslaught, raid; offensive; fit,
attack, paroxysm (of a disease); forward
line, forwards (in soccer, and the like) │
ھجوم جانبي (jānibī) flank attack; ھجوم جوي
(jawwī) air raid; ھجوم مضاد (muḍādd) or
ھجوم معاكس (mu‘ākis) counterattack; خط
الھجوم kaṭṭ al-h. forward line (in soccer,
and the like); قلب الھجوم qalb al-h. the
center forward (in soccer, and the like)
ھجومي hujūmī aggressive, offensive
مھاجمة muhājama attack, charge;
assault, onset, onslaught, raid; O police
raid, police roundup
تھجم tahajjum pl. -āt assault, attack, raid
مھاجم muhājim attacker, assailant,
aggressor; forward (in soccer, and the
like)
ھجن hajuna a ( ھجنة hujna, ھجانة hajāna, ھجونة
hujūna) to be incorrect or faulty II to
excoriate, flay, censure scathingly, run
down, disparage ( ه s.o.) X to consider ( ھ
s.th.) bad, wrong or improper; to
disapprove ( ھ of s.th.), condemn, reject ( ھ
s.th.)
ھجنة hujna fault, defect, shortcoming;
meanness, baseness
ھجان hajjān pl. ھجانة hajjāna camel rider
ھجين hajīn pl. ھجن hujun, ھجناء hujanā’2,
مھاجين mahājīn مھاجنة , 2 mahājina low,
lowly, base, ignoble, mean; -- (pl. ھجن
hujun) racing camel, dromedary
ھجينة hajīna pl. ھجائن hajā’in2 racing
camel, dromedary
استھجان istihjān disapproval,
disapprobation
ھجا (ھجو ) hajā u (hajw, ھجاء hijā’) to
ridicule, mock, satirize, disparage, run
down ( ه s.o.); to lampoon ( ه s.o.) II and V
to spell ( ه s.th.) III to compose defamatory
or satiric poems ( ه against s.o.), defame,
satirize, lampoon, ridicule, mock ( ه s.o.)
VI to ridicule each other in satiric verse
ھجو hajw ridiculing, scoffing;
defamation, disparagement; lampoonery,
mockery, ridicule, irony; satiric poem,
satire
ھجوي hajwī defamatory, denigrating,
disparaging, satiric
ھجاء hijā’ derision, ridiculing, scoffing;
satire; defamatory poem; (pl. اھجية ahjiya)
spelling, successive order of letters;
alphabet
ھجائي hijā’ī alphabetical; satiric 1020
اھجوة uhjuwa and اھجية uhjīya pl. اھاجي
ahājīy satiric poem, lampoon
تھجية tahjiya and تھج tahajjin spelling
ھاج hājin spelling; defamatory,
denigrating; mocker, scoffer, derider;
satirist
ھد hadda u (hadd, ھدود hudūd) to break, crush,
break off, pull down, tear down, raze,
demolish, wreck, destroy ( ھ s.th.); to
undermine, sap, weaken, ruin ( ھ، ه or من
s.o., s.th.); -- i ( ھديد hadīd) to crash down,
fall down, collapse; -- a i (hadd) to be
weak and decrepit II to threaten, menace (
ب ه s.o. with), scare, frighten, terrify,
daunt, cow, intimidate, brow-beat ( ه s.o.)
V do. VII to be or get torn down,
demolished, razed, wrecked; to fall down,
collapse, break down; to be broken down,
be dilapidated, be in ruins, be a wreck
ھد hadd razing, pulling down,
wrecking; demolition, destruction
ھدة hadda and ھديد hadīd heavy,
thudding fall; thud, crash (of s.th.
collapsing)
ھداد hadād slowness, gentleness; ھداديك
hadādaika gently! slowly! take it easy!
مھدة mihadda, rock crusher, jawbreaker
تھديد tahdīd pl. -āt threat, menace;
intimidation │ تھديد بالتشھير extortion by
threats of public exposure, blackmail
(jur.)
تھديدي tahdīdī threatening, menacing
تھدد tahaddud threat, menace;
intimidation
مھدود mahdūd destroyed, demolished,
wrecked │ مھدود القوى m. al-quwā
weakened, debilitated, exhausted
مھدد muhaddid menacing, threatening;
threatener, menacer
مھدد muhaddad threatened, menaced
ھدأ hada’a a ( ھدء had’, ھدوء hudū’) to be calm,
still, quiet, tranquil; to become calm, calm
down; to subside, abate, let up, die down
(storm, etc.); to stop, halt, linger, rest,
remain, stay ( ب at a place); to stop ( عن
s.th., doing s.th.), cease ( عن to do s.th.) │
ھدأ روعه (rau‘uhū) to become composed,
calm down II to calm, quiet, pacify,
tranquilize, appease, soothe, placate,
temper, assuage, allay ( من or ھ s.th., ه
s.o.); O to slow down, drive slowly │ ھدأ
اعصابه (a‘ṣābahū) to soothe the nerves; ھدأ
من روعه (rau‘ihī) to reassure s.o., set s.o.’s
mind at rest; ھدئ روعك haddi’ rau‘aka
calm down! take it easy! don’t worry!
don’t be afraid! ھدئ من روعك (rau‘ika)
calm down! take it easy! IV = II; to lull ( ھ
a baby) to sleep
ھدء had’ calm(ness), quiet(ness), peace,
tranquility, stillness
ھداءة hadā’a calm, quiet, peace,
tranquility, stillness
ھدوء hudū’ calm(ness), quiet(ness),
peace, tranquility, stillness │ بھدوء calmly,
quietly
تھدئة tahdi’a calming, quieting,
pacification, tranquilization, appeasement,
reassurance; O slowing down, slow
driving
ھادئ hādi’ calm, quiet, peaceful,
tranquil, still │ ھادئ القلب h. al-qalb
calm(ly), confident(ly); ھادئ البال
composed(ly), with one’s mind at ease;
المحيط الھادئ (muḥīṭ) the Pacific Ocean
ھدب hadaba a (hadab) to have long lashes
(eye); to have long, drooping branches
(tree) II to fringe, trim with fringes ( ھ a
garment)
ھدب hadb, hudub (coll.; n. un. ة) pl.
اھداب ahdāb eyelashes; fringes │ باھداب
trimmed with fringes, fringed; تمسك باھدابه
(bi-ahdābihī) to be most devoted to s.o.,
be at s.o.’s beck and call, be under s.o.’s
1021 thumb; تمسك (تعلق) بأھداب الشيء to
adhere, cling to s.th.; اخذ بأھداب الشي to
apply o.s. to, attend to, engage in,
cultivate, practice s.th.
ھدب hadib having long lashes
أھدب ahdab2, f. ھدباء hadbā’ having long
lashes
ھداب huddāb (coll.; n. un. ة) fringes;
edging, border
ھدج hadaja i (hadj, ھدجان hadajān, ھداج hudāj)
to shamble, shuffle along, walk with
unsteady, tottering or tremulous steps (old
man), totter, hobble, limp II to make ( ھ
s.th.) tremble V to tremble, quaver, shake
(voice)
ھودج haudaj pl. ھوادج hawādij2 camel
litter, howdah; sedan chair, litter
ھدر hadara i (hadr, ھدير hadīr) to peal, rumble,
roll (thunder); to surge (sea); to roar
(lion); to bray (donkey, camel); to clamor,
raise a din, be noisy; to storm, rage, rant,
shout, bawl, bellow (person); to snarl (in a
fury); to bubble, boil, simmer; (with ب) to
blare s.th. out; -- u i (hadr, hadar) to be in
vain, be made to no avail (effort); to be
spent uselessly (money); to be abed in
vain or with impunity (blood); -- (hadr) to
shed in vain or with impunity ( ھ blood);
to spend uselessly, squander, waste ( ھ
effort or money); to ruin ( ھ the health) IV
to regard as nonexistent ( ھ s.th.); to
consider invalid ( ھ s.th.); to invalidate,
void ( ھ s.th.); to thwart, foil, ruin ( ھ s.th.)
ھدرا hadran uselessly, to no avail; in
vain, for nothing, futilely │ ذھب ھدرا to
melt away uselessly, futilely, be spent in
vain, be wasted
ھدر hudr fall, tumble
ھدار haddār swirling, rushing,
torrential, roaring, raging; surging (sea);
weir; spillway, millrace
ھدارة haddāra waterfall
ھدير hadīr roaring, roar; surge, raging,
storming, uproar
مھدر muhdar invalid, void
ھدف hadafa u (hadf) to approach ( الى s.o. or
s.th.). draw or be near s.o. or s.th. ( الى ); to
aim ( الى at) IV to approach ( الى s.o. or
s.th.), draw or be near s.o. or s.th. ( الى ) V
to strut X to be exposed, be open ( ل or الى
to a danger); to be susceptible or sensiitive
ل) to); to make ( ھ s.th.) one’s goal or
object, aim ( ھ at), have before one’s eyes,
have in mind ( ھ s.th.)
ھدف hadaf pl. اھداف ahdāf target; aim,
end, object, objective, purpose, design,
intention; goal (in sports) │ جعله ھدفا ل
make s.o. the target or object of …,
expose s.o. to s.th.; كان ھدفا ل to be
exposed, be open to ...; O أھداف حربية
(ḥarbīya) military targets
ھداف haddāf sharpshooter, marksman
ھدفان hadafān (practice) target
مستھدف mustahdif exposed, open ( ل to
s.th.)
ھدل hadala i ( ھديل hadīl) to coo
(pigeon); -- i (hadf) to let down, let hang,
dangle ( ھ s.th.); -- hadila a (hadal) and V
to hang loosely, dangle; to flow, be wide
and loose (garment)
اھدل ahdal2, f. ھدلاء hadlā’2, pl. ھدل hudl
hanging down loosely, flowing
مھدل muhaddal hanging down loosely,
flowing
ھدم hadama i (hadm) to tear down, pull down,
rue, wreck, demolish, destroy ( ھ s.th.); to
tear up ( ھ s.th.) II to tear down, pull
down, rue, wreck, demolish, destroy ( ھ
s.th.); to tear up, blast, blow up ( ھ s.th.) V
to be torn down, be razed, be demolished,
be destroyed, be wiped out; to be
dilapidated; to fall down, break down,
collapse VII do. 1022
ھدم hadm razing, pulling down,
wrecking (of a building); demolition,
destruction
ھدم hidm pl. اھدام ahdām, ھدم hidam old,
worn garment; pl. ھدوم hudūm clothes,
clothing
ھدام haddām destructive
ھدام hudām seasickness
تھديم tahdīm wrecking, demolition,
destruction, annihilation
تھدم tahaddum fall, downfall, crash,
collapse, breakdown
ھادم hādim crushing, devastating,
annihilating, destructive; destroyer,
demolisher
مھدوم mahdūm torn down, razed,
demolished, wrecked, destroyed
مھدم muhaddam and متھدم mutahaddim
torn down, razed, demolished, wrecked,
destroyed; in ruins, dilapidated,
ramshackle, tumble-down
مستھدم mustahdim dilapidated,
tumbledown (walls)
ھدن hadana i ( ھدون hudūn) to be or become
quiet; to calm down, quiet down III to
conclude a truce ( ه with s.o.)
ھدنة hudna pl. -āt calm(ness), quietness,
peace, tranquility, stillness; pause,
intermission, cessation; truce, armistice
ھدن hidāna truce, armistice; peace
ھدون hudūn calm(ness), quiet(ness),
peace, tranquility, stillness
مھادنة muhādana conclusion of a truce,
truce negotiations
ھدھد hadhada to rock, dandle ( ه a child)
ھدھد hudhud pl. ھداھد hadāhid2 hoopoe
(zool.)
ھدى hadā i (hady, ھدى hudan, ھداية hidāya) to
lead ( ه s.o.) on the right way, guide ( ه s.o.,
ھ on a course); to guide, show, direct ( الى ه
s.o. to), show ( ه s.o.) the way ( الى to); to
lead ( ه s.o., to the true faith); to supply,
bring, procure ( ھ s.th.); -- i ( ھداء hidā’) to
bring, load, conduct ( الى ھا the bride to the
bridegroom) III to exchange presents ( ه
with s.o.) IV to bring, lead, conduct ( الى ھا
the bride to the bridegroom); to give as a
present ( الى or ل ھ s.th. to s.o.), present ( الى
or ل s.o., ھ with), make s.o. ( الى or ل) a
present of ( ھ ); to dedicate ( الى or ل ھ s.th.
to s.o.), confer, bestow, award ( ھ e.g., an
order); to send, convey, transmit ( ھ ه to
s.o. s.th.) V to be rightly guided, be led
well; to get ( الى to), reach ( الى a place,
s.th.) VI to make each other presents,
exchange presents; to exchange among
each other ( ھ s.th., also التحية at-taḥīya to
exchange greetings, greet or salute each
other); to guide, load, conduct, take, bring
ه) s.o.); to sway to and fro, swing
rhythmically (in walking); to walk with a
swinging gait; to stride; to move forward.
Move on, advance; to get ( الى to), reach (
الى a place); to get as far as ( الى ), penetrate
الى) to); to flock ( الى to s.o.), rally ( الى
around s.o.) VIII to be rightly guided, be
led on the right way; to be led, be shown,
be taken ( الى , J to); to find the way ( الى to);
to find, detect, discover ( الى s.th.), come
upon s.th. ( الى ); to hit upon s.th. ( الى or ,ل
e.g., an idea), be made aware, think ( الى or
ل of), arrive ( الى or ل at); to be led back,
find one’s way back ( الى to the true faith,
من away from evil); to be guided ( ب by
s.o.), take ( ب s.o. or s.th.) as an example
or model, follow s.o.’s ( ب) load X to ask
to be rightly guided, pray for divine
guidance, seek the right way
ھدي hady guidance, direction; way,
road, course, direction; manner, mode,
fashion
ھدى hudan right guidance (esp., in a
religious sense); guiding, leading (of 1023
s.o.); right way. true religion │ كان على ھدى
to be on the right way; to embrace the true
religion; على غير ھدى aimlessly, at random;
سار على غير ھدى to wander aimlessly
ھدية hadya, hidya (line of) conduct,
procedure, policy, course, way, direction;
manner, mode, fashion
ھدية hadīya pl. ھدايا hadāyā gift, present,
donation; offering, sacrifice
ھداية hidāya guidance │ على غير ھداية
without divine guidance, aimlessly, at
random
اھدى ahdā better guided; more correct,
more proper, better
اھداء ihdā’ presentation; donation,
grant(ing); award, bestowal, conferment;
dedication (of a book)
ھاد hādin pl. -ūn, ھداة hudāh leading,
guiding; leader, guide
مھدي mahdīy rightly guided; Mahdi
مھتد muhtadin rightly guided
ھذا hādā (dem. pron.), f. ھذه hādihī, ھذي hādī,
pl. ھؤلاء hā’ulā’i, dual m. ھذان hādāni, f.
ھاتان hātāni this one, this │ بھذا bi-hādā
hereby, herewith; لھذا li-hādā therefore, for
this reason; مع ھذا herewith; in spite of it,
nevertheless; ھذا الى ان (ilā an) besides,
moreover, furthermore, what’s more; ھذا و
besides, moreover, furthermore, what’s
more; on the other hand; ھذا ويوجد (yūjadu)
besides, there is ...
ھذب hadaba i (hadb) to prune, trim ( ھ s.th.); to
clean. purify, cleanse, smooth ( ھ s.th.),
polish ( ھ s.th., also fig., e.g., the style) II
do.; to improve, refine ( ھ s.th.); to rectify,
set right, correct ( ھ s.th.); to check, revise
ھ) s.th.); to bring up ( ه a child); to
educate, instruct ( ه s.o.) V pass. of II
تھذيب tadīb expurgation, emendation,
correction; rectification; revision; training;
instruction; education, upbringing;
culture, refinement
تھذيبي tahdībī of or pertaining to
education, educational, educative;
instructive, didactic
تھذب tahaddub upbringing, manners,
education
مھذب muhaddib teacher, educator
مھذب muhaddab well-mannered, wellbred,
refined, polished, urbane, cultured,
educated, well-behaved, polite, courteous
متھذب mutahaddib well-mannered, wellbred,
refined, polished, urbane, cultured,
educated, well-behaved, polite, courteous
ھذر hadara u i (hadr) to prattle, babble, prate,
talk nonsense; to blurt out, blab ( ب s.th.) II
to joke, make fun, jest
ھذر hadr prattle, babble, idle talk;
raillery, taunting words
ھذر hadar prattle, babble, idle talk;
mockery, scoffing
ھذر hadir prattling, garrulous
ھذرم hadrama to babble, jabber, prattle, prate
ھذلول hudlūl pl. ھذاليل hadālīl2 elevation,
hillock; little river, small stream
خط ھذلولي kaṭṭ hudlūlī hyperbola (math.)
ھذى hadā i (hady, ھذيان hadayān) to talk
irrationally, rave, be delirious
ھذاء hudā’ raving, irrational talk,
delirium
ھذيان hadayān senseless jabber,
rigmarole, raving, drivel, delirium; state of
absennt-mindedness; folly; madness,
insanity, mania, craze; hallucination
ھاذ hādin delirious, raving 1024
ھر harra i ( ھرير harīr) to growl; to whimper,
whine
ھر hirr pl. ھررة hirara tomcat; cat
ھرة hirra pl. ھرر hirar cat
ھرير harīr growling, growl; yelping,
whining, whimper(ing); spitting (of a cat)
ھريرة huraira kitten
ھرأ hara’a a to tear, lacerate ( ھ s.th.); to wear
out, wear off ( ھ a garment); to affect
strongly, beset grievously, try, wear out,
harm, hurt ( ه s.o.); to irritate ( ھ the skin);
to he hitingly cold (wind) II to cook too
much, overdo ( ھ meat) IV = II; V to he
overdone (meat); to he tom, lacerated VIII
to he tom, lacerated, mangled, torn to
pieces; to be worn out, shabby
ھراء hurā’ prattle, idle talk
مھترئ muhtari’ overdone, boiled to
shreds; torn, lacerated, mangled; worn out,
shabby
ھرب haraba u (harab, ھروب hurūb, مھرب
mahrab, ھربان harabān) to flee ( الى to); to
escape ( من a danger); to desert; to run
away, elope ( مع with) II to help ( ه s.o.) to
escape; to force to flee, put to flight ( ه
s.o.); to liberate, free ( ه a prisoner) ; to
rescue ( ھ a distrained or impounded thing;
jur.); to engage in illicit trade, to traffic; to
smuggle V to escape, elude ( من s.th.); to
shirk, dodge, evade ( من a duty, or the like)
ھرب harab flight, escape, getaway;
desertion; elopement
ھروب hurūb flight
ھربان harbān fugitive, runaway, on the
run; a runaway, a fugitive, a refugee
ھراب harrāb coward
مھرب mahrab pl. مھارب mahārib2 (place
of) refuge, retreat, sanctuary; flight,
escape, getaway │ لا مھرب منه (mahraba)
inescapable, unavoidable
تھريب tahrīb illicit trade, trafficking;
smuggling, smuggle, contrabandism
ھارب hārib fugitive, runaway, on the
run; a runaway, a fugitive, a refugee;
deserter; see also alphabetically
مھرب muharrib illicit dealer, trafficker;
smuggler
مھرب muharrab pl. -āt smuggled goods,
contraband
ھرج haraja i (harj) to he excited, agitated, in
commotion II to make ( ه s.o.) drunk,
befuddle, cloud, fog, blur ( ه s.o.’s mind or
perceptions); to joke, make fun, jest ( في in
conversation)
ھرج harj excitement, agitation,
commotion; disorder, muddle, confusion
│ ھرج ومرج (wa-marj) turmoil, confusion,
chaos
مھرج muharrij jester, clown, buffoon
ھرجلة harjala chaos, muddle, confusion
ھردبشت hardabašt buncombe, nonsense; trash,
rubbish, junk
ھرس harasa u (hars) to crush, mash, squash,
bruise, pound ( ھ s.th.); to tenderize by
beating, pound until tender ( ھ meat)
ھرس harīsa a dish of meat and bulgur;
(eg.) a sweet pastry made of flour, melted
butter and sugar
ھراس harrās pl. -āt steamroller
O آلة ھراسة āla harrāsa steamroller
مھراس mihrās pl. مھاريس mahārīs2
mortar
ھرش II to sow dissension ( بين between, among)
III to quarrel, wrangle ( ه with); to dally,
joke, banter ( ه with) 1025
ھرش harš scratching; wear and tear,
attrition, depreciation (of tools,
machinery, etc.)
ھراش hirāš quarrel, wrangle
مھروش mahrūš worn out, battered
ھرطق harṭaqa to become a heretic
ھرطقة haṭaqa heresy
ھرطوقي harṭūqī pl. ھراطقة harāṭiqa
heretic (Chr.)
ھراطقي harāṭiqī heretic (Chr.)
ھرطمان harṭamān a brand of oats
ھرع hara‘a a (hara‘) and pass. huri‘a to hurry,
hasten, rush ( الى to) II pass. hurri‘a and IV
ahra‘a do.
ھرع hara‘ hurry, haste, rush
ھراع hurā‘ hurry, haste, rush
ھرف harafa i (harf) to praise excessively,
shower with extravagant praise ( ب s.th.
or s.o.)
ھرق haraqa a (harq) to shed, spill ( ھ s.th.) IV
do.; to sacrifice ( ھ s.th.)
مھراق muhrāq poured out, spilled
مھرقان mahraqān, muhraqān,
muhruqān shore, coast; ocean
اھراق ihrāq shedding, spilling │ اھراق
الدماء i. ad-dimā’ bloodshed
مھرق muhraq spilled, shed; -- (pl. مھارق
mahāriq2) parchment; O wax paper
ھرقل hiraql2, hirqil2 Heraclius (Byzantine
emperor); Hercules
ھرم harima a (haram, مھرم mahram, مھرمة
mahrama) to become senile and decrepit
II to mince, chop ( ھ s.th.)
ھرم haram decrepitude, senility; old
age
ھرم haram pl. اھرام ahrām, اھرامات
ahrāmāt pyramid │ O ھرم ناقص frustum of
pyramid, truncated pyramid (math.)
ھرمي haramī pyramidlike, pyramidical,
pyramidal
اھرامي ahrāmī pyramidlike,
pyramidical, pyramidal
ھرم harim decrepit, senile; advanced in
years, aged, old; old man
ھرمس harmasa to he grave, stern, gloomy
(face)
ھرمون hormōn pl. -āt hormone
ھرھر harhara to move, shake ( ھ s.th.); to
attack ( على s.o.)
ھرا (ھرو 1 ) harā u (harw) to cane, thrash,
wallop ( ه s.o.)
ھراوة harāwa pl. ھراوى harāwa stick,
cane; cudgel, truncheon, club
ھراة 2 harāh Herat (city in NW Afghanistan)
ھروي harawī of Herat
ھرول harwala to walk fast; to burry, hasten,
rush ( الى to)
ھرولة harwala quick pace, haste, hurry
مھرول muharwal hurrying, speeding; in
a hurry
ھري hury pl. اھراء ahrā’ granary
ھار hārin reeling, tottering, unsteady
ھز hazza u (hazz) to shake ( ب or ھ s.th.); to
swing, brandish, wave ( ھ a lance or
sword); to jolt to and fro, jog, rook ( ه s.o.);
to make ( ه s.o.) tremble; to convulse,
shake, rock, upset, sway ( ھ s.th.) │ ھز
كتفيه (katifaihi) to shrug (one’s shoulders);
ھز رأسه (ra’sahū) to nod, shake one’s
head; ھز ذيله (dailahū) to wag its tail II to
shake, swing, brandish, wave ( ھ s.th.) V
to be moved, agitated, shaken, jolted,
upset, convulsed, receive a shock; to
move, stir, shake, sway, swing, vibrate,
oscillate VIII do.; to tremble, quake,
quiver; to be moved, touched, deeply
affected ( ل by ); to rock (rider on 1026 a
camel) │ لا نھتز له كثيرا this won’t affect us
greatly, this is not likely to disconcert us,
this will hardly cause us any headache;
اھتز فرحا (faraḥan) to tremble with joy; اھتز
اليه قلبه (qalbuhū) to be elated by s.th.
ھزة hazza (n. vic.) pl. -āt motion,
movement, stir, commotion, agitation;
convulsion; jolt, jog, push; O (electric)
shook; vibration, oscillation; tremor,
shake │ ھزة ارضية (arḍīya) seismic shock,
earthquake; (ھزة السرور (الطرب، الفرح
(ṭarab, faraḥ) joyous excitement, delight,
rapture
ھزة hizza liveliness, vivacity, high
spirits
ھزاز hazzāz shaking, jolting; rocking;
rolling, swinging; shaker (in concrete
construction, for coal, and the like)
ھزيز hazīz bluster(ing), sough (of the
wind); rumbling, roll (of thunder)
مھزة mahazza excitement, agitation
تھزيز tahzīz movement, agitation,
shaking
اھتزاز ihtizāz convulsion, shock;
trembling, shaking, tremor; swinging,
oscillation, vibration; excitement,
agitation, commotion, emotion
اھتزازة ihtizāza (n. vic.) tremor,
vibration
مھتز muhtazz trembling, tremulous,
shaking, quivering
ھزأ haza’a, ھزئ hazi’a a ( ھزء haz’, huz’, ھزؤ
huzu’, ھزوء huzū’, مھزأة mahza’a) to scoff,
jeer, sneer, laugh ( من or ب at), make fun (
من or ب of), deride, ridicule, mock ( من or
s.o.) V and X to deride, mock ( من or ب
s.o., s.th., also (على
ھزء haz’, huz’ and ھزؤ huzu’ derision,
scorn, disdain, contempt; mockery
ھزئي huz’ī mocking, derisive
ھزأة haz’a object of ridicule, butt of
derision, laughingstock
ھزأة huza’a mocker, sarcast; scorner,
disdainer, despiser
مھزأة mahza’a derision, loom, disdain,
contempt; mockery; scornful laughter,
sneer
استھزاء istihzā’ mockery, ridicule,
derision, scorn │ باستھزاء mockingly,
derisively
ھازئ hāzi’ mocker, scoffer
مستھزئ mustahzi’ mocker, scoffer
ھزبر hizabr, hizbar pl. ھزابر hazābir2 lion
ھزج hazija a to sing
ھزج hazaj name of a poetic meter
اھزوجة uhzūja pl. اھازيج ahāzīj2 song
ھزر 1 hazara i (hazr) to laugh II (eg.) to joke,
make fun, jest
ھزار hizār (eg.) joking, jesting, funmaking
ھزار 2 hazār pl. -āt nightingale
ھزع haza’a a (haz’), to hurry, be quick V do.
ھزع hazī’ part of the night
ھزل hazala i (hazl, huzl), hazila a (hazal) and
pass. huzila to be emaciated, lean, skinny;
to loss weight, become lean, skinny,
emaciated; -- hazala i (hazl) to joke, talk
lightly, jokingly; to cause to lose weight,
make lean, emaciate, enervate ( ه s.o.) II to
emaciate, waste away, enervate ( ه s.o.) III
to joke, make fun, jest ( ه with s.o.) IV to
emaciate, waste away, enervate ( ه s.o.) VII
to be or become lean
ھزل had joking, jesting, fun
ھزلي hazlī jocular, funny, amusing,
droll, humorous; humoristic; comical
1027
ھزلية hazlīya or رواية ھزلية comedy
(theat.)
ھزل hazil joker, jester, funnyman, wag,
wit
ھزال huzāl emaciation; leanness,
skinniness
ھزال hazzāl joker, jester, funnyman,
wag, wit
ھزيل hazīl pl. ھزلى hazlā lean, skinny,
emaciated
مھزلة mahzala pl. -āt, مھازل mahāzil2
comedy
ھازل hāzil joking, jocose, jocular,
funny, humorous, amusing; joker, wag,
wit │ صحف ھازلة (ṣuḥuf) funnies, comics
مھزول mahzūl pl. مھازيل mahāzīl2
emaciated, wasted, haggard, gaunt; weak,
feeble
ھزم hazama i (hazm) to put to flight, rout,
vanquish, defeat ( ه the enemy); to put out
of action, neutralize ( ه an opponent) VII to
be defeated, be routed, be put to flight
ھزم hazm vanquishing, routing; defeat
ھزيم hazīma roll of thunder, rumbling,
rumble, thunder; fleeing, fugitive, in
flight, on the run
ھزيمة hazīma pl. ھزائم hazā’im2 defeat,
rout │ O روح الھزيمة rūḥ al-h. defeatism
انھزام inhizām (suffering of) defeat,
frustration; rout, (disorganized) flight
انھزامي inhizāmī pl. -ūn defeatist
انھزامية inhizāmīya defeatism
ھزھز hazhaza to move, agitate, shake, jolt,
shock, convulse, upset ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) II
tahazhaza to be moved, agitated, shaken,
convulsed, upset, receive a shock
ھزھزة hazhaza pl. ھزاھز hazāhiz2
movement, agitation, shock, convulsion,
commotion, disturbance
ھس hass i (hass) to whisper
ھس hass whisper, whispering; soliloquy
ھس huss hush! quiet! silence!
ھسيس hasīs whisper, whispering sound
ھستولوجيا histōlōjiyā histology
ھستيريا and ھيستيريا histēriyā hysteria
ھيستيري histērī hysteric(al)
ھش 1 hašša i ( ھشوشة hušūša) to be crisp (bread)
-- u i ( ھشاش hašāš, ھشاشة hašāša) to be in
good spirits, display a cheerful mien, wear
a smile; to smile ( ل or ب at s.o.), meet s.o.
ل) or ب) in a courteous, amiable manner,
receive s.o. kindly; to cheer up ( ل over or
because of), be delighted ( ل by); -- u to
drive away, chase away ( ھ flies, and the
like); -- u i (hašš) to chop off ( على ھ
leaves for the cattle) II to cheer up,
enliven ( ه s.o.), raise s.o.’s ( ه) spirits
ھش hašš delicate, fragile; crisp, brittle,
crumbly, friable; fresh and soft; gay,
cheerful, happy, lively, brisk
ھشاش haššāš soft, crumbly, friable
ھشيش hašīš soft
ھشاشة hašāša gaiety, cheerfulness,
happiness
ھاش hāšš crisp, blithe, cheerful, brightfaced
│ ھاش باش (bāšš) gay and happy
ھش 2 hušš hush! quiet! silence!
ھشم hašama i (hašm) and II to destroy ( ھ
s.th.); to smash ( ھ s.th.); to crush ( ھ s.th.)
V and VII to be or get smashed, destroyed
ھشيم hašīm frail, fragile; dry stalks,
straw, chaff
ھاشمي hāšimī Hashemite
مھشم muhaššam destroyed (city);
crushed 1028
ھصر haṣara i (haṣr) to pull toward o.s., bend
down ( ھ s.th., e.g., a branch); to produce a
crack or break ( ھ in), crack, break ( ھ
s.th.)
ھصور haṣūr epithet of the lion
ھض haḍḍa u (haḍḍ) to walk fast, move
briskly, advance, progress, get on
ھضب haḍaba i (haḍb) to be long-winded,
verbose
ھضبة haḍba pl. ھضاب hiḍāb hill,
elevation, mountain
ھضم haḍama i (haḍm) to digest ( ھ the food; of
the stomach); to oppress, terrorize,
outrage, wrong, treat with injustice ( ه s.o.);
to stand, bear, endure ( ه s.o.); to stomach (
ھ s.th.), put up with s.th. ( ھ ) VII to be
digested VIII to oppress, wrong ( ه s.o.), do
ه) s.o.) an injustice
ھضم haḍm digestion; patience, longsuffering
│ ھضم الجانب forbearance,
compliance, indulgence; سھل الھضم sahl alh.
easily digestible, light
ھضمي haḍmī digestive, alimentary
ھضوم haḍūm digestible, agreeing,
wholesome
ھضيم haḍīm digested; digestible;
oppressed, terrorized, outraged; slender,
slim
ھضيمة ha4ima encroachment, inroad,
injustice, wrong, outrage, oppression
انھضام inhiḍām digestion; digestibility
مھضوم mahḍūm digested; digestible;
oppressed, terrorized, outraged
ھطع IV to protrude the neck (in walking) │
اھطع في العدو (‘adw) to run fast
ھطل haṭala i (haṭl, ھطلان haṭalān, تھطال tahṭāl)
to flow in torrents, fall heavily, pour down
(rain) VI do.
ھطل hiṭl wolf
ھطول huṭūl: ھطول الأمطار h. al-amṭār
downpour, heavy rain
ھيطل haiṭal pl. ھياطلة hayāṭila, ھياطل
hayāṭil2 fox
ھف haffa i ( ھفيف hafīf) to pass swiftly,
flit put; to flash; to brush, touch lightly; --
i (haff, hafīf) to blow, whiffle, sough
(wind); to spread, waft (fragrance) │ ھفت
نفسه الى (nafsuhū) he yearned for …; ھف
على باله it occurred to him all of a sudden,
it flashed across his mind
ھف hiff empty; light, light-headed,
thoughtless, frivolous
ھفاف haffāf flashing, sparkling, shining;
blowing (wind); light, fleeting; thin and
transparent, diaphanous
الھفوف al-hufūf Hofuf (chief town of al-
Hasa district in E Saudi Arabia)
مھفة mahaffa fan; feather duster
مھفوف mahfūf light-headed,
irresponsible, reckless, unscrupulous
ھفت hafata i (haft, ھفات hufāt) to fall
down, collapse; to be nonsensical, absurd;
to talk nonsense VI to pounce, rush, fall,
plunge ( على on or into); to crowd in ( على
on), throng, flock ( على to), tumble one
over the other, fall all over themselves; to
suffer a breakdown; to cave in, collapse,
break down; to be broken, wrecked,
ruined (nerves)
ھفتان haftān (eg.) weak, exhausted,
spent, weakened
تھافت tahāfut collapse, breakdown │
تھافت الأعصاب nervous breakdown
ھافت hāfit wrong, erroneous (opinion)
مھفوت mahfūt baffled, startled,
perplexed
الھافر look up alphabetically
ھفھف hafhafa to be slender, slim; to float in the
air II tahafhafa to be slender, slim 1029
ھفھفة hafhafa sough, whispering of the
wind
ھفھاف hafhāf slender, slim, svelte;
slight, frail, delicate; thin, sparse (e.g.,
beard); diaphanous, transparent,
gossamery; light, weightless, defying
gravity; flowing, waving, fluttering
مھفھف muhafhif slender, slim, svelte;
thin
ھفا (ھفو ) hafā u (hafw, ھفوة hafwa, ھفوان
hafawan) to slip, commit a lapse, make a
mistake; to err; to be weak with hunger,
famished, starved; to hurry, rush ( الى to);
to reach quickly ( الى for s.th.), snatch ( الى
at s.th.); with ب: to induce s.o. ( الى to),
tempt s.o. to do s.th. ( الى )؛ (ھفو hafw,
hufuw) to flutter, fly, float in the air; to
throb violently, beat feverishly, flutter, be
passionately excited, be impassioned
(heart; esp., with love); to feel a desire,
yearn ( الى for)
ھفوة hafwa pl. hafawāt slip, lapse, error,
mistake, fault, offense, sin
ھاف hāfin famished, starved
ھكتار hiktār pl. -āt hectare
ھكذا hākadā so, thus, this way, in this manner
ھيكل look up alphabetically
ھكم V to be dilapidated, ramshackle, tumbledown,
to fall down, collapse; to mock,
scoff; to make fun ( ب or على or ه of s.o.),
ridicule, deride, jeer ( ب، على، ه s.o.); to be
annoyed ( على by), regret ( على s.th.)
اھكومة uhkūma derision, mockery, taunt,
gibe
تھكم tahakkum mockery, derision, scorn,
irony; sarcasm
تھكمي tahakkumī mocking, derisive,
sarcastic, scornful
متھكم mutahakkim mocking, ironical
ھل 1 hal interrogative particle introducing direct
and indirect question; also preceding the
first part of an alternative question: ھل -- أم
hal -- am whether -- or
ھلا hallā = ھل لا is (or does) not ...? why
not?
ھل 2 halla i (hall) to appear, come up, show
(new moon); to begin, let in (month) II to
say the words lā ilāha illā llāh; to shout
with joy, rejoice, exult, jubilate; to
applaud, acclaim, cheer ( ل s.o.) IV to
appear (new moon); to cheer, exult; to
offer up ( ل ب an animal to a deity) V to
shine, gleam, glow, be radiant; to beam
with joy (face); to be delighted, jubilant;
to cheer. rejoice, exult, jubilate VII to fall
heavily, pour down (rain); to begin ( في
with), take up, undertake, tackle, attack (
في s.th.), embark ( في upon) X to begin, set
in (new month); to raise one’s voice; to
intone, strike up ( ھ a tune); to begin, start
ھ) a task); to open, begin, introduce,
initiate ( ب ھ s.th. with or by)
ھلال hilāl pl. اھلة ahilla, اھاليل ahālīl2
new moon; half-moon, crescent;
parenthesis; any crescent-shaped object
ھلالي hilālī lunar; crescent-shaped,
lunate, sickle-shaped
ھلل halal fright, terror, dismay
تھليل tahlīl pl. تھاليل tahālīl2 utterance of
the formula lā ilāha illā llāh; rejoicing,
exultation, jubilation; applause,
acclamation, acclaim, cheering, cheers
تھلل tahallul joy, jubilation, exultation
استھلال istihlāl beginning, opening,
introduction, initiation
استھلالي istihlālī incipient, initial,
starting, opening, introductory, initiative
مھلل muhallal crescent-shaped, lunate
1030
متھلل mutahallil jubilant, rejoicing,
exultant; radiant, beaming
مستھل mustahall beginning, start, outset
ھلب haliba a (halab) to be hairy, covered with
hair
ھلب halib hairy, covered with hair;
shaggy, hirsute
ھلب hulb (coll.; n. un. ة) hair, bristles
ھلب hilb pl. اھلاب ahlāb anchor, grapnel,
grappling iron, boat hook
اھلب ahlab2, f. ھلباء halbā’2, pl. ھلب hulb
hairy, hirsute, shaggy
ھلابة hulāba lochia (med.)
مھلبية muhallabīya a dessert resembling
blancmange, made of rice flour, milk and
sugar
ھليلج halīlaj and اھليلج ihlīlaj myrobalan, emblic
(fruit of Phyllanthus emblica L.; bot.);
ellipse (geom.)
اھليلجي ihlīlajī elliptic(al)
ھلس 1 halasa i (hals) to emaciate, consume,
waste away ( ه s.o.; of a disease); pass.
hulisa to be consumptive, suffer from
pulmonary tuberculosis II to waste away,
become lean, emaciated, haggard; to talk
nonsense IV to smile
ھلس hals emaciation, wasting away;
pulmonary tuberculosis, consumption,
phthisis; nonsense, bosh, silly talk
ھلوسة 2 look up alphabetically
ھلسنكي helsinkī Helsinki (capital of Finland)
ھلع hali‘a a (hala‘) to be impatient or restless,
be anxious, be in despair
ھلع hala‘ impatience, restlessness,
uneasiness; fear, burning anxiety; alarm,
dismay
ھلع hal‘ impatient, restless, uneasy,
anxious; dismayed, appalled
ھلوع halū‘ impatient, restless, uneasy,
anxious; dismayed, appalled
ھلوف hillauf bearded; bristly
ھلقم halqama to gulp down, devour ( ھ s.th.)
ھلك halaka i (halk, hulk, ھلاك halāk, تھلكة
tahluka) to perish; to die; to be
annihilated, wiped out, destroyed II and
IV to ruin, destroy ( ھ s.th.) │ اھلك الحرث
والنسل (hart, nasl) to destroy lock, stock
and barrel VI to exert o.s., do one’s
utmost ( في in); to pounce, fall, throw o.s. (
على upon); to fight desperately ( على for); to
covet, crave ( على s.th.); to feel enthusiasm
على) for), devote o.s. eagerly ( على to), go
all out ( على for); to become languid, tired,
weak; to drop in utter exhaustion ( على on);
to break down, collapse VII and VIII to
risk danger, imperil o.s., act desperately X
to exert o.s., do one’s utmost ( في in); to
waste, squander, spend, exhaust, use up,
consume ( ھ s.th.); to discharge, pay off,
amortize ( ھ a debt); pass. ustuhlika to
perish, die
ھلك hulk death; destruction, ruin
ھلكة halka, halaka total loss, ruin,
destruction; disaster; jeopardy, perilous
situation, danger
ھلاك halāk total loss, ruin, destruction;
perdition, eternal damnation
مھلكة mahlaka. mahluka. mahlika pl.
مھالك mahālik2 dangerous place, danger
spot; dangerous situation; danger, peril
تھلكة tahluka ruin; jeopardy, perilous
situation, danger
تھالك tahāluk enthusiasm, zeal, ardor (
على for), (vivid) interest ( على in);
weakness, fatigue, languor
استھلاك istihlāk consumption; attrition,
wear and tear; discharge, amortization
استھلاكي istihlākī consumer- (in
compounds; e.g., goods, prices, etc.) 1031
ھالك hālik pl. ھلكى halkā, ھلك hullak,
ھلاك hullāk, ھوالك hawālik perishing,
dying; dead; mortal, destructible,
perishable; doomed to perdition, damned;
irretrievably lost, irredeemable
مھلك muhlik destructive, devastating,
annihilating, scathing, withering;
pernicious, ruinous, dangerous, perilous,
deadly, lethal; medium of destruction or
extermination
متھالك mutahālik broken down, downand-
out; exhausted
مستھلك mustahlik consumer
مستھلك mustahlak consumption
ھللويا hallilūyā hallelujah
ھلم 1 halumma up! get up! come! now
then! come on! onward! forward! (with
acc.) out with ...! bring ...! give me (us) ...!
│ ھلمي اليه (halummī) now then, go (f.)
quickly to him! ھلم بنا (bi-nā) come on!
let’s go! وھلم جرا (jarran) and so on, etc.
ھلم 2 hillam languid, listless, slack, limp
ھلام hulām jelly, gelatin
ھلامى hulāmī jellylike, gelatinous
تھلين tahlīn Hellenization
ھلھل halhala to weave finely ( ھ s.th., also a
poem), weave flimsily ( ھ s.th.); to
wear out ( ھ a garment), let it become
shabby, threadbare, thin
ھلھل halhal fine; thin, flimsy; delicate
ھلاھل halāhil fine; thin, flimsy; delicate
ھلھولة halhūla pl. ھلاھيل halāhil2 (eg.)
worn dress, old rag, tatters
مھلھل muhalhal thin, flimsy, gauzelike,
diaphanous; finely woven (also, of a
poem); worn, shabby, threadbare, tattered,
ragged
ھلوسة halwasa hallucination; vision
ھليكوبتر helikoptar helicopter
ھليلج halīlaj and اھليلج ihlīlaj myrobalan, emblic
(fruit of Phyllanthus emblica L.; bot.);
ellipse (geom.)
اھليلجي ihlīajī elliptic(al)
ھليون hilyaun asparagus
ھم 1 hum they (3rd pers. m. pl. of the pers. pron.)
ھم 2 hamma u (hamm, مھمة mahamma) to
disquiet, make uneasy. fill with anxiety,
distress, grieve ( ه s.o.); to preoccupy,
interest, regard, concern, affect ( ه s.o.), be
of interest ( ه to s.o.); to be on s.o.’s ( (ه
mind, be s.o.’s ( ه) concern; to worry,
trouble ( ه s.o.); to be important, be of
importance or consequence ( ه to s.o.); --
(hamm) to worry, be concerned ( ب about);
to have in mind, intend, plan ( ب s.th., to
do s.th.); to consider ( ھ doing s.th.), think
of doing s.th. ( ه); to be about, be going (
بأن، ب to do s.th.), be on the point of doing
s.th. ( بأن، ب ), begin to, start doing s.th. (
بأن، ب ); to rise, get up IV to grieve,
distress, concern, preoccupy, affect,
regard ( ه s.o.); to be on s.o.’s ( ه) mind, be
s.o.’s ( ه) concern; to worry, trouble ( ه s.o.);
to be of interest ( ه to s.o.), interest ( ه s.o.);
to be important, be of consequence, to
matter VIII to be distressed, grieved,
worried ( ب by); to worry, be concerned ( ب
about); to concern o.s. ( ب, occasionally
also ل, with); to feel concern ( ب for), take
an interest ( ب in); to attach importance
( to); to be interested ( ب in); to look ( ب
after); to pay attention ( ب to). take notice (
ب of), bear in mind ( ب s.th.); to go to
trouble, go to great lengths ( ب ل on behalf
of or for s.o. about s.th.); to take care ( ب
of s.o.), take s.o. ( ب) under one’s wing,
help, assist ( ب s.o.); to provide ( ب for); to
be anxious or solicitous ( ل about) 1032
ھم hamm pl. ھموم humūm anxiety,
concern, solicitude; worry, care; sorrow,
grief, affliction, distress; interest;
intention, design, plan; important matter;
weight, moment, importance, significance,
consequence
ھم himm pl. اھمام ahmām, f. ھمة himma,
pl. -āt, ھمائم hamā’im2 decrepit, senile; old
man
ھمة himma pl. ھمم himam endeavor,
ambition, intention, design; resolution,
determination; zeal, ardor, eagerness;
high-mindedness, high-aiming ambition │
بعيد الھمة and عالي الھمة high-aspiring,
having far-reaching aims; high-minded
ھمام hammām careworn, worried;
anxious, solicitous; eager, active,
energetic
ھمام humām pl. ھمام himām highminded;
generous, magnanimous; heroic,
gallant
اھم ahamm2 more important, of greater
importance
اھمية ahammīya importance,
significance, consequence; interest │ عديم
الأھمية unimportant; علق اھمية على (‘allaqa)
to attach importance to; كان من الأھمية بمكان
عظيم (makānin) to be of the greatest
importance
مھمة mahamma pl. مھام mahāmm2
important matter; task, function, duty;
commission, assignment, mission │ مھام
الأمور important matters; مھام المنصب m. almanṣib
official duties, official functions
تھميم tahmīm lulling a baby to sleep by
singing
تھميمة tahmīma lullaby
اھتمام ihtimām pl. -at concern, interest;
anxiety; solicitude; care; attention;
endeavor, ambition
ھام hāmm important, significant,
momentous, weighty, ponderous, grave,
serious; interesting
ھامة hāmma pl. ھوام hawāmm2 vermin;
past; reptile; see also under ھموم
مھموم mahmūm concerned, worried,
anxious, distressed, grieved, sorrowful;
preoccupied; interested
مھم muhimm important, significant,
momentous, weighty, ponderous, grave,
serious; interesting
مھمة muhimma pl. -āt important matter;
pl. requirements, exigencies; equipment,
material(s); stores, supplies, provisions │
مھمات حربية (ḥarbīya) war material; O
مھمات متحركة (mutaḥarrika) rolling stock
مھتم muhtamm interested ( ب in);
concerned, anxious, solicitous ( ب about);
attentive ( ب to), mindful ( ب of)
مھتمات muhtammāt tasks, functions,
duties
ھما humā both of them (3rd pers. dual of the
pers. pron.); see also ھمو
ھمايون humāyūnī imperial
ھمج hamija a (hamaj) to he hungry
ھمج hamai (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اھماج
ahmāj small flies, gnats; riffraff, rabble,
ragtag; savages, barbarians
ھمج hamaj hunger │ ھمج ھامج ravenous
hunger, voracious appetite
ھمجي hamajī uncivilized, savage; rude;
barbaric, barbarous; a savage, barbarian
ھمجية hamajīya savageness, savagery;
rudeness; barbarism
ھمد hamada u ( ھمود humūd) to abate, subside,
let up, calm down, die away, fade away,
die down, cool off; to become smaller,
shrink II and IV to quiet, calm, still,
appease, placate, soothe, mitigate,
alleviate, allay, stifle, quell, suppress, put
out, extinguish ( ھ s.th.)
ھمود humūd extinction; cooling off (of a
passion, and the like); lull; fatigue, 1033
exhaustion, tiredness; motionlessness,
torpor; stiffness, rigidity, rigor; death
ھامد hāmid calm, quiet, still, extinct;
lifeless; rigid, stiff (corpse)
ھمر hamara u i (hamr) to pour out, shed ( ھ
s.th., water, tears) VII to be poured out, be
shed; to pour down (rain), flow (tears)
ھمرة hamra shower of rain; growl(ing),
snarl(ing)
ھمز hamaza u i (hamz) to prick; to drive, urge
on, prod, goad on ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to spur (
ھ one’s horse); (gram.) to provide with
hamza ( ھ a letter or word)
ھمز hamz spurring, goading, prodding,
urging, pressing; beating, striking,
kicking; backbiting, slander │ ھمز لمز
(lamz) innuendoes, defamatory
insinuations; taunts, gibes, sneers
ھمز hamz glottal stop before or after a
vowel (phon.)
ھمزة hamza pl. hamazāt hamza, the
character designating the glottal stop: ء
(gram.) │ ھمزة القطع h. al-qaṭ‘ disjunctive
hamza (gram.); ھمزة الوصل h. al-waṣl
conjunctive hamza (gram.); ھمزة الوصل بين
the (connecting) link between ...
ھماز hammāz slanderer, backbiter
مھمز mihmaz pl. مھامز mahāmiz2 spur;
goad
مھماز mihmāz pl. مھاميز mahāmīz2 spur;
goad
ھمس hamasa i (hams) to mumble, mutter; to
whisper ( ب s.th., الى to s.o.) │ ھمس في اذنه
(fī wajhihī) to whisper in s.o.’s ear VI to
whisper together, exchange whispered
remarks
ھمس hams mutter(ing), mumble;
whisper(ing)
ھمسة hamsa pianissimo of a singer;
whisper; pl. ھمسات hamasāt whispering,
whispers
ھوامس hawāmis2 mumbled or whispered
words
ھمش hamaša u (hamš) to bite ( ه s.o.)
ھامش hāmiš margin (of a bock, page,
etc.) │ على ھامش ... on the periphery of ...,
on the side lines of ..., aside from, in
connection with ..., on the occasion of ...,
apropos of │ على ھامش الأخبار sidenotes of
the news (title of a BBC news
commentary)
ھامشي hāmišī marginal
ھمع hama‘a a u to shed tears (eye); to stream,
flow, well
ھمك hamaka u (hamk) to urge, press ( في ه s.o.
to do s.th.) VII to be engrossed, be
completely engaged ( في in s.th.), be
dedicated ( في to), give o.s. up, abandon
o.s. wholeheartedly ( في to, also على ), be
loot, become absorbed ( في in), be
completely taken up, be preoccupied ( في
with)
انھماك inhimāk wholehearted dedication,
abandon, engrossment, exclusive
occupation, absorption; preoccupation
منھمك munhamik engrossed, absorbed,
loot ( في in), taken up, preoccupied ( في
with); given, addicted ( في to); dedicated (
في to)
ھمل hamala u i (haml, ھملان hamalān,
ھمول humūl) to be bathed in tears, shed
tears (eye) IV to neglect ( ھ s.th.); to omit,
leave out ( ھ s.th.); to disregard, fail to
consider or notice, overlook, forget ( ھ
s.th.); to cease to use, disuse ( ھ s.th.); to
leave unpointed, provide with no
diacritical points ( ھ a consonant; gram.)
VI to be careless, negligent, remiss, lazy
VII to be bathed in tears, shed tears (eye);
to pour down (rain)
ھمل hamal left to o.s., to one’s own
devices, left alone; left untended (cattle);
neglected, disregarded 1034
اھمال ihmāl negligence; neglect;
dereliction of duty; carelessness,
heedlessness, inattention; nonobservance,
disregard, nonconsideration
ھامل hāmil pl. ھمل hummal roving,
roaming; vagabond, tramp
مھمل muhmil negligent, neglectful,
remiss; careless, heedless, inattentive,
slovenly
مھمل muhmal neglected; omitted;
disregarded, not taken into account;
obsolete, antiquated; lacking, devoid of,
not provided with; without diacritical
points, unpointed (gram.); المھملات
deadletter office │ مھمل الإمضاء without
signature, unsigned; رسالة مھملة dead (i.e.,
undeliverable) letter; سلة المھملات sallat alm.
wastebasket; كمية مھملة (kammīya)
negligible quantity
ھملج hamlaja to amble (horse)
ھملاج himlāj pl. ھماليج hamālīj2 ambler,
ambling horse
ھمھم hamhama to say “hmm”; to mumble,
mutter; to grumble; to growl, snarl; to
hum, buzz, drone
ھمھمة hamhama pl. -āt, ھماھم hamāhim2
an inarticulate utterance (“hmm,
hmm”),e.g., to express astonishment, and
the like; mumble, mutter(ing)j hum, buzz,
drone (also. e.g., of an airplane); growl,
snarl
ھما (ھمو ) hamā u (hamw) to flow; to pour forth;
see also alphabetically
ھن 1 hanna , to weep, sigh; to long, yearn ( الى
for)
ھن 2 hunna they (3rd pers. f. pl. of the pers.
pron.)
ھنة 1 hana see under ھنو
ھنا hunā and ھھنا hāhunā here, over here, in
this place; hūnā (with foll. verb) there,
then, now, by now, at this point │ الى ھنا or
لھنا here, over here, to this place; up to
here, so far, up to this point, up to this
amount; من ھنا from here; of this, hereof,
from this, hence; for this reason, therefore;
by this, hereby; ھنا وھناك here and there
ھناك hunāka and ھنالك hunālika there,
over there, in that place; there is (are) │
ھناك قول مأثور (qaul) there is a proverb; الى
ھناك there, over there, to that place; من ھناك
from there, from that place; ماذا ھنالك
what’s up? what’s the matter?
ھنأ 2 hana’a u a i ( ھنء han’, hin’, ھناء hanā’) to
be beneficial, wholesome, healthful,
salutary, salubrious ( ل or ه to s.o.), do s.o.
ل) or ه) good; -- ھنئ hani’a a ( ھنأ hana’) to
he delighted ( ب with), take pleasure ( ب
in), enjoy ( ب s.th.) II to congratulate,
felicitate ( على or ب ه s.o. on or on the
occasion of); to make happy, gladden,
delight ( ه s.o.) V to enjoy, savor ( ب s.th.),
take pleasure ( ب in)
ھناء hanā’ and ھناءة hanā’a happiness,
bliss; good health, well-being;
congratulation, felicitation
ھناء hinā’ tar
ھنيء hanī’ healthful, salutary,
salubrious, wholesome, beneficial;
pleasant, agreeable; easy, smooth,
comfortable │ ھنيئا لك or ھنيئا مريئا hanī’an
marī’an approx.: may it do you much
good! I hope you will enjoy it (i.e., food)!
تھنئة tahni’a pl. تھانئ tahāni’2
congratulation, felicitation
ھانئ hāni’ happy, delighted, glad;
servant; ھانئة hāni’a servant girl, maid
مھنئ muhanni’ congratulator, wellwisher
الھند al-hind India; the (East) Indians │ الھند
البريطانية British India; الھند الصينية (ṣīnīya)
1035
Indochina; الھند الشرقية (šarqīya) East
India; جزر الھند الغربية juzur al-h. al-garbīya
the Caribbean Islands, the West Indies
ھندي hindī Indian; (pl. ھنود hunūd) an
Indian │ المحيط الھندي (muḥīṭ) the Indian
Ocean; الھنود الحمر (ḥumr) the American
Indians
مھند muhannad sword made of Indian
steel
ھندب hindab, ھندباء hindibā’ wild chicory,
endive (bot.)
ھنداز hindāz measure
ھندازة hindāza cubit (Eg., = 65.6 cm)
ھندسة handasa engineering; mechanical
engineering; architecture, architectural
engineering; army engineering; geometry;
geodesy, surveying │ علم الھندسة ‘ilm al-h.
geometry; ھندسة الري h. ar-riyy irrigation
engineering; الھندسة الزراعية (zirā‘īya)
agronomy; الھندسة السطحية (saṭḥīya) plane
geometry, planimetry; الھندسة الفراغية
(farāgīya) solid geometry, stereometry;
ھندسة المدن h. al-mudun town planning;
الھندسة المعمارية (mi‘mārīya) architecture;
ھندسة الميدان h. al-maidān combat
engineering; الھندسة الكھربائية (kahrabā’īya)
electrotechnics, electrical engineering;
ھندسة اللاسلكي h. al-lā-silkī radio
engineering; الھندسة المدنية (madanīya) civil
engineering; الھندسة الميكانيكية mechanical
engineering
ھندسي handasī technical, technological;
geometrical; of or relative to mechanical
engineering; engineering, industrial │ فرقة
ھندسية (firqa) corps of engineers; القوات
الھندسية (qūwāt) corps of engineers; the
engineers (mil.)
ھنداسة hindāsa = ھندازة , see above
مھندس muhandis architect; engineer;
technician │ مھندس زراعي (zirā‘ī)
agricultural engineer; مھندس عسكري
(‘askarī) army engineer; مھندس كھربائي
(kahrabā’ī) electrotechnician, electrical
engineer; مھندس معماري (mi‘mārī) architect
ھندم handama to order, array, adjust ( ھ s.th.);
to make smart, neat, trim; to dress up,
spruce up ( ه s.o.)
ھندمة handama harmony; orderliness,
tidiness, neatness, trimness
ھندام hindām harmony; orderliness,
tidiness, neatness, trimness; attire, dress,
garb │ اصلح ھندامه to adjust one’s clothes;
to dress, dress up
مھندم muhandam well-ordered, wellarrayed;
orderly, tidy, neat; trim, smart;
well-dressed; made to measure, tailormade
(suit)
ھنشير hanšīr pl. ھناشير hanāšīr2 (tun.) country
estate
ھنغاري hungārī Hungarian (adj. and n.)
ھنف II to hurry, hasten, rush III and VI to
laugh contemptuously, sneer; to sob,
whimper
ھناك and ھنالك see ھنا 1
ھنم 1 hanam dried dates
ھانم 2 look up alphabetically
ھنيھة hunaiha a little while; hunaihatan for a
little while
ھنھن hanhana to lull to sleep with a song ( ل a
baby)
ھنھونة hanhūna lullaby
ھنة hana pl. -āt, ھنوات hanawāt thing; s.th.
unimportant, trifle, bagatelle; blemish,
defect, fault, flaw
ھنو hinw time
ھني hanīy (= ھنيء ) wholesome, delicious
ھه hih (interj.) oh! alas! woe! (also
derogatorily) oh, come now! 1036
ھھنا see ھنا 1
ھو 1 huwa he; it (3rd pers. m. sing. of the pers.
pron.); God; ھوذا see ذا
ھوية huwīya essence, nature;
coessentiality, consubstantiality; identity;
identity card (= │ ( بطاقة الھوية، تذكرة الھوية
اوراق الھوية aurāq al-h. identification
papers, credentials; تذكرة الھوية tadkirat alh.
(ir., syr.) identity card; عرف ھويته
(‘urifa) to be identified
ھوة 2 hūwa see ھوى
ھوتة hauta, hūta pl. ھوت huwat depression in
the ground; chasm, abyss
ھوج hawaj folly, light-headedness, rashness,
thoughtlessness
اھوج ahwaj2, f. ھوجاء haujā’2, pl. ھوج
hūj reckless; impatient, rash, thoughtless,
harebrained, precipitate, hasty, foolhardy;
violent, vehement, frantic
ھوجاء haujā’ pl. ھوج hūj hurricane,
tornado, cyclone
ھاد (ھود ) hāda u (haud) to be a Jew II to
proceed Ilowly; to intoxicate, inebriate ( ه
s.o.; of wine); to make Jewish ( ه s.o.) III to
be indulgent, forbearing, conciliatory,
considerate, complaisant, obliging ( ه to
s.o.); to avoid, shun ( ه s.o.), stay out of
s.o.’s ( ه) way V to become a Jew or
Jewish
الھود al-hūd the Jews, the Jewry
ھوادة hawāda forbearance, indulgence,
consideration, complaisance,
obligingness; clemency, leniency, gentleheartedness;
relaxation, mitigation (of
laws)
تھويد tahwīd Judaization
مھاودة muhāwada complaisance,
obligingness, indulgence, consideration │
مھاودة الأسعار low pricing
متھود mutahawwid Judaized, under
Jewish influence or control
متھاود mutahāwid moderate (price)
ھودج see ھدج
ھوذا see ذا
ھار (ھور ) hāra u (haur, ھؤور hu’ūr) to be
destroyed, crash down, fall down,
collapse; -- (haur) to pull down, topple,
wreck, demolish, destroy ( ھ s.th., esp., a
building); to bring down, throw to the
ground ( ه s.o.) II to endanger, imperil,
jeopardize, expose to danger ( ه s.o.); to
bring down, throw to the ground ( ه s.o.) V
to be destroyed, crash down, fall down,
collapse; to rush headlong into danger; to
be light-headed, careless, irresponsible; to
elapse, pass, go by (time) VII to be
demolished or torn down; to crash down,
fall down, collapse; to fall apart (line of
argument)
ھور haur pl. اھوار ahwār lake
ھورة haura pl. -āt danger, peril
ھواري hawārī pl. ھوارة hawwāra
volunteer; O short-term soldier, irregular;
الھوارة irregular troops
ھير hayyir rash, precipitate, thoughtless,
ill-considered, imprudent
تھور tahawwur light-headedness,
carelessness, irresponsibility; hastiness,
rashness, precipitance
انھيار inhiyār crash, fall, downfall;
collapse, breakdown
متھور mutahawwir rash, hasty,
precipitate; frivolous, thoughtless;
lightheaded, careless, irresponsible,
reckless; foolhardy, daredevil
ھورمون hormōn hormone
ھوس 1 hawisa a (hawas) to be baffled, startled,
perplexed; to be utterly confused, be at a
complete 1088, be at one’s wit’s end II to
baffle, startle, perplex, confuse, bewilder,
confound ( ه s.o.); to delude, beguile,
befool, infatuate, dazzle, blind ( ه s.o.); to
craze, drive crazy, render 1037 insane ( ه
s.o.) V to be beguiled, befooled,
infatuated, dazzled, lose one’s head; to
abandon o.s. completely; to be a fantast, a
visionary VII to be beguiled, befooled,
infatuated, dazzled
ھوس hawas foolishness, folly, craze,
madness; dreaminess, visionariness,
rapture, ecstasy; wild fancy, fantasy;
raving madness, frenzy; infatuation,
blindness, delusion
ھوس hawīs thought, idea, concept,
notion
ھويس hawīs and ھاويس hāwīs pl. اھوسة
ahwisa (eg.) look, canal lock
اھوس ahwas2 foolish, crazy, mad;
dazzled, blind, infatuated
مھووس mahwūs (religious) visionary
مھوس muhawwas foolish, crazy, mad;
dazzled, blind, infatuated
متھوس mutahawwis pl. -ūn fantast,
visionary
ھوسة 2 hausa clamor, shouting, uproar
ھوش hawiša a (hawaš) and ھاش hāša u (hauš)
to be excited, be in a state of commotion
II to excite, agitate, unsettle ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to rouse, incite, stir up, inflame ( ھ
the mob); to sick ( على ھ a dog on), set,
incite ( على ه s.o. against); to exert a
disturbing influence ( على on) III to annoy
by its barking ( ه s.o.; of a dog) V to get
tumultuous, get excited, run riot
ھوشة hauša excitement, agitation,
commotion, riot, uproar, ruckus, rumpus,
row, fracas; turmoil, tumult
تھويش tahwīš excitation, agitation;
incitement, instigation
مھوش muhawwaš exciting;
troublemaker, agitator, rabble rouser
ھاع (ھوع ) hā‘a u a (hau‘) to vomit, throw up;
to retch II to make ( ه s.o.) vomit V= I
ھاك 1 hāka see ھا
ھوكي 2 hokī hookey │ ھوكي الانزلاق ice hockey
ھال (ھول ) hāla u (haul) to frighten, scare,
terrify, appall, horrify, strike with terror ( ه
s.o.) II to alarm, dismay, frighten, terrify,
horrify, fill with horror ( ه s.o.); to threaten,
menace, scare ( ب على s.o. with); to wield
menacingly ( ب a stick); to picture ( ھ s.th.)
as a terrible thing, mike ( ھ s.th.) appear
terrible; to exaggerate, overemphasize ( ھ
or منعن s.th.), make much ado, make a
great fuss ( من about) X to deem significant
ھ) s.th.); to consider terrific, appalling,
tremendous ( ھ s.th.); to be horrified ( ھ
at), be appalled, be staggered ( ھ by)
ھول haul pl. اھوال ahwāl, ھؤول hu’ūl
terror, fright, alarm, shook, horror,
dismay; power │ ابو الھول abū l-h. the
Sphinx; يا للھول yā la-l-haul oh, how
terrible!
ھولة haula a terrifying thing, a fright;
object of rear or terror
ھال hāl mirage, fata morgana;
cardamom (spice)
ھالة hāla pl. -āt halo (around moon or
sun, also, e.g., of a saint); ring around the
eye; nimbus, aureole, glory
تھويل tahwīl pl. -āt, تھاويل tahāwīl2
frightening, soaring, alarming,
intimidation, cowing, browbeating;
exaggeration; nightmare, phantom,
bugbear, bogey, bugaboo; pl. تھاويل
embellishments, ornamental flourishes;
pleasant visions
ھائل hā’il dreadful, frightful, terrible,
horrible, appalling, ghastly, awful; huge,
vast, formidable, gigantic, prodigious,
tremendous, stupendous; extraordinary,
enormous, fabulous, amazing, astonishing,
surprising; grim, hard, fierce (battle, fight)
مھول muhawwil terrible, dreadful 1038
ھولاندا holandā or ھولانده holanda Holland
ھولاندي holandī Dutch, Hollandish; (pl.
-ūn) Dutchman, Hollander
ھوليوود Hollywood
ھوم II to nod drowsily (head of s.o. falling
asleep); to doze off, fall asleep; to doze,
nap V to doze off, fall asleep; to doze, nap
ھامة hāma pl. -āt, ھام hām head; crown,
vertex; top, summit; see also under ھ م
ھان (ھون 1 ) hāna u (haun) to be or become easy
على) for s.o.), be of little importance ( على
to); ھان عليه ان to attach no importance to
the fact that ..., care little that ...; -- (hūn,
ھوان hawān, مھانة mahāna) to be or
become despicable, contemptible II to
make easy, ease, facilitate ( على ھ s.th. for
s.o.); to represent or picture ( ھ s.th., على to
s.o.) as easy or as of little importance; to
make light ( ھ or من of), belittle, minimize,
deride, flout, disparage ( ھ or من s.th.) │
ھون عليك (hawwin) take it easy! don’t get
excited! never mind! IV to despise ( ھ، ه
s.o., s.th.); to humble, humiliate, abase,
demean, scorn, disdain, slight, treat with
contempt or disdain ( ه s.o.); to insult ( ه
s.o.) VI to consider easy ( ب s.th.); to think
little. make little ( ب of), attach little
importance ( ب to), disdain, despise ( ب
s.th.); to be negligent, remiss, lax,
careless, ( في or ب in s.th.), neglect ( في or ب
s.th.); (with negation) not to fail ( في to do
s.th.), not to tire ( في of doing s.th.) X استھان
istahāna and استھون istahwana to consider
easy ( ب s.th.); to make little ( ب of), esteem
lightly, disesteem, underrate, undervalue (
ب s.th.); to disdain, despise ( ب s.th.); to
misunderstand, misjudge ( ب s.th.) │ لا
يستھان (yustahānu) not to be sneezed at, not
to be overlooked
ھون haun ease, leisure, convenience,
comfort; easiness, facility; ھونا haunan
slowly, gently, leisurely, imperceptibly │
على ھون slowly, gently, leisurely,
imperceptibly; على ھونك at your
convenience
ھون hūn disgrace, shame, degradation,
abasement
ھوان hawān despicableness, lowly,
contemptible position; insignificance,
negligibleness; degradation. abasement;
disgrace, shame, ignominy
ھين hayyin, hain pl. -ūn, اھوناء ahwinā’
easy; insignificant, negligible, of little
value; inconsiderable; unimportant; plain,
simple, homely, modest │ ھين لين hain
lain simple and nice
ھينة hīna easiness, facility;
convenience, comfort, ease; leisure
ھوينا huwainā gentleness, mildness,
kindliness; slowness, leisureliness, leisure,
ease; الھوينا slowly, gently, leisurely,
unhurriedly
اھون ahwan2 f. ھوناء haunā’2 easy;
comfortable; -- (elative) easier; smaller,
less, lesser; of less value, more worthless
│ ما اھونه (ahwanahū) how small, how
worthless it is! اھون الشرين a. aš-šarrain the
lesser evil
مھانة mahāna contempt, despicableness;
degradation, abasement, humiliation,
disgrace, shame
اھانة ahāna insult; affront, contumely,
abuse
تھاون tahāwun disesteem, disdain,
scorn, neglect; indifference ( ب to s.th.)
استھانة istihāna disesteem, disdain,
scorn, neglect; contempt
مھين muhīn insulting, abusive,
offending; contemptuous, humiliating,
disgraceful, ignominious, outrageous
متھاون mutahāwin negligent, remiss,
lax, indifferent
مستھين mustahīn disdainer, scorner,
despiser 1039
ھاون 2 look up alphabetically
ھوى 1 hawā i (huwīy) to drop, fall, tumble, fall
down, come down, sink; to topple, tumble
down, be upset; to swoop down (predatory
bird); to pounce, fall ( على upon); to blow
(wind); to overthrow ( ب s.o. or s.th.) │
ھوى على رقبتھا (raqabatihā) he fell in her
arms, he embraced her; ھوى بمقامه
(maqāmihī) to degrade s.o.; -- hawiya a (
ھوى hawan) to love ( ھ, ه s.o., s.th.); to
become fond ( ھ, ه of); to like ( ھ, ه s.o.,
s.th.); to go in ( ھ for a hobby), take up as
a hobby ( ھ s.th.) II to air, ventilate ( ھ a
room), expose to the wind or to fresh air (
ھ s.th.); to fan the air III to show o.s.
complaisant ( ه to s.o.), humor ( ه s.o.); to
flatter ( ه s.o.) IV to fall down, drop; to
drop ( ب s.th.); to pounce, fall ( على upon
s.o., ب with); to lean, bend ( على over); to
reach ( الى for), grab, grasp ( الى at). make
for s.th. ( الى ); to strive ( الى for), aspire ( الى
to), desire ( الى s.th.) │ اھوى بيده الى (biyadihī)
to stretch out one’s hand for, reach
out for V to be aired, be ventilated VI to
break down, collapse; to plunge down,
throw o.s. down VII to fall down, drop; to
be thrust down X to attract ( ه s.o.); to
seduce, tempt ( ه s.o.); to entice, lure ( ه
s.o.); to charm, enchant, fascinate,
enrapture, delight, entrance, carry away ( ه
s.o.)
ھوى hawan pl. اھواء ahwā’, ھوايا
hawāyā love; affection; passion;
inclination, liking, bent, wish; desire,
longing, craving; fancy, whim, caprice,
pleasure; اھواء sects, heretic tendencies │
على ھواء be convenient to s.o., please s.o.;
في الھوى in love; اصحاب الأھواء sectarians,
dissenters
ھوة hūwa pl. -āt, ھوى huwan abyss,
chasm; cave, cavern; pit, hole, ditch,
trench; (fig.) gulf
ھواء hawā’ pl. اھوية ahwiya, اھواء ahwā’
air; atmosphere; wind, draft; weather,
climate │ الھواء الأصفر (aṣfar) the plague;
ھواء طلق (ṭalq) open air; fresh air; في الھواء
الطلق outdoors, in the open, in fresh air;
ھواء مضغوط compressed air; سلك الھواء silk
al-h. aviation; طلمبة الھواء ṭulumbat al-h. air
pump
ھوائي hawā’ī airy, breezy; aerial, air- (in
compounds), atmospheric(al); pneumatic;
O inside (diameter, width); antenna,
aerial, سلك ھوائي (silk); flighty, whimsical,
capricious; ethereal; fantastic │ دولاب ھوائي
wind wheel; O ھوائي اطاري (iṭārī) frame
antenna; O ھوائي طوقي (ṭauqī) loop
antenna; O ھوائي مرتفع (murtafi‘) elevated
antenna; O ھوائي مرسل (murtafi‘)
transmitting antenna; O ھوائي مزدوج
(muzdawij) two-wire antenna; O ھوائي
مستقل (mustaqbil) receiving antenna; O
ھوائي مفرد (mufrad) single-wire antenna
ھواء hawwā’ amateur
ھواية hawāya pl. -āt hobby, sport or art
cultivated as an amateur; amateurism,
amateurship
ھواية hawwāya fan; ventilator
اھوى ahwā more desirable, preferable
اھوية uhwiya abyss, chasm, deep, depth
مھوى mahwan, مھواة mahwāh pl. مھاو
mahāwin2 abyss, chasm, gulf; place of
one’s longing, object of desire;
atmosphere
مھواة mihwāh ventilator
تھوية tahwiya airing, ventilation
استھواء istihwā’ fascination, captivation;
enchantment; seducement, enticement,
temptation; suggestion
ھاو hāwin pl. ھواة huwāh falling,
dropping, sinking; loving, in love; lover;
fancier, fan, amateur; dabbler, dilettante
ھاوية hāwiya chasm, gulf, abyss,
infernal depth, bottomless pit, hell 1040
ھوية 2 huwīya see ھو 1
ھي hiya she (3rd pers. sing. f. of the pers. pron.)
ھيا hayyā (interj.) up! come on! let’s go! now
then!
ھاء (ھيء ) hā’a i a and ھيؤ hayu’a u ( ھيأة ḥai’a,
ھياءة hayā’a) to be shapely, well-formed,
beautiful to look at, present a handsome
appearance; -- a ( ھيئة hī’a) to desire, crave
الى) s.th.) II to make ready, get ready, put
in readiness ( ھ s.th.); to prepare ( ھ s.th.);
to fix up, fit up, set up ( ھ s.th.); to pave
the way ( ل for s.o., for s.th.); to arm,
mobilize, get in fighting condition (mil.);
to put in order, to order, array, arrange ( ھ
s.th.); to incline, dispose, make inclined ( ل
ه s.o. to), influence ( ل ه s.o. in favor of) │
ھيأ الأسباب ل (asbāba) to pave the way
for ...; ھيأ ذاته ل (dātahū) to prepare o.s. (at
heart) for ...; ھيأ فرصة ملائمة ل (furṣatan
mulā’imatan) to offer a good opportunity
for ... III to agree, come to an agreement (
في ه with s.o. about); to concur ( في ه with
s.o. in); to adapt o.s., adjust o.s. ( ه to s.o.)
V to be prepared, be in readiness, be
ready, stand ready ( ل for); to be armed, be
prepared for war, be in fighting condition
(mil.); to prepare o.s., get ready ( ل for); to
be possible ( ل to s.o.); to be well-dressed
│ تھيأ tahayya’ make ready! (mil.
command) VI to adapt themselves to one
another, make mutual adjustment; to be in
agreement, be agreed
ھيئة hai’a pl. -āt form, shape; exterior,
appearance, guise, aspect, bearing; air,
mien, physiognomy; attitude, position;
situation, condition, state; group, (social)
class; society, association; body,
corporation; organization; board,
commission, committee; corps; cadre,
skeleton organization │ ھيئة الأمم المتحدة h.
al-umam al-muttaḥida and الھيئة الأممية
(umamīya) the United Nations
Organization; الھيئة الاجتماعية (ijtimā‘īya)
human society; ھيئة الإذاعة اللاسلكية h. alidā‘
a al-lā-silkīya broadcasting
corporation; ھيئة اركان الحرب h. arkān al-
ḥarb general staff; ھيئة اركان حرب الأسطول
(usṭūl) naval staff; ھيئة برلمانية
(barlamānīya) parliamentary group; ھيئة
التحكم board of arbitration; jury, committee
of judges, committee of umpires (in
sports), the referees (in military
maneuvers); ھيئة التدريس teaching staff;
faculty, professoriate (of an academic
institution); ھيئة حاكمة (حكومية ) (ḥukūmīya)
governmental agency, authority; ھيئة
دبلوماسية diplomatic corps; الھيئة السعدية
(sa‘dīya) the Sa’dist Union (formerly, a
political group in Egypt); ھيئة طبية (ṭibbīya)
ambulance corps; ھيئة نيابية (niyābīya)
representative body, parliamentary body;
علم الھيئة ‘ilm al-h. astronomy
ھيء hayyi’, ھيئ hayī’ good-looking,
handsome; shapely
تھيئة tahyi’a preparation; training;
adaptation, adjustment, accommodation
مھايأة muhāya’a joint usufruct, use or
profit sharing (Isl. Law)
O تھيؤ tahayyu’ military preparations
تھيؤ tahayyu’ (mutual) adaptation,
(mutual) adjustment
مھيأ muhayya’ prepared; ready
ھيب) ھاب) hāba (1st pen. perf. hibtu) a (
ھيبة haiba, مھابة mahāba) to fear, dread (، ھ
ه s.o., s.th.), be afraid ( ھ، ه of); to stand in
awe ( ھ of), be awed ( ھ، ه by); to honor,
respect, revere, venerate ( ه s.o.) II to make
ھ) s.th.) be dreaded ( الى by s.o.), make it
dreadful to s.o., inspire s.o. ( الى ) with awe
ھ) of); to make s.th. ( ھ ) appear dreadful
or awesome ( الى to s.o.); to threaten,
frighten, intimidate, cow, daunt ( على s.o.)
IV to call out, shout ( ب to s.o.); 1041 to
call upon s.o. ( ب), appeal ( ب to s.o.); to
drive, urge, rouse, egg on, encourage ( الى
ب s.o. to) V = I; to awe, frighten, scare,
threaten ( ه s.o.) VIII = I
ھيبة haiba fear, dread, awe; reverence,
veneration, esteem, respect; awe-inspiring
appearance, venerableness, gravity,
dignity; standing, prestige
ھياب hayyāb timid, timorous, shy,
diffident; respectful
ھيوب hayūb timid, timorous, shy,
diffident; respectful; awful, fearful,
dreadful; awe-inspiring, awesome,
venerable
مھاب mahāb object of reverence and
respect
مھابة mahāba dignity
تھيب tahayyub fear, dread; awe
مھوب mahūb and مھيب mahīb dreaded,
dreadful, awful
مھيب muhīb awe-inspiring, awesome,
venerable; grave, solemn, dignified
متھيب mutahayyib respectful, reverential
ھيت II to call ( ب s.o.)
ھيت haita, ھيت لك (laka) come here!
ھاج (ھيج ) hāja i (haij, ھيجان hayajān,
ھياج hiyāj) to be astir or stirred up, be or
get excited, agitated; to rise; to awaken, be
awakened, spring up (desire); to be in
great excitement, be very upset, be
furious, indignant ( على about, at); to run
high, be rough, stormy (sea); -- ھاج and II
to move, stir, agitate ( ھ s.th.); to stir up,
excite ( ھ s.th.); to disturb, trouble,
perturb, disquiet ( ھ s.th.); to provoke,
incite, stimulate ( ھ s.th.); to kindle, ignite,
inflame, incense ( ھ s.th.); to make ( ھ the
blood) boil; to awaken, arouse, evoke ( ھ
e.g., a desire); to bring to light ( ھ s.th.); to
irritate, inflame ( ھ an organ); to drive,
urge on, spur on ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th., على to); to
rouse, start, scare up ( ھ a bird) IV = II; V
and VIII to be astir, be restive, be in a
state of commotion, be disturbed, be
excited, be agitated; to be awakened, be
(a)roused, be scared up
ھيج excitement; agitation; commotion,
disturbance, turmoil; dissension, strife;
combat, battle
ھيجا haijā and ھيجاء haijā’ fight,
combat, battle, war
ھيجان hayajān excitement; agitation;
commotion, disturbance, turmoil, tumult;
outburst of rage, fury, irritation,
indignation, bitterness
ھياج hiyāj excitement; agitation;
commotion, disturbance, turmoil, tumult;
outburst of rage, fury, irritation,
indignation, bitterness; raging, uproar (of
the elements)
تھييج tahyīj excitation, agitation,
stimulation; provocation, incitement;
instigation; stirring up, fanning;
incensement, inflammation; O induction
(el.)
تھيج tahayyuj disturbance, commotion,
turmoil; excitement, agitation; emotional
disturbance; affect (jur.)
ھائج hā’ij stirring, astir, agitated, in
commotion; rough, heaving (sea, waves);
excited, impassioned; angry, furious,
enraged │ ھاج ھائجه he became angry, he
flew into a rage
مھيج muhayyaj exciting, stirring,
rousing, stimulating; provocative, inciting;
incendiary, inflammatory; agitator,
troublemaker, incendiary, seditionary,
rabble rouser; (pl. -āt) a stimulant, an
excitant
متھيج mutahayyij and مھتاج muhtāj
agitated, upset, excited, impassioned
ھيدروجين hīdrōžēn hydrogen 1042
ھير II to hurl down, topple, tear down, destroy,
demolish ( ھ s.th.)
ھير hayyir see ھور
ھيراطيقي hīrāṭīqī hieratic (writing)
ھيروغليفي hīroglīfī hieroglyphic
ھيروين hīruwīn heroin (chem.)
ھاش (ھيش ) hāša i (haiš) to be agitated, excited
ھيش hīš thicket, brush, scrub
ھيشة haiša excitement; commotion,
turmoil, tumult, riot
ھاض (ھيض ) hāḍa i: ھيض جناحه hīḍa janāḥhū his
wing was broken, he wass powerless
ھيضة haiḍa summer cholera, cholera
morbus; Asiatic cholera
مھيض mahīd broken, shattered │ مھيض
الجناح m. al-janāḥ broken-winged, helpless,
feeble, sapless
ھاط (ھيط ) hāṭa i (haiṭ) to shout, clamor, raise a
din, be tumultuous
ھيط haiṭ shouting, clamor, din, uproar,
ruckus
ھياط hiyāṭ shouting, clamor │ ھياط مياط
(miyāṭ) tumultuous uproar, ruckus, wild
shouting, tumult
ھيطل see ھطل
مھيع mahya‘ pl. مھايع mahāyi‘2 broad, paved
road
ھاف (ھيف ) hāfa i (haif) to be parched, thirsty;
-- a (haif) to run away (slave); -- ھيف
hayifa and hāfa a (haif, hayaf) to be slim,
slender, slight, frail
ھيف haif parching wind
ھيف hayaf slenderness, slimness
ھيوف hayūf burned up with thirst
ھيفان haifān2 parched; thirsty
اھيف ahyaf2, f. ھيفاء haifā’2, pl. ھيف hīf
slender, slim; slight, frail, wispy
ھيكل haikal pl. ھياكل hayākil2 temple; large
building, edifice; altar; skeleton;
framework (of a structure), frame; chassis
(of an automobile); colossal, gigantic,
huge
ھيكلي haikalī: مناورة ھيكلية (munāwara)
cadre maneuver, skeleton exercise (mil.)
ھال (ھيل 1 ) hāla i (hail) to pour, strew, sprinkle (
على s.th. on) II and IV do.; to pile up ( ھ
sand, earth; said of the wind) VII to be
heaped up, be poured in a heap, fall in a
heap; to rain down (bombs); to shower ( ب
على s.o. with), assail ( على s.o., ب على s.o.
with; instead of ب also accusative of a
verbal noun) │ انھال عليه ضربا وشتما
(ḍarban wa-šatman) he fell upon her with
blows and abusive language
ھيل hail piled-up sand │ الھيل والھيلمان
(hailamān) heaps of money, enormous
sums
ھيلان hayalān sand heap
انھيال inhiyāl, انھيال الأرض inh. al-arḍ
landslide
ھيول 2 hayūl mote, atom
ھيولى 3 hayūlā, hayyūlā primordial matter;
matter; substance
ھيولي hayūlī material (adj.)
ھيولاني hayulānī material (adj.)
ھام (ھيم ) hāma i (haim, ھيمان hayamān) to fall
in love ( ب with); to be in love ( ب with); to
be enthusiastic, ecstatic, frantic, beside
o.s.; to be in raptures, be crazy ( ب about),
be gone on ( ب); to roam, rove, wander │
ھام على وجھه (wajhihī) to wander aimlessly
about; ھام في وديان (widyān) approx.: he
was no longer himself, he was floating in
higher regions, he was beside himself, he
was out of his senses; ھام بأنظاره to let
one’s eyes wander; -- ( ھيام huyām, hiyām)
to thirst ( ب for) 1043 II to confuse,
bewilder, puzzle, mystify, mislead ( ه s.o.);
to infatuate, enchant, captivate, carry
away, rob of his senses ( ه s.o.; of love) X
pass. استھيم ustuhīma to be infatuated,
enchanted, captivated, carried away; to be
passionately in love
ھيام huyām, hiyām passionate love;
burning thirst
ھيوم hayūm confused, puzzled, baffled,
mystified, perplexed
ھيمان haimān2, f. ھيمى haimā, pl. ھيام
hiyām, madly in love; very thirsty
ھائم hā’im pl. ھيم huyyam, ھيام huyyām
perplexed, mystified, baffled, puzzled,
confused; out of one’s senses, beside o.s.;
in love, mad with love
مستھام mustahām in love, mad with love
ھيمن haimana to say “amen”; to guard ( على
s.o.), watch ( على over s.o.), watch
narrowly ( على s.o.), keep an eye on ( ;(على
to control ( على s.th.)
ھيمنة haimana supervision,
superintendence, surveillance; control;
suzerainty, supremacy, ascendancy,
hegemony
مھيمن muhaimin supervising,
superintending, controlling; guardian;
protector; master ( على of s.th., also, e.g., of
a situation)
ھين and ھينة see ھون 1
ھينم hainama to murmur softly
ھيه hīh (interj.) hey! Let’s go! step lively! look
alive!
ھيھات haihātu, haihāt, haihāti but oh! far from
the mark! wrong! what an idea! how
preposterous! │ ھيھات ان it is absolutely
out of the question that ...; ھيھات ان يفعل كذا
how far he is from doing so! ھيھات بين ھذا
وذاك what a difference between them! how
different they are! وھيھات لك ذلك and how
impossible is this to you!
و
wa 1. and; and also, and ... too │ ولا واحد not
one, not a single one; -- 2. (with foll. acc.)
with │ واياه wa-iyyāhu with him; لا يتفق
ومبادئھم (yattafiqu, mabādi’ahum) it is not
in agreement with their principles; -- 3.
introducing circumstantial (ḥāl) clauses:
while, as, when, whereas │ قال وھم يبتسم (he
said while he smiled) he said with a smile;
جاء والشمس طالعة (šamsu) he arrived at
sunrise; -- 4. (with foll. genit.) by (in
oaths) │ ولله by God! – 5. (with foll.
genit.) many a, how many │ وكأس شربت
(ka’sin) many a cup have I emptied! how
many cups I have drunk! -- أو a-wa أ
والا wa-illā (and if not), otherwise, else
وإن wa-in even if, even though,
although
ولو wa-lau even if, even though, even in
case that
ولكن wa-lākin, wa-lākinna (the latter
with foll. acc. or pers. suffix) but,
however, yet
وا toll (with the foll. noun ending in -āh) oh │
وا اسفاه wā-asafāh! oh grief! alas!
وابور (Fr. vapeur; colloq.) wābūr pl. -āt steam
engine; steamer, steamship; locomotive,
railroad, train; factory, mill; machine,
engine, apparatus; hot plate, heater, stove
│ وابور اكسبريس express train; وابور البضاعة
freight train, goods train; وابور الركاب 1044
w. ar-rukkāb passenger train; وابور w.
ar.ri"" irrigation pump; وابور الزلط w. azzalaṭ
(eg.) steamroller; وابور طارة w. ṭāra
paddle steamer; وابور العادة w. al-‘āda local
train, accommodation train, way train
وات wāt watt (el.)
واحة wāḥa pl. -āt oasis
وأد wa’ada يئد ya’idu to bury alive ( ھا a
newborn girl) V and VIII اتأد itta’ada to be
slow, act or proceed deliberately, tarry,
hesitate, temporize ( ل in s.th.) │ اتأد في
مشيتة (mišyatihī) to walk slowly,
unhurriedly, saunter
وئيد wa’ād deliberate, unhurried, slow;
deliberateness; وئيدا wa’īdan slowly;
gradually
تؤدة tu’ada deliberateness, slowness │
على تؤدة slowly, deliberately, unhurriedly
متئد mutta’id slow
وأر wa’ara يئر ya’iru (wa’r) to frighten ( ه s.o.)
X to be frightened, be struck with terror
وارسو warsō Warsaw (capital of Poland)
واشنطون wāšinṭōn Washington
واط wāṭ watt (el.)
واق واق wāqwāq in the description, of Arab
geographers, name of two different groups
of island (one east of China, the other
located in the Indian Ocean)
موئل mau’il refuge, asylum
وأم III to agree, be in agreement ( ھ، ه with); to
suit ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), be suited ( ھ، ه to),
harmonize ( ھ، ه with) VI to agree, tally,
humanize
وئام wi’ām agreement; unity, concord,
harmony
مواءمة muwā’ama agreement; unity,
concord, harmony
واه wāha, واھا wāhā (interj.) with ل or ب to
express admiration: how wonderful is
(are) …! with على to express regret: alas
…! too bad for ...!
واو wāw name of the letter و
وئية wa’īya kettle
وبئ wabi’a يوبأ yawba’u ( وبأ waba’), وبؤ
wabu’a u ( وباء wabā’, وباءة wabā’a) and
pass. وبئ wubi’a to be plague-stricken,
infected, infested, poisoned, contaminated
وبأ waba’ pl. اوباء aubā’ infectious
disease; epidemic
وباء wabā’ pl. اوبئة aubi’a infectious
disease; epidemic
وبائي wabā’ī infectious, contagious;
epidemic(al); pestilential
وبئ wabi’ and وبيء wabī’ infected,
poisoned, contaminated, infested; plaguestricken,
plague-ridden, plague-infected
موبوء maubū’ poisoned, contaminated,
infested; infected, stricken ( ب by),
affected ( ب with)
وبخ II to reprimand, rebuke, censure, reprove,
scold, chide ( على ه s.o. for)
توبيخ taubīk reproach, reproof, censure;
reprimand, rebuke
وبر wabira يوبر yaubaru (wabar) to have
abundant hair or wool, be covered with
thick hair, be hirsute, hairy
وبر wabr pl. وبور wubūr, وبار wibār,
وبارة wibāra daman (Hyrax syriaca: zool.)
وبر wabar pl. اوبار aubār hair, fur of
camels and goats (furnishing the material
for tents) اھل الوبر ahl al-w. the Bedouins
(as distinguished from (اھل المدر
وبر wabir covered with hair, hairy,
hirsute 1045
اوبر aubar2 f. وبراء wabrā’ covered with
hair, hairy, hirsute
موبر muwabbar hairy, woolly
وبش wabaš trash, rubbish, bosh; pl. اوباش
awbāš rabble, riffraff
وبق wabaqa يبق yabiqu and wabiqa يوبق
yaubaqu (wabaq, وبوق wubūq, موبق
maubiq) to perish, go to ruin, be destroyed
IV to ruin ( ه s.o.); to debase, humiliate,
mortify ( ه s.o.)
موبق maubiq place of destruction, of
perdition; prison, jail
موبقة mūbiqa pl. -āt grave offence; act
of violence, crime; mortal sin
وبل wabala يبل yabilu (wabl) to shed
heavy rain (sky); -- wabula يوبل yaubulu
(wabal, وبال wabāl, وبالة wabāla, وبول
wubūl) to be unhealthy, unwholesome,
noxious (climate, air)
وبل wabl downpour
وبال wabāl unhealthiness of the air or
climate; evil consequences of a deed;
harm, evil, curse
وبيل wabīl unhealthy, unwholesome
(climate, food); of evil consequences,
hurtful, noxious, calamitous, disastrous,
pernicious
وابل wābil heavy downpour; (fig.) hail,
shower │ امطره وابلا من الرصاص (raṣāṣ) to
shower s.o. with a hail of bullets; امطر عليه
وابلا من الشتم (šatm) to shower s.o. with a
flood of abuse
وبه wabaha, wabiha يوبه yaubahu (wabh) and
IV to heed, mind ( ل or ب s.o.), pay
attention ( ل or ب to), take notice ( ل or ب
of)
وتد II to drive or ram in firmly ( ھ a peg or
stake); to fix, fasten, secure ( ھ s.th.) │ وتد
في بيته (baitihī) to stay at home
وتد watad, watid pl. اوتاد autād peg, pin;
tent pin, tent peg; stake, pole
وتر watara يتر yatiru (watr) to string, provide
with a string ( ھ the bow); to wrong, harm
ه) s.o.), cheat, dupe ( ه s.o., ھ out of, with
regard to) II to stretch, strain, draw tight,
tighten, pull taut ( ھ a rope, a musical
string, and the like) III to do or perform ( ھ
s.th.) at intervals, intermittently, with
interruptions IV to string, provide with a
string ( ھ the bow) V to be or become
strained, stretched, tight, taut │ توترت
العلاقات (‘alāqāt) relations were strained VI
to follow in uninterrupted succession; to
repeat itself, recur
وتر witr uneven, odd (number); وترا
singly, one by one, separately
وتري watrī, witrī uneven, odd (number)
وتر watar pl. اوتار autār string (of a
bow, of a musical instrument); sinew,
tendon (anat.); chord (geom.); hypotenuse
(geom.) │ ضرب على الوتر الحساس (ḥassās)
to touch on a sensitive spot, get to the
heart of a matter; وتر صوتي (ṣautī) vocal
cord
وترى watarī stringed, string- (in
compounds)
وتيرة watīra pl. وتائر watā’ir2 manner,
way; mode, fashion; procedure, method;
style; tone على ھذه الوتيرة in this manner,
this way; على وتيرة واحدة in the same
manner; uniformly, in unison; استمر على ھذه
الوتيرة he continued in this tone
تترى tatrā one after the other, one by
one, in succession, successively
توتر tawattur tension (also el. =
voltage); strain │ توتر الأعصاب
nervousness, nervous tension; توتر سياسي
(siyāsī) political tension
تواتر tawātur succession; repetition,
recurrence; frequency, constancy,
incessancy, continuance; persistence;
frequency (el.) │ على تواتر successively,
one after the other, in succession 1046
موتور mautūr one who has been
wronged by the murder of a relative, hut
to whom blood revenge is still denied
متوتر mutawattir stretched, strained,
taut, tense, rigid, firm, tight
متواتر mutawātir successive
وتين watīn pl. وتن wutun اوتنة autina aorta
وتى III to come ( ه to, upon; of s.th. pleasant),
befall ( ه s.o.; s.th. pleasant); to be
complaisant, obliging ( ه toward s.o.),
oblige ( ه s.o.); to be favorable, propitious (
ه to s.o.); to be convenient ( ه to s.o.), suit ( ه
s.o.); to turn out successful, be a success ( ه
for s.o.); to be suited, suitable ( ه to s.o.),
become, befit ( ه s.o.), go well with ( ه); to
agree ( ه with; of food)
موات muwātin pleasant, agreeable,
pleasing, appealing, engaging, winning,
becoming: favorable, propitious
وثأ wata’a يثأ yata’u ( وثء wat’ to bruise,
contuse ( ھ a limb); to wrench, sprain ( ھ a
limb); -- وثئ wati’a يثأ yata’u ( وثأ wata’,
وثوء wutū’) and pass. وثئ wuti’a to get
bruised, be wrenched, be sprained IV = I
wata’a
وثء wat’ contusion, bruise; sprain,
wrench
وثاءة watā’a contusion, bruise; sprain,
wrench
وثب wataba يثب yatibu (watb, وثوب
wutūb, وثيب watīb, وثبان watabān) to jump,
leap, spring, bound; to skip, hop, caper; to
jump up, start; to jump up and run ( الى to);
to rush ( الى to), make a rush ( الى for); to
jump, dash ( على at s.o.), pounce, fall ( على
upon s.o.) 11 and IV to make ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.) jump, bounce ( ھ s.th.) III to pounce,
fall ( ھ upon s.th.) V to jump up, start; to
rush, dash ( الى to, at); to hop, skip, bound,
leap, jump; to approach eagerly, with
enthusiasm, tackle energetically ( الى s.th.);
to pounce ( في، على upon); to awaken,
recover, rise VI to jump, leap, spring,
hound, make a jump; to be fast, abort,
come pantingly (breathing)
وثب wajb jump(ing), leap(ing) │ وثب
بالزانة (zāna) pole vault(ing); وثب طويل
broad jump; وثب عال (‘ālin) high jump;
تخطى وثبا من فوق to hurdle over ...
وثبة watba (n. vic.) pl. watabāt jump,
leap, bound; attack; daring enterprise,
bold undertaking; riae; awakening │ وثبة
احساسية (iḥsāsīya) impulsive motion
وثاب wattāb given to jumping, bouncy,
full of bounce; fiery, hotheaded,
impetuous; dashing, daring, enterprising
مواثبة muwātaba prompt assertion of a
claim in the presence of witnesses (Isl.
Law)
متوثب mutawattib awakening, rising;
vigorous, energetic
وثر watura يوثر yauturu ( وثارة watāra) to be
soft (bed); -- watara يثر yatiru (watr) to
make soft, make smooth ( ھ s.th., esp., the
bed)
وثر watir son, snug, cozy, comfortable
(bed, seat); smooth (cloth)
وثير watīr soft, snug, cozy, comfortable
(bed, seat); smooth (cloth)
وثار witār soft bed
ميثرة mītara pl. مواثر mawātir مياثر , 2
mayātir2 saddlecloth, blanket, drape
وثق watiqa يثق yatiqu ( ثقة tiqa, وثوق wutūq) to
place one’s confidence, put faith ( ب in))
rely, depend ( ب on), trust ( ب in; من ان
that), be confident ( ب of; من ان that) │ يوثق
به (yūtaqu) trustworthy, reliable; وثق من
النفس to have self-confidence; -- watuqa
يوثق yautuqu ( وثاقة watāqa) to be firm,
solid; to be sure, be certain ( من of) II to
make firm or solid, strengthen, cement,
consolidate ( ھ s.th.); to 1047 document,
authenticate, confirm, certify ( ھ s.th.),
attest ( ھ to), notarize ( ھ s.th.), draw up a
notarial deed ( ھ over); to link firmly, hind
closely ( بين -- بين s.o. to) III to enter into
an agreement, make a treaty ( ه with s.o.) │
واثق نفسه على (nafsahū) to make a firm
resolution on, intend firmly to (do s.th.)
IV to tie, fasten ( ب ه s.th. to); to hind, tie
up, fetter ( ب ه s.o. with) V to he firm,
consolidated, firmly established; to
proceed with confidence, act trustfully ( في
in s.th.) X to make sure, make certain ( من
of), check, verify ( من s.th.); to have
confidence ( ه in s.o.), trust ( ه s.o.)
ثقة tiqa trust, confidence, faith, reliance
│ على ثقة trusting ( من in), relying ( من on),
confident, certain, sure ( من of); ھو على ثقة
من انه he is certain that he ...; ثقة بالنصر
(naṣr) confidence in victory; ثقة بالنفس or ثقة
بنفسه self-confidence, self-reliance; اخو ثقة
trustworthy; عدم الثقة ‘adam at-t. distrust,
mistrust; طلب عدم الثقة (ṭalab) motion of “no
confidence” (parl.); -- tiqa pl. -āt
trustworthy, reliable; trustworthy person,
trusted agent, informant, reliable authority
or source; pl. authorities │ O ثقة عسكري
(‘askarī) military expert
وثاق watāq, witāq pl. وثق wutuq tie,
bond, fetter, shackle, chain (also fig.) │ شد
وثاقه (šadda) to tie s.o. up. fetter, shackle
s.o.
وثاقة watāqa firmness solidity, strength
وثيق watīq pl. وثاق witāq firm, strong,
solid; safe, secure, dependable, reliable
وثيقة watīqa pl. وثائق watā’iq2
document, deed, writ, instruments, paper,
record, voucher, certificate, receipt,
policy; diplomatic note │ الوثيقة العظمى
(‘uẓmā) the Magna Charta; وثيقة التفويض
warrant of attorney (jur.)
اوثق autaq وثقي , 2 wutqā firmer, stronger
موثق mautiq pl. مواثق mawātiq2
covenant, agreement, contract, treaty, pact
ميثاق mātāq pl. مواثق mawātiq2 covenant,
agreement, contract, treaty, pact, alliance;
charter │ ميثاق ھيئة الأمم المتحدة m. hai’at alumam
al-muttaḥida the Charter of the
United Nations; ميثاق عدم الاعتداء m. ‘adam
al-i‘tidā’ nonaggression pact
توثيق tautīq consolidation,
strengthening, cementation;
documentation, authentication, attestation,
notarization; functions of a notary public,
notariate │ توثيق الديون consolidation of
debts, specif., consolidation of several
government loans into an overall public
debt
توثقة tautiqa security, surety, guaranty
وثاق witāq see watāq above
واثق wātiq trusting, confident, certain,
sure
موثوق mautūq: موثوق به trustworthy,
reliable, dependable; من مصدر موثوق به
(maṣdar) from a reliable source
موثق muwattiq pl. -ūn notary public
وثل watal palm-fiber rope, manila rope, hemp
rope
وثيل watīl palm-fiber rope, manila rope,
hemp rope
وثن watan pl. وثن wutun, اوثان autān graven
image, idol
وثني watanī idolater, pagan, heathen;
pagan, idolatrous
وثنية watanīya paganism
وجب wajaba يجب yajibu ( وجوب wujūb)
to be necessary, requisite, obligatory,
indispensable; to be incumbent, imposed,
enjoined ( على on), be s.o.’s ( على ) duty │
وجب عليه ان it is his duty to ..., he is in duty
hound to ..., he has to …, he must ...; كما
يجب as it should be, as it 1048 must be,
comme il faut; -- (wajb, وجيب wajīb, وجبان
wajabān) to throb, beat, palpitate (heart) II
to make s.th. ( ھ ) s.o.’s ( على ) duty, make
s.th. ( ھ ) incumbent ( على on s.o.), impose,
enjoin ( على ھ s.th. on s.o.), obligate ( ھ على
s.o. to) IV to make s.th. ( ھ ) s.o.’s ( (على
duty, make s.th. ( ھ ) incumbent ( على on),
impose, enjoin ( على ھ s.th. on s.o.), make
necessary, obligatory, binding ( على ھ s.th.
for s.o.), obligate ( على s.o., ھ to); to decide
positively ( ھ ل s.th. in favor of s.o.),
adjudge, adjudicate, award, grant ( ل ھ
s.th. to s.o.) X to deserve, merit ( ھ s.th.),
be worthy ( ھ of); to be entitled, have a
title ( ھ to), have a claim ( ھ on); to deem
necessary or obligatory ( ھ s.th.) │ عمل
يستوجب الشكر (šukra) an act deserving of
thanks, a meritorious undertaking
وجبة wajba pl. wajabāt meal, repast;
menu (syr.) │ وجبة الطعام w. aṭ-ṭa’ām meal,
repast; وجبة ناشفة dry rations, emergency
ration (approx.: D ration; mil.)
ايجاب ījāb obligation, liability,
commitment; affirmation; confirmation,
assertion; consent, assent; positive
reaction, compliance; offer of contract,
offer (jur.) │ ايجابا ل in conformity with, in
accordance with, according to, in
pursuance of; محل الإيجاب maḥall al-i.
competent authority; مراجع الإيجاب the
competent authorities; رد (اجاب) بالإيجاب to
answer in the affirmative, say yes
ايجابي ījābī positive; affirmative; active
(defense)
ايجابية ījābīya positivism
واجب wājib necessary, requisite,
essential, indispensable, inevitable,
unavoidable, inescapable; incumbent,
imperative, binding, obligatory; proper,
adequate, fair; -- (pl. -āt, وجائب wajā’ib2)
duty, obligation; incumbency;
requirement, exigency, necessity; task,
assignment │ واجب عليك it is your duty;
يرى من واجبه he considers it his duty;
بالواجب obligatorily; dutifully, duly;
deservedly; واجب العرض w. al-‘arḍ suitable
for presentation (petition, application);
واجبات منزلية (manzilīya) homework (of a
student)
موجوب maujūb moral obligation,
dictate, injunction
موجب mūjib obligating, necessitating,
requiring, inducing, motivating, causing;
(pl. -āt) cause, reason, motive; need,
exigency, requirement, necessity; matter
of decorum, formality │ بموجب or على
موجب according to, in accordance with; on
the basis of, on account of; by virtue of,
on the strength of; لا موجب ل (mujiba) there
is no reason for ..., one need not ...
موجبة mūjiba cause, reason, motive,
deed entailing certain inevitable
consequences
موجب mūjab necessary, requisite,
obligatory, made binding; effect,
consequence; affirmative (gram.); positive
(also, e.g., el.)
موجبة mujaba affirmative sentence
مستوجب mustaujib deserving, worthy
وجد wajada يجد yajidu ( وجود wujūd) to
find ( ھ s.th.); to hit upon s.th. ( ھ ), come
across s.th. ( ھ ), meet with s.th. ( ھ ); to get,
obtain ( ھ s.th.); to invent, make up ( ھ ھ
s.th. as); to find (good, bad) ( ھ s.th.); pass.
wujida ( وجود wujūd): to be found, be there,
exist; to be; يوجد yūjadu there is (are); --
(wajd) to experience, feel, sense ( ھ
affections, afflictions); to suffer, be in a
state of painful agitation; to love ( ب s.o.),
be impassioned ( ب by), long ardently,
languish ( ب for); -- i u (wajd) to be angry (
على with), have a grudge ( على against) IV
to produce, evoke, provoke. engender,
bring into being, originate, cause, bring
about ( ھ s.th.); to create, make ( ھ s.th.); to
achieve, accomplish, effect ( ھ s.th.); to
1049 invent ( ھ s.th.); to let ( ه s.o.) find or
obtain ( ھ s.th.), get, procure ( ھ ه for s.o.,
s.th.), furnish, supply ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.); to
force, compel ( على ه s.o. to) V to be
passionately in love ( ب with); to grieve (g
or ب for) VI to show up, turn up, come; to
exist, be existent, be there, be available; to
affect passion
وجد wajd strong emotion, emotional
upset; passion, ardor; ecstasy of love
وجدان wijdān passionate excitement;
ecstasy; emotional life, psychic forces;
feeling, sentiment
وجداني wijdānī emotional; psychic,
mental; sentimental
وجود wujūd finding, discovery; being;
existence; presence; whereabouts; stay,
visit
وجودي wujūdī existential; existentialist
│ الفلسفة الوجودية (falsafa) existentialism
موجدة maujida feeling, emotion,
passion, excitement; anger, grudge,
resentment, ill will
ايجاد ījād creation, procreation,
production, origination; procuring,
procurement, furnishing, supply;
calculation, computation, evaluation
واجد wājid finding; finder; agitated,
excited, upset, worried ( على about); in love
ب) with)
موجود maujūd found; available, on
hand, existing, existent; present; living
being, creature; stock, store, supply; pl.
-āt everything in existence, the creation;
(com.) assets, stocks
موجد mūjid originator, author, creator
وجر wajr pl. اوجار aujār cave, cavern, grotto;
den, lair, habitation
وجرة wajra, wajara pitfall
وجار wijār pl. اوجرة aujira cave (of wild
animals), den, lair, burrow
ميجار mījār pl. مواجير mawājīr2 bat;
racket; earthen kneading trough
وجز wajaza يجز yajizu and wajuza يوجز
yaujuzu (wajz, وجازة wajāza, وجوز wajūz)
to be brief, succinct, terse, concise,
summary IV to be concise, terse; to be
brief, succinct ( في or ھ in); to abridge,
summarize, epitomize ( ھ s.th.), make it
short
وجز wajz short, brief, succinct; terse,
concise, summary, compendious
وجيز wajīz short, brief, succinct; terse,
concise, summary, compendious │ بوجيز
العبارة briefly stated, in a few words,
reduced to its essentials, in a nutshell
ايجاز ījāz shortness, brevity,
succinctness; conciseness, terseness;
abridgment │ ايجازا or بالإيجاز in short,
briefly, concisely; واليكھا بالإيجاز (ilaikahā)
the matter is, briefly, as follows
موجز mūjaz summarized; concise, terse;
abstract, epitome; outline, brief sketch;
summary, résumé
وجس wajasa يجس yajisu (wajs, وجسان
wajasān) to be apprehensive, be afraid, be
worried, be seized with fear IV to have
presentiments, forebodings,
apprehensions; to have a presentiment ( ھ
of), fear ( ھ s.th.), be afraid, apprehensive,
in dread ( ھ of); to feel, sense, realize ( ھ
s.th.), be aware ( ھ of) │ اوجس خيفة
(kīfatan) to have a sensation of`fear; اوجس
فيه الملل (malala) to feel that s.o. is bored,
sense s.o.’s boredom V = IV; to listen
anxiously, apprehensively ( ھ to); to taste,
nibble, sip ( ھ of s.th.) │ توجس شرا من
(šarran) to regard s.th. as an evil omen
وجس wajs fear, apprehension, anxiety,
concern, uneasiness
توجس tawajjus timorousness, timidity,
apprehensiveness
واجس wājis disquieting thought,
foreboding, evil premonition 1050
وجع waji‘a يوجع yauja‘u (waja‘) to feel pain,
be in pain; to hurt, pain ( ه s.o.) IV to
cause pain ( ه to s.o.); to pain. hurt ( ه
s.o.) V to suffer pain, be in pain; to voice
one’s pain, give vent to one’s pain, to
lament; to feel grid, sorrow or pity, feel
sorry, feel compassion ( ل for s.o.),
commiserate ( ل with), pity ( ل s.o.)
وجع waja‘ pl. اوجاع aujā‘, وجاع wijā‘
pain, ache; ailment │ وجع السن w. as-sinn
toothache; الوجع بكبدك (bi-kabidika) an
imprecation (lit.: may pain strike your
liver!)
وجيع painful; grievous, sad
توجع tawajju‘ pain, ache; lament
موجوع maujū‘ feeling pain, in pain,
aching; ailing; suffering
وجف wajafa يجف yajifu (wajf, وجوف wujūf,
وجيف to be agitated, excited, troubled, in
commotion; -- (wajīf) to throb, beat
(heart) IV to agitate, excite, trouble,
disturb ( ھ s.th.); to make ( ھ s.th.) tremble
X to set ( ھ the heart) aflutter
واجف wājif beating, throbbing (heart) │
في صوت واجف (ṣaut) in a tremulous voice
وجق wujaq (tun.) the “Oudjak” (Tunisian
gendarmery)
وجاق wujāq, اوجاق ūjāq pl. وجقات
wujaqāt range, cooking stove; (heating)
stove; kitchen, galley; caboose; Janizary
corps
وجل wajila يووجل yaujalu (wajal, موجل maujal)
to be afraid, be scared; to be a coward, be
craven IV to fill with fear, frighten ( ه s.o.)
وجل wajal pl. اوجال awjāl fear, dread
وجل wajil pl. -ūn, وجال wijāl fearful,
apprehensive, timorous; cowardly, craven
وجم wajama يجم yajimu (wajm, وجوم wujūm) to
be silent; to be speechless, dumfounded
(with fear, rags, and the like); to be shy; to
be despondent, dejected, depressed
وجم wajim silent, speechless,
dumfounded; despondent, dejected,
depressed
وجوم wujūm silence; anxious,
apprehensive silence; speechlessness from
indignation, speechless, indignation;
despondency; shyness; anxiety, concern,
sorrow
واجم wājim silent, speechless,
dumfounded; despondent, dejected,
depressed
وجنة wajna pl. wajanāt cheek
وجه wajuha يوجه yaujuhu ( وجاھة wajāha) to be
a man of distinction, belong to the
notables II to raise to eminence,
distinguish, honor ( ه s.o.); to turn one’s
face, turn, go ( الى to), head ( الى for); to
send, dispatch ( الى ه s.o. to); to aim, level (
ل or الى ه s.th. at), direct, steer, guide,
channel ( ل or الى ه s.th. to); to turn ( ھ s.th.,
e.g., one’s face, one’s attention, etc., ل or
الى to); to address ( الى ھ a request, a
question, a letter, etc., to) │ وجه عليه تھمة
(tuhmatan) to rail, an accusation, bring a
charge against s.o.; وجه النظر الى (naẓara)
to turn one’s eyes to III to be opposite
s.th. ( ھ ), be in front ( ھ of); to face, front (
ھ a locality or toward); to meet face to
face, encounter ( ه s.o.); to see personally ( ه
s.o.), speak personally ( ه to s.o.), have an
interview or audience ( ه with); to face ( ھ
e.g., a problem), be faced ( ھ with), find
o.s. in the face of ( ھ ); to meet, counter,
obviate, withstand, defy ( ھ a danger); to
stand up ( ه to s.o.), oppose ( ه s.o.); to hold
one’s own ( ھ against s.th.); to envisage,
have in mind, consider ( ھ s.th.); to declare
openly, say frankly ( بأن ه to s.o. that); to
bring face to face. confront ( ب ه s.o. with
s.o., else or with s.th.) IV to 1051
distinguish, honor ( ه s.o.) V to betake o.s.,
repair, go, wend one’s way ( نحو or الى to),
head ( نحو or الى for), bend one’s steps ( نحو
or الى toward); to turn one’s face, turn ( ل
or الى to s.o.), face ( ل or الى s.o.); to turn,
apply ( نحو الى to s.o. for) VI to face each
other, meet face to face VIII اتجه ittajaha
to tend, be directed, be oriented ( نحو or الى
to. toward), be aimed, aim ( نحو or الى at);
to head, make ( الى for), face, turn one’s
face ( الى toward); to turn, be turned ( نحو or
الى to s.o., to s.th.); to lead, go ( نحو or الى
to, toward; of a road); to point ( نحو or الى
to; of a signpost); to come to s.o.’s ( (ل
mind. occur ( ل to s.o.; of an idea)
جھة jiha pl. -āt side; direction; region,
part, section, area; district, precinct, city
quarter; agency, authority; administrative
agency; (tun.) administrative district;
الجھات the outskirts, the outlying districts,
the provinces │ الى جھة in the direction of,
toward; من جھة from the direction of, from,
on the part of, concerning, regarding, as
to, with respect or regard to; من جھة الشمال
(šamāl) from the north; من جھة ... ومن جھة
اخرى (ثانية ) (ukrā, tāniya) on the one
hand ... on the other hand; من كل جھة from
all sides, on all sides; من جھتي for my part,
as for me, I for one; من ھذه الجھة seen from
this angle, under this aspect, from this
viewpoint; جھة الاختصاص or الجھة المختصة
(muktaṣṣa) the competent authority; جھة
اليسار jihata l-yasār at left, to the left, on
the left side
مجلس جھوي Majlis jihawī council of an
administrative district (Tun.)
وجه wajh pl. وجوه wujūh face,
countenance; front, face, façade; outside;
surface; right side of a fabric; dial (of a
clock or watch); face, obverse (of a coin);
prominent personality; exterior, look(s),
appearance, guise, semblance; side;
direction; intention, intent, design,
purpose, aim, goal, objective, end; course,
policy, guiding principle. precept; way,
manner, mode, procedure, method; lesson,
cause; sense, meaning, signification,
purport; beginning, start, outset, first part
of a given period of time; -- (pl. وجوه
wujūh and اوجه aujuh) aspect; approach,
point of view; viewpoint, standpoint; --
(pl. اوجه aujuh) phase (of the moon; also
el.) │ 1. Adverbial phrases: وجھا
apparently; وجھا بوجه (لوجه ) face to face, in
private, personally, directly; وجھا من الوجوه
(with preceding negation) in no way
(whatsoever); بوجه الإجمال bi-w. il-ijmāl on
the whole, by and large, in general; بوجه
على وجه) التقريب ) approximately, roughly,
nearly; بوجه خاص or على وجه خاص (kāṣṣ)
especially, in particular; بوجه (على وجه) عام
(‘āmm) generally, in general; بوجه ما some
way or other, somehow; in a certain way,
to a certain extent; بدون وجه حق (w. ḥaqqin)
without any legitimate claim, without
being in the least entitled, in an entirely
unlawful manner; على وجه in the manner
of, in the form of, in the shape of; with
regard to, concerning. about; على وجھه in
his own way; in the right manner,
correctly, properly, as it should be; على غير
وجھه improperly, incorrectly, wrongly; ذھب
على وجھه and مضى على وجھه to go one’s
own way, go one’s way; على ھذا الوجه in
this manner, this way, thus; على وجه الإجمال
(w. al-ijmāl) on the whole, by and large,
in general; altogether, in the aggregate;
على الوجه التالي in the following manner, as
follows; على وجه التفصيل at great length, in
detail, elaborately; على وجه الحصر (w. ilhaṣr)
in a condensed form, briefly stated,
in a nutshell; على وجه العموم in general,
generally; على وجه اليقين with certainty; في
وجھه before him, in his presence; counter
to him; before his (very) eyes; لوجه لله for
the sake of God, 1052 regardless of any
reward in this life; for nothing, gratis; من
كل وجه in every respect, from every point
of view, on all grounds; من وجوه كثيرة from
many points of view, in many respects; من
بعض الوجوه in some ways; من كل الوجوه in
every respect, in every way, all the way
through, completely; -- 2. Verbal phrases:
ابيض وجھه ibyaḍḍa wajhuhū to enjoy an
excellent reputation, stand in good repute;
اسود وجھه iswadda wajhuhū to fall into
discredit. be discredited, be in disgrace;
اخذ وجھا to win respect, gain prestige; اخذ
وجه العروسة (wajha l-‘arūsa) to
consummate marriage; اھانه في وجھه to
insult s.o. to his face; بيض وجھه bayyaḍḍa
wajhahū to make s.o. appear blameless, in
a favorable light, to whitewash, exculpate,
vindicate, justify s.o., play s.o. up, make
much of s.o.; to honor s.o., show honor to
s.o.; خلا له وجه الطريق (kalā, wajhu ṭ-ṭ.) his
way was unobstructed, he had clear
sailing; سفه وجھه saffaha wajhahū or سود
وجھه (sawwada) to expose s.o., show s.o.
up, make a fool of s.o., bring s.o. into
discredit, disgrace s.o., dishonor s.o.; شوه
وجه الحقيقة šawwaha wajh l-h. to distort the
truth; شوه وجه الوظيفة to disgrace one’s
profession or office; ضرب وجه الأمر وعينه
(wajha l-amr wa-‘ainahū) to touch on the
very essence of a matter, hit the mark; قام
في وجه فلان to stand up to s.o., take a stand
against s.o.; ھرب من وجه فلان to flee from
s.o.; -- 3. Nominal phrases: الوجه البحري
(baḥrī) Lower Egypt; الوجه القلي (qiblī)
Upper Egypt; وجه الحال the circumstances,
the state of affairs, the factual situation;
وجه الشبه w. aš-šibh point of resemblance;
وجه النھار wajah n-nahār during the
daytime; كلام ذو وجھين (kalām) equivocal
statement, ambiguous words; اوجه القمر a.
al-qamar the lunar phases; وجوه الناس
prominent people, Leading personalities;
-- لا وجه ل . 4 (wajha) there is no reason
for; لا وجه له من الصحة (ṣiḥḥa) it has no
validity at all
وجھي wajhī facial, of the face
وجھة wijha, wujha pl. -āt direction,
trend, drift; course (of a ship); intention,
design, aim, goal, objective; respect,
regard; (= وجھة النظر w. an-naẓar) angle,
point of view, viewpoint, standpoint │ من
ھذه الوجھة in this respect; from this point of
view; من وجھة اخرى (ukrā) from a different
standpoint, from another point of view;
وجھته باريس he is on his way to Paris
وجاھة wajāha esteem, credit, repute,
prestige, influence, standing, rank,
distinction, notability; acceptability; wellfoundedness,
soundness, solidity, validity
│ ذو وجاھة person of rank; notable, noted,
eminent, distinguished; اھل الوجاھة ahl alw.
the notables
وجاھي wijāhī contradiotory (jur.)
وجيه wajīh pl. وجھاء wujahā’ 2 notable,
noted, eminent, distinguished; eminent
man, person of note, notable; leader;
excellent, outstanding; acceptable, wellfounded,
sound; الوجھاء the notables │ سبب
وجيه (sabab) sound reason
وجيھة wajīha pl. -āt lady of high social
standing; lady of society, socialite
تجاه tujāha (prep.) in front of, facing,
opposite
توجيه taujīh aiming, leveling, directing;
orientation; guidance, direction;
controlling, steering, channeling, leading,
guiding; (methodical) instruction; (pl. -āt)
directive, instruction; allocation; transfer,
conveyance, assignment │ توجيه خطاه t.
kuṭāhu directive, that one receives
توجيھي taujīhī: السنة التوجيھية (sana) fifth
grade of a secondary school, the
completion of which is prerequisite before
1053 admittance to a university (Eg.);
شھادة توجيھية diploma conferred after the
successful completion of the fifth grade of
a secondary school, entitling the holder to
admittance to a university (Eg.); طلبة
التوجيھي ṭalabat at-t. fifth graders of a
secondary school (Eg.)
مواجھة muwājaha opposite position,
opposition; meeting; facing, anticipation,
countering, obviation; encounter;
confrontation; talk from person to person,
personal talk; audience; interview;
muwājahatan face to face, (from) person
to person │ بمواجھة in his presence
توجه tawajjuh attention; favoritism,
patronage
اتجاه ittijāh pl. -āt direction; inclination,
bent, trend, drift; tendency; orientation;
course (e.g., of a ship) │ طريق ذو اتجاه واحد
one-way street; اتجاه واحد One Way Only
(traffic sign)
واجھة wājiha pl. -āt face, front; outside;
facade; show window │ واجھة القتال front
line, fighting front
موجه muwajjih mate (naval rank; Eg.
1939)
موجه muwajjah remote-controlled,
guided
متجه muttajih directed, tending, aiming
في) in a direction)
متجه muttajah direction │ في كل متجه in
all directions; in all fields, in every respect
وحد waḥada يحد yaḥidu ( وحدة waḥda, حدة
ḥida) and waḥuda to be alone, unique,
singular, unmatched, without equal,
incomparable II to make into one, unite,
unify, standardize, regularize ( ھ s.th.); to
connect, join, link, unite, bring together,
fit together, combine, consolidate,
amalgamate, merge ( بينھم different parts) │
وحد لله to declare God to he one; to profess
belief in the unity of God, he a
monotheist; وحد الديون to consolidate, or
fund, debts V to be one, alone, by o.s., the
only one, singular, unique; to be lonely,
solitary, live in solitude, lead a secluded
life; to do alone, perform or carry out by
o.s. ( ب s.th.); to be reduced to one; to be
united, be combined, be unified, be
standardized, be concerted, be
consolidated; to become one, form a unity
│ توحد برأيه (bi-ra’yihī) to stand alone with
one’s opinion; توحده بعنايته (bi-‘ināyatihī) to
single s.o. out for one’s special care, give
s.o. particular attention VIII اتحد ittaḥada
to he one, form a unity; to be united, be
combined, be consolidated, be
amalgamated, merge, form, or join in, a
union; to unite, combine ( ب with); to he
agreed, be unanimous; to agree, concur; to
act jointly
حدة ḥida solitude, solitariness │ على حدة
alone, by o.s., apart from others, detached,
isolated. secluded; separate(ly); كل على حدة
everyone by himself. each by himself
(itself), each separately, each individually
وحده waḥdahū, f. وحدھا waḥdahā or على
وحده ‘alā waḥdihī etc., he alone, he by
himself │ جاء وحده he came alone; لا ... وحده
بل not only ... but
وحدة waḥda oneness, singleness, unity;
solitariness, isolation, seclusion, privacy,
solitude, loneliness; self-containment,
independence; union; -- (pl. -āt) military
unit; crew; single group, grouping; plant
unit, installation; (subsidiary) unit (of an
industrial plant); branch office, sub-office
(of an administrative agency) │ O وحدات
الإشارة w. al-išāra communications units
(mil.); وحدة الزمن w. az-zaman time unit;
وحدة طائفية denominational group, religious
minority; الوحدة العربية (‘arabīya) Arab
unity, the Arab Union
وحداني waḥdānī single, solitary,
separate, individual; sole, only, exclusive;
1054 singular, unique; matchless,
unequaled, incomparable; single,
unmarried
وحدانية waḥdānīya soleness, solitariness;
isolation, seclusion, privacy; solitude,
loneliness; oneness, singleness, unity (esp.
of God); singularity, uniqueness,
incomparableness
وحيد waḥīd alone; solitary, lonely;
single, separate, individual, sporadic,
isolated; sale, only, exclusive; singular,
unique; matchless, unequaled,
incomparable │ وحيدة ابويھا w. abawaihā
her parents’ only daughter
اوحد auḥad singular, unique
توحيد tauḥīd unification, union,
combination, fusion; standardization,
regularization; consolidation,
amalgamation, merger; belief in the unity
of God; profession of the unity of God;
monotheism; (myst.) mergence in the
unity of the universe │ توحيد الدين
consolidation of debts; توحيد الزوجة t. azzauja
monogamy; توحيد الكلمة t. al-kalima
unification, union, joining of forces,
unanimity; توحيد المنتوجات standardization
of industrial products; علم التوحيد ‘ilm at-t.
(Islamic) theology
توحد tawaḥḥud soleness, singleness,
solitariness; isolation, seclusion, privacy;
solitude, loneliness
اتحاد ittiḥād oneness, singleness, unity;
concord, accord, unison, harmony,
unanimity, agreement; combination;
consolidation, amalgamation, merger,
fusion; alliance, confederacy; association;
federation; union; O chemical compound
│ باتحاد in unison, with combined efforts,
together, jointly; اتحاد الآراء unanimity;
باتحاد الآراء unanimously; اتحاد البريد العام
(‘āmm) Universal Postal Union; اتحاد جنوب
افريقية itt. janūb ifrīqiya the Union of South
Africa; اتحاد الدول العربية itt. Ad-duwal
al-’arabīya the United Arab States (i.e.,
the United Arab Republic and Yemen);
اتحاد السوفيت or الاتحاد السوفيتي (السوفييتي ) the
Soviet Union
اتحادي ittiḥādī unionist; unionistic;
federal │ حكومة اتحادية federal government
واحد wāḥid one (numeral); someone,
somebody, a certain person, a certain ...;
sole, only; (pl. وحدان wuḥdān) single,
solitary, separate, individual, sporadic,
isolated واحدا واحدا or فواحدا واحدا or واحد بعد
واحده or واحدا بعد الآخر one by one, single,
separately, one after the other, one at a
time, successively; الواحد the One (attribute
of God); الواحد منھم each of them, every one
of them; واحد كھذا such a one, such a man,
(any)one like that; كل واحد kullu wāḥidin
everyone, everybody; في موضع واحد
(mauḍi’in) in one and the same place; ولا
واحد not a single one, not one; زرافات ووحدانا
zarāfātin wa-wuḥdānan in groups and
alone
موحد muwaḥḥid professor of the unity
of God; الموحدون the Almohades
موحد muwaḥḥad combined,
consolidated, amalgamated; united;
unified; standardized, regularized; O
unipolar (el.); having one diacritical point
(letter)
متوحد mutawaḥḥid solitary, rare,
sporadic, isolated; recluse, hermit
متحد muttaḥid united, combined,
consolidated, amalgamated; uniform,
standardized; harmonious, united,
unanimous, in agreement, concordant │
الولايات المتحدة (wilāyāt) the United States;
الأمم المتحدة (umam) the United Nations
مستوحد mustauḥid solitary, lonely,
isolated
وحش IV to be deserted, desolate
(region); to oppress, make uneasy, fill
with anxiety ( ه s.o.); to make ( ه s.o.) feel
lonely, make lonesome ( ه s.o.); to grieve
by one’s 1055 absence ( ه s.o.) V to be
desolate, deserted, waste; to be or become
wild, savage, brutal; to brutalize, become
brutish X to be desolate, deserted, waste;
to feel lonely; to be distressed, saddened
by the separation ( ل from s.o.), miss badly
ل) s.o.); to have an aversion ( من to), feel a
distaste ( من for), feel repelled ( من by), to
be unable to warm or reconcile o.s. ( من
to), feel no particular liking ( من for), to be
alienated, become estranged; to be afraid
وحش waḥš waste. deserted, lonely,
dreary, desolate, wild, untamed (animal),
-- (pl. وحوش wuḥūš, وحشان wuḥšān) wild
animal, wild beast; game, monster │
الوحوش الضارية (ḍāriya) the predatory
animals, the beasts of prey
وحشة loneliness, forlornness,
desolation, cheerlessness, dreariness; (fig.)
chilliness, frontiness, frigidity, coldness
(e.g., of relations), gloom, melancholy,
weird feeling; strangeness, estrangement,
alienation
وحشي waḥšī untamed, wild, brutish,
savage, uncivilized, barbarous; brutal;
cruel; ugly, repulsive, disgusting, directed
outward, outer, external (esp., of
anatomical parts) │ الكعب الوحشي (ka‘b)
outer anklebone
وحشية waḥšīya wildness, savageness,
ferocity, brutality, savagery, barbarity,
barbarism
ايحاش īḥāš loneliness, forlornness
توحش tawaḥḥuš return to a wild or
savage state, wildness, savageness,
barbarity, brutalization; brutality
استيحاش istīḥāš strangeness,
estrangement, alienation, unsociability;
weirdness, uncanniness, eeriness
موحش mūḥiš desolate, dreary, deserted,
forlorn, lonely, waste; oppressed, uneasy,
anxious; weird, eerie, uncanny
متوحش mutawakkiš wild (animal),
savage; barbarous, barbaric; brutal, cruel;
a savage; a barbarian
مستوحش mustauḥiš wild, savage; a
savage; lonesome, lonely; melancholia,
gloomy, sad, unhappy
وحف waḥf luxuriant and black (hair)
وحل waḥila يوحل yauḥalu to sink in mire, get
stuck in the mud; to be stuck, be stranded,
come to a deadlock, be in a fix II to soil
with mud, muddy ( ھ s.th.), to become
slimy, muddy or mucky (the ground) IV to
mire ( ه s.o.), make ( ه s.o.) stick flit in the
mud, get s.o. into a quagmire, throw s.o.
in the mud V to be or become dirty,
muddy, miry X = V
وحل waḥl, waḥal pl. وحول wuḥūl, اوحال
auḥāl mud, mire, slough, morass
وحل waḥil muddy, dirty, miry
موحل mauḥil muddy ground, slough;
fix, predicament
موحل muwaḥḥal muddy, miry, mudcovered,
mud-spattered, dirty
وحم waḥima يحم yauḥimu, يوحم yauḥamu
(waḥam) to feel appetite, have a longing, a
craving ( ھ for), desire ( ھ s.th.)
وحم waḥam a craving for certain food
during pregnancy; appetite, craving,
longing, ardent desire
وحام waḥām, wiḥām a craving for
certain food during pregnancy, appetite,
craving, longing, ardent desire
وحمى waḥmā pl. وحام wiḥām, وحامى
waḥāmā craving for certain food
(pregnant woman)
وحوح waḥwaḥa to tremble, shiver, shudder ( من
from, with)
وحى waḥā يحي yaḥī (waḥy) to inspire ( ب الى s.o.
with); to reveal ( ب الى to s.o. s.th.) IV to
inspire ( ب الى s.o. with), to reveal ب) 1056
الى to s.o. s.th.; of God); to give an idea,
give an impression ( من of); to suggest,
give rise to the idea ( ان that), create the
impression ( ان that, as if); pass. اوحي الي
ūḥiya ilayya it occurred to me, the idea
suggested itself, I came to think, I was
inspired X to ask s.o.’s ( ه) advice, seek
s.o.’s ( ه) counsel, consult ( ه s.o.); to let o.s.
be inspired ( ه ھ with s.th. by s.o.), seek
inspiration ( ه ھ in s.th. from s.o.); to
derive, deduce ( من ھ s.th. from) │ استوحى
الفكرة (fikrata) to let o.s. be guided by the
thought; استوحى موعظة من (mau‘iẓatan) to
draw a lesson from
وحي waḥy inspiration; revelation
(theol.)
ايحاء īḥā’ suggestion │ ايحاء ذاتي (dātī)
autosuggestion
O واح wāḥin radio transmitter; O الواحى
radio
موح mūḥin inspiring; revealing;
dispenser of revelations
موحى mūḥan pl. موحيات mūḥayāt
inspiration, revelation
مستوحى mustauḥan influenced, advised,
guided, inspired ( ب by); derived, deduced
من) from)
وخز wakaza يخز yakizu (wakz) to sting, prick,
twinge ( ه s.o.); to pierce, transfix, stab to
death ( ه s.o.); to vex, pester, harass, beset,
irritate, torment ( ه s.o.)
وخز wakz stinging, pricking; sharp,
local pain, twinges │ وخز الضمير
compunctions, pangs of remorse
وخزة wakza (n. vic.) sting, prick, twinge
وخزان wakzān needling, nagging
وخاز wakkāz stinging, pricking; biting,
sharp, pungent, smarting, fierce, violent
واخز wākiz stinging, pricking; biting,
sharp, pungent, smarting, fierce, violent
وخط wakaṭa يخط yakiṭu (wakṭ) to turn gray,
make gray-haired ( ه s.o.; of age)
وخم (see also تخم 1 ) wakuma يوخم yaukumu (
وخامة wakāma) to be unhealthy (e.g., air,
climate); to be unwholesome, heavy,
indigestible; -- wakima يوخم yaukamu
(wukm)to suffer from indigestion VIII اتخم
ittakama to suffer from indigestion
تخمة tukma pl. -āt, تخم tukam surfeit;
indigestion; upset stomach
وخم wakam unhealthy air; dirt, filth,
squalor
وخم wakim unhealthy; unwholesome,
heavy, indigestible; dirty, filthy, squalid
وخيم wakīm unhealthy; indigestible;
bad, evil, dangerous, fatal, disastrous │
وخيم العاقبة of evil consequences
وخامة wakāma unhealthiness,
unwholesomeness; evil nature
اوخم aukam2 unhealthier; worse
مستوخم mustaukam indigestible;
unwholesome │ مجاز مستوخم (majāz)
tasteless metaphor (rhet.)
وخى wakā يخي yakī (waky) to intend, purpose (
ھ s.th., to do s.th.), have in mind, have in
view ( ھ s.th.), aim ( ھ at), aspire ( ھ to), be
out for ( ھ ) II do.; to lead, guide ( ه s.o.) V
to intend, purpose ( ھ s.th., to do s.th.),
have in mind, have in view ( ھ s.th.), aim (
ھ at), aspire ( ھ to), strive ( ھ for), be out
for ( ھ ), put one’s mind ( ھ to), set one’s
mind, be intent ( ھ on) │ توخى طريقة to
follow a method, proceed methodically,
systematically; توخى غاية to pursue an
object, have an aim in mind
وخي waky pl. وخي wukīy, wikīy
intention, aim, plan
توخ tawakkin design, intent
ود wadda (1st pers. perf. wadidtu) a
(wadd, wudd, widd, وداد wadād, wudād,
مودة mawadda) to love, like ( ھ, ه s.o.,
s.th.), be fond ( ھ, ه of); to want, wish ( ھ
s.th., ان or لو or لو ان that s.th. be) │ اود ان
يفعل ذلك ١٠٥٧ I should like him to do this,
كما يود as he likes; وددت لو كان غنيا (lau,
ganīyan) I wish he were rich; ود نفسه بعيدا
عن (nafsahū) to wish o.s. far away from III
to make friends, become friends ( ه with
s.o.) to show love or affection ( ل or الى to
s.o.); to try to gain favor ( الى with), seek
s.o.’s ( الى )) friendship; to curry favor,
ingratiate o.s. ( الى with), flatter one’s way
الى) into); to attract, captivate ( ه) win s.o. (
ه) love or friendship VI to love each
other, be on friendly terms, be friends
ود wadd, widd, wudd love, affection,
amity, friendship; wish, desire │ كان بودنا لو
(bi-waddinā) we should be pleased if
ود wadd, widd, wudd pl. اوداد audād, اود
awudd, awidd loving; affectionate, tender;
fond, attached, devoted; lover
ودي waddī, widdī, wuddī friendly,
amicable
وداد wadād, widād, wudād love,
friendship
ودادي wadādī amicable, friendly, of a
friend
ودود wadūd favorably disposed,
attached, devoted, fond, friendly
وديد wadīd favorably disposed,
attached, devoted, fond, friendly
مودة mawaadda love; friendship
تواد tawādd friendly relations, good
terms
ودج wadaj pl. اوداج audāj jugular vein │ انتفخت
اوداجه his jugular veins swelled, i.e., he
flew into a rage, he became furious; (also
used in the sense of:) to become inflated
with pride, swagger, bluster
وداج widāj jugular vein
ودر to endanger, imperil ( ه s.o.); to waste ( ھ
s.th.)
ودع wada’a يدع yada’u (wad’) to put
down, lodge, deposit ( ھ s.th.); (usually
only in imperf. and imp.) to let, leave; to
leave off, stop, cease; to give up, omit,
skip ( ھ s.th. الى in order to turn to s.th.
else) │ دع عنك da’ ‘anka desist! stop! دع
عنك or دعك من da’ka min not to speak of ...,
let alone …; دعك من ھذا (da’ka) stop that!
cut it out! دعنا من ھذا (da’nā) let’s not talk
about it! enough of that! دعنا نذھب let us
go! يدع محلا to leave room; -- wadu’a يودع
yaudu’u ( وداعة wadā’a) to be gentle, mildtempered,
meek, peaceable II to see off,
bid farewell ( ه s.o.); to take leave ( ه of),
say farewell ( ه to s.o.) IV to put down, lay
down ( ھ ھ , s.o., s.th. in a place, also fig.,
s.th. in a book), lodge, deposit ( ھ ھ s.th.
in a place); to entrust ( ھ ھ to s.o. s.th.); to
leave ( ھ ه with s.o. s.th.), give ( ھ ه s.o.
s.th.) for safekeeping, give s.th. ( ھ ) in
charge of s.o. ( ه), consign ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.)
│ اودعه السجن (sijna) to throw s.o. in prison
X to lay down, put down, place, lodge,
deposit ( ھ ھ s.th. in a place); to entrust,
consign, commit ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.), leave (
ھ ه s.th. with s.o.), give ( ھ ه s.o. s.th.) for
safekeeping, give s.th. ( ھ ) in charge of
s.o. ( ه); to put on half pay, transfer to
provisional retirement ( ه an official); to
store, warehouse ( ھ s.th.) │ استودعه لله
(llāha) to commend s.o. to God’s
protection; استودعك لله farewell! God with
you! good-by! adieu!
دعة da’a mild-temperedness, meekness,
gentleness, gentle-heartedness; calm,
composure, equanimity
ودع wad‘ lodging, depositing,
deposition
ودع wad‘, wadā’ (coll.; n. un. (ة
seashells
وداع wadā‘ farewell, leave-taking,
adieu, valediction; الوداع and وداعا farewell!
adieu! God with you! Good-by!
وداعة wadā‘a gentle-heartedness,
gentleness, mild-temperedness, meekness,
peaceableness 1058
وديع wadī‘ calm, peaceable, gentlehearted,
mild-tempered, meek
وديعة wadī‘a pl. ودائع wadā’i‘ s.th.
entrusted to s.o.’s custody, trust, charge;
deposited amount; deposit
ميدعة mīda‘a apron; (doctor’s) smock
توديع taudī‘ farewell, adieu, leavetaking;
valediction
ايداع īdā‘ lodging, consigning,
depositing, deposition │ بطاقة الإيداع
deposit slip, certificate of deposit; warrant
of arrest; محضر الإيداع maḥḍar al-i. official
record of deposit (jur.)
استيداع istīdā‘ lodging, consigning,
depositing, deposition; reserve; transfer to
provisional retirement (of an official);
putting on half pay (mil.) │ في الاستيداع in
provisional retirement; unattached, on half
pay; O مخزن الاستيداع makzan al-ist. depot
وادع wādi‘ consignor, depositor,
deponent, lodger; gentle, mild, meek;
peaceable, composed, calm; moderate;
low, deep
مودع mūdi‘ consignor, lodger,
depositor; gentle, mild, meek; moderate;
low, deep
مودع mūda‘ lodged, consigned;
deposited; deposit; المودع لديه (ladaihi)
keeper, consignee, depository
مستودع mustaudi‘ depositor
مستودع mustauda‘ lodged, consigned;
deposited; stored; in provisional
retirement; unattached, on half pay, in
reserve; -- (pl. -āt) depository, repository;
store-house; warehouse, depot; O hangar;
O container, reservoir, (storage) tank │ O
مستودع التدريب training center (mil.)
وديقة wadīqa pl. ودائق wadā’iq2 lawn, meadow
ودك wadak fat
ودك wadik, ودك wadūk, وديك wadīk and
وادك wādik fat (adj.)
ودى wadā يدي yadī to pay blood money ( ه for
s.o. killed) IV to perish, die; to out off ( ب
s.o.; of death); to kill, destroy ( ب s.o.,
s.th.) │ اودى بحياته (bi-ḥayātihī) to destroy
s.o.’s life; اودى بصحته (bi-ṣiḥḥatihī) to ruin
s.o.’s health, sap s.o.’s strength
دية diya pl. -āt blood money, wergild;
indemnity for bodily injury
واد wādin pl. اودية audiya, وديان widyān
valley; river valley, river bed, ravine,
gorge, wadi; river; (newspaper) column │
اسال اودية من الحبر (ḥibr) to pour forth floods
of ink; نحن في واد وانتم في واد we belong to
different camps; there is a deep gulf
between us, we stand worlds apart; حوم به
الفكر في اودية شتى (ḥawwama, fikru šattā)
approx.: his thoughts trailed off, he was
thinking of s.th. else, he was absentminded;
ذھب صيحة في واد (ṣaiḥatan) to die
unheard (call); ھام في وديان approx.: he was
no longer himself, he was floating in
higher realms, he was beside himself, he
was out of his senses; في كل واد
everywhere, on all sides; وادى حلفا w. ḥalfa
Wadi Halfa (town in N Sudan, on
Egyptian border)
وذر) ) only imperf. يذر yadaru and imp. ذر dar
to let, leave; to let alone, leave alone; to
let be, stop, cease; to leave behind
ورب II to equivocate, express o.s. in equivocal
terms ( عن about) III to doublecross, dupe,
outfox, outsmart ( ه s.o.)
ورب warb pl. اوراب aurāb obliqueness,
obliquity, slantingness; oblique direction,
inclination, slope, slant, diagonal │ بالورب
obliquely, slantingly, aslant; diagonally,
transversely
وراب wirāb obliqueness, obliquity
مواربة muwāraba equivocation,
ambiguity │ بدون مواربة or في غير مواربة
unequivocally, in no uncertain terms 1059
موروب maurūb oblique, inclined,
slanting, sloping; diagonal, transverse;
partly open, ajar (door)
موارب muwārab ajar (door)
ورث warita يرث yaritu (wirt, ارث irt, ارثة irta,
وراثة warāta, رثة rita, تراث turāt) to be heir
ه) to s.o.), be s.o.’s ( ه) heir; to inherit ( ه or
عن or من ھ s.th. from s.o.) II to appoint as
heir ( ه s.o.); to transfer by will, leave,
bequeath, make over ( ھ ه to s.o. s.th.) IV =
II; to draw down, bring down ( ھ ه on s.o.
s.th.), cause ( ھ ه s.o. s.th.) VI to have
inherited ( ھ s.th.); to possess as an
inheritance ( ھ s.th.)
ارث irt heritage, inheritance, legacy;
estate (of inheritance)
ورث wirt inheritance, legacy
وراثة wirāta inheritance, legacy;
hereditariness, hereditary transmission,
heredity
وراثي wirātī hereditary │ امراض وراثية
hereditary diseases
وريث warīt pl. ورثاء wuratā’2 beir,
inheritor
تراث turāt inheritance, legacy
ميراث mīrāt pl. مواريث mawārīt2
heritage, inheritance, legacy, estate
توارث tawārut transmission by
inheritance; heredity
وارث wārit pl. ورثة warata, وراث wurrāt
inheriting; heir, inheritor
موروث maurūt inherited; handed down,
transmitted, traditional; hereditary
مورث muwarrit and mūrit testator,
legator
متوارث mutawārat inherited
ورد 1 warada يرد yaridu ( ورود wurūd) to come,
arrive; to appear, show up; to be found, be
met with, be said ( في in a book, letter,
etc.), be mentioned ( في in); to reach ( الى or
ھ a place), arrive ( الى or ھ at), come to,
get to, travel to; to be received ( على by
s.o.; letter, money, or the like), come to
s.o.’s ( على ) hands; to accrue, come ( على to
s.o.; revenue, proceeds, etc.) II to make ( ھ
s.th.) reach ( ب s.th. else or s.o.), get s.th. (
ھ ) to ( ب); to bring in, import ( ھ s.th.); to
supply, furnish, feed ( ب ھ s.th. to); to
deposit ( ب ھ s.th. in), pay ( ب ھ s.th. into)
IV to make or have ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) come (
ھ or على to), bring, take ( الى or على ھ، ه
s.o., s.th. to); to transfer, convey,
transport, move ( الى ھ s.th. to a place); to
import ( ھ s.th.); to deposit, pay in ( ھ an
amount); to produce, present ( ھ s.th.); to
supply, furnish ( ھ s.th.); to mention, state,
set forth, bring up, allege, adduce, cite,
quota ( ھ s.th.), interpose, introduce,
mention casually, drop in passing, throw
in ( ھ s.th., .,. in one’s speech) VI to arrive
successively, come one after the other; to
succeed one another, be successive,
consecutive; to arrive, come in, come to
hand (news, dispatches); to coincide,
happen to be identical (ideas, thoughts) X
to have ( ھ s.th.) supplied or furnished ( من
by or from), buy, draw, get, procure ( من ھ
s.th. from); to import ( من ھ s.th. from)
ورد wird watering place; animals
coming to the water; -- (pl. اوراد aurād)
specified time of day or night devoted to
private worship (in addition to the five
prescribed prayers); a section of the Koran
recited on this occasion │ الورد الذي طالما
التسبيح به (ṭālamā) and الورد الذي يتلى في الغدو
والآصال (yutlā fī l-gudūw wa-l-āṣāl)
approx.: always the lame old story
بنت وردان bint wardāna pl. بنات وردان
banāt w. cockroach
وريد warīd pl. اوردة aurida, ورد wurud,
ورود wurūd vein; jugular vein │ حبل الوريد
ḥabl al-warīd jugular vein 1060
ورود wurūd coming, arrival, advent;
receipt; appearance
مورد maurid pl. موارد mawārid2 place of
arrival, (place of) destination; access to
the water, to a watering place; watering
place; spring, well; resource, resort,
expedient; place of origin, of provenience;
source of income; income, revenue;
supply; importation │ موارد الدولة m. addaula
government revenues; موارد الزيت m.
az-zait oil wells; موارد المعيشة m. al-ma‘īša
food supply lines
موردة maurida watering place; landing
place, quay, wharf
توريد taurīd pl. -āt furnishing,
provision, purveyance; importation,
import; supply; feed │ توريد البضائع supply
of goods
ايراد īrād adduction, allegation, bringing
up, mention(ing), citation, quotation; pl.
-āt importation, import; supply; revenue,
income; returns, proceeds, takings,
receipts; yield, gain, profit
توارد tawārud successive arrival;
accidental identity of ideas
استيراد istīrād importation, import(s)
وارد wārid pl. وراد wurrād arriving;
found, mentioned; newcomer, arrival; pl.
-āt imports; receipts, incomings, returns,
proceeds, takings │ واردات وصادرات
imports and exports
مورد muwarrid supplier, furnisher,
purveyor, contractor
مستورد mustaurid importer
مستوردات mustauradāt imported goods,
imports
ورد 2 II to blossom, be in bloom (tree); to apply
rouge ( ھ to), rouge, make up ( ھ s.th.); to
dye or color red ( ھ s.th.) V to be or
become red; to take on a rosy color, glow,
be aglow, be flushed (cheek) VI = V
ورد ward (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. ورود wurūd
rose(s); blossoms, flowers, bloom
وردة warda (n. un.) rose; rosette;
cockade; rosebush; (eg.) washer; (eg.)
packing ring (of a piston)
وردي wardī roseate, rose-colored, rosy;
pink
وردية wardīya rosary
وردة wurda reddish color
تورد tawarrud a reddening, red
coloration
مورد muwarrad rosy, ruddy, red
متورد mutawarrid rosy
جبال الآوراس jibāl al-aurās the Aurès
Mountains (in E Algeria)
ورش 1 waraša يرش yarišu (warš) to interfere
with s.o.’s (jo) p1&ns, thrust o.s. on s.o. (
على ) II to disturb the peace, make trouble
ورش wariš lively, brisk; restless, restive
وارش wāriš obtrusive; intruder, parasite
ورشة 2 warša pl. -āt, ورش wiraš workshop │
ورشة الإصلاح w. al-iṣlāḥ repair shop,
service station; ورشة الغسيل laundry
وروط II and IV to entangle, embroil, involve (
في ه s.o. in difficulties), put s.o. ( ه) in an
unpleasant situation, get s.o. in a bad fix V
to let o.s. in for difficulties, get o.s. into
trouble; to be entangled, be embroiled,
become involved ( في in) X to be
entangled, be embroiled, become involved
في) in)
ورطة warṭa pl. waraṭāt, وراط wirāṭ
difficult or critical situation, difficulty,
trouble, plight, predicament, awkward
position, dilemma, fix, ja.m; embroilment,
bad entanglement
تورط lawarruṭ entanglement,
involvement ( في in) 1061
موروط maurūṭ in a plight, in a bad fix,
in a dilemma
مورط muwarraṭ in a plight, in a bad fix,
in a dilemma
ورع warifa يرع yari‘u (wara‘) and waru‘a (
وراعة warā‘a) to be pious and god-fearing
V to pause ( عن before), be cautious,
hesitate ( عن about), refrain, abstain ( عن, من
from)
ورع wara‘ piety, piousness, godliness,
godfearingness; caution, cautiousness,
carefulness; timorousness, timidity,
shyness, reserve
ورع wari‘ pl. اوراع aurā‘ pious, godly,
god-fearing; cautious, careful; reticent,
reserved
ورف warafa يرف yarifu (warf, وريف warīf,
وروف wurūf) to stretch, extend, become
long (shadow); to sprout, be green,
verdant, in bloom (plant) II and IV to
stretch, extend, become long (shadow)
وارف wārif extending, stretching
(shadow); green, verdant, blooming;
luxuriant
ورق II to leaf, burst into leaf, put forth leaves,
sprout; to leaf, thumb ( ھ a book); to paper
ھ) a wall) IV to leaf, burst into leaf, put
forth leaves, sprout
ورق waraq (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. اوراق
aurāq foliage, leafage, leaves; paper;
paper money, banknotes; thin sheet metal,
laminated metal │ ورق تمغة w. tamga
stamped paper; ورق الرسم w. ar-rasm
drawing paper; ورق مزركش w. muzarkas
wallpaper, paper hangings; ورق السنفرة w.
as-sanfara emery paper, glass paper,
sandpaper; ورق شفاف (šaffāf) tracing paper;
ورق الشاھدة carbon paper; ورق مطبوع (tun.)
stamped paper; ورق عادم wastepaper; ورق
مقوى (muqawwan) cardboard, pasteboard;
ورق الكتابة writing paper; ورق اللعب w. alla‘
b playing cards; ورق اللف w. al-laff
wrapping paper; ورق نشاف (نشاش ) (naššāf,
naššāš) blotting paper; ورق نقدي paper
money; ورق اليانصيب w. al-yā-naṣīb lottery
tickets; اوراق الأشغال business papers,
commercial papers; اوراق الاعتماد
credentials; اوراق الحكومة government
bonds; اوراق القضية a. al-qaḍīya court
records; اوراق مالية securities, bonds;
banknotes, paper money; اوراق الموسيقى a.
al-mūsīqā sheet music; اوراق نقدية
(naqdīya), ورق النقد w. an-naqd banknotes,
paper money; حبر على ورق (ḥibr) mere ink
on paper, of no effect (e.g., treaty,
agreement); طرح الأوراق على المائدة to lay the
cards on the table; to show one’s hand
ورقة waraqa (n. un.) leaf; petal; sheet of
paper; piece of paper, slip; note; card,
ticket; document, record, paper; thin metal
plate, leaf of sheet metal │ ورقة البريد
postcard; ورقة البنك banknote; ورقة مدموغة
(madmūga) stamped sheet; ورقة لعب w.
la‘b playing card; ورقة مالية banknote;
bond, security; ورقة الاتھام w. al-ittihām bill
of indictment
ورقي waraqī: نقود ورقية paper money
ورق wariq leafy, green, verdant
وراق warrāq pl. -ūn paper
manufacturer, papermaker; stationer;
wastepaper dealer; copyist (of
manuscripts)
وراقة wirāqa papermaking, paper
manufacture; stationery business,
stationer’s trade
وارق wāriq leafy, green, verdant
مورق muwarriq stationer
مورق mūriq leafy
ورك wark, wirk, warik f., pl. اوراك aurāk hip,
haunch; thigh
ورل waral pl. ورلان wirlān, اورال aurāl varan,
monitor lizard (zool.)
ورم warima يرم yarimu (waram) to be swollen;
to swell, become swollen II to 1062 cause
to swell, inflate ( ھ s.th.) │ ورم انفه
(anfahū) to annoy, vex, irritate, infuriate
s.o.; ورم بأنفه (bi-anfihī) to be puffed up,
conceited, stuck-up V = I
ورم waram pl. اورام aurām swelling,
intumescence, tumor │ في انفه ورم (anfihī)
he is stuck-up
تورم tawarrum swelling, rising,
intumescence
وارم wārim swollen
مورم muwarram swollen
ورن waran varan, monitor lizard (zool.)
ورنش warnaša to varnish, lacquer, japan ( ھ
s.th.)
ورنيش warnīš varnish, lacquer, japan;
shoe polish │ ورنيش الأرضية w. al-ardīya
floor wax
اوره aurah2, f. ورھاء warhā’ stupid, dumb;
cheeky, brazenfaced, impudent
وروار warwar bee eater (Meropl; zool.)
ورى 1 warā يري yarī (wary) to kindle, fire, take
fire (lighter) II do.; to strike fire; to hide,
conceal, keep secret, secrete ( ھ s.th.); to
allude ( ب عن to s.th. with); to pretend,
feign, affect, simulate ( ب s.th.) III to try to
keep secret ( ھ s.th.); to hide, conceal ( ھ ھ
s.th. in); to disguise, mask ( ھ s.th.) │ واراه
التراب (turāba) to inhume, bury s.o. IV = I;
to strike fire V to hide, conceal o.s. ( من or
عن from) VI do.; to disappear from the
sight ( عن of s.o. also (عن الأنظار
الورى al-warā the mortals, mankind │
خير الورى kair al-w. the best of all men, the
Prophet Mohammed
وراء warā’a (prep.) behind, in the rear
of, at the back of; after; beyond, past; over
and above, beside, in addition to; (adv.)
warā’u behind, in the rear, at the back │
الى الوراء to the rear; backward; كان وراءه to
be favorably disposed to s.o., stand behind
s.o., support, back s.o.; ما وراء الأردن
(urdun) Transjordan; ما وراء الأكمة (akama)
what is at the bottom of it, what is behind
it; وراء الأكمة ما وراءھا there is more in it
than meets the eye, there is s.th. wrong; ما
وراء البحر (baḥr) overseas; ما وراء الطبيعة the
supernatural, the transcendental;
metaphysics; ما وراء النھر (nahr)
Transoxiana; من وراء min warā’i (with foll.
genit.) behind, from behind; beyond, past;
over and above; by means of, through, by;
التكسب من وراء الدعارة (takassub, di‘āra)
professional prostitution; كانمن وراء مقدرة
العقل البشري (madurati al-‘aqli al-bašarī) to
be beyond the power of human
comprehension
ورائي warā’ī hind, rear, back, located at
the back, directed backward
اورى aurā (elative) better concealing ( ل
s.th.)
تورية tauriya hiding, concealment;
dissemblance, dissimulation, hypocrisy;
equivocation, ambiguity, double-entendre,
allusion
توراة 2 look up alphabetically
وز 1 wazza u (wazz) to incite, set ( على ه s.o.
against)
وز = اوز 2 iwazz (see up alphabetically)
وزب wazaba يزب yazibu ( وزوب wuzūb) to flow
(water)
ميزاب mīzāb pl. ميازيب mayāzīb2 drain
pipe, drain; gutter, sewer; roof gutter │
انفتحت ميازيت السماء infataḥat m. us-samā’
the heavens opened their gates
وزر wazara يزر yaziru (wizr) to take
upon o.s., carry ( ھ a burden); -- wazira
yaziru and wazira يوزر yauzaru (wizr,
wazr, زرة zira) to commit a sin III to help,
assist, aid, support ( على ه s.o. in) IV to
support, 1063 back up ( ه s.o.), strengthen
s.o.’s ( ه) arm VI to help each other VIII
اتزر ittazara to wear a loincloth; to put on
ھ) a garment); to commit a sin
وزر wizr pl. اوزار auzār heavy load,
burden, encumbrance; sin, crime;
responsibleness, responsibility │ حمله وزره
(ḥammalahū) to make s.o. bear the
responsibility for s.th., make s.o.
answerable for s.th.; وضعت الحرب اوزارھا
waḍa‘at il-ḥarbu auzārahū the war has
come to an end
وزرة wizra pl. wizarāt loincloth
وزرة wazara pl. -āt skirt, skirting
(arch.)
وزر 2 V to become a (cabinet) minister X to
appoint a (cabinet) minister ( ه s.o.); to be
appointed as (cabinet) minister
وزير wazīr pl. وزراء wuzarā’ (cabinet)
minister; vizier; queen (in chess) │ وزير بلا
وزارة (bi-lā) minister without portfolio;
وزير مفوض (mufawwaḍ) minister
plenipotentiary (dipl.); مقيم وزير (muqīm)
minister resident (Tun.); الوزير الأكبر the
Prime Minister (Tun.); مجلس الوزراء majlis
al-w. cabinet, council of ministers; for the
various departments see under وزارة
وزارة wizāra pl. -āt ministry; (rarer,
also) cabinet, government │ وزارة الإرشاد
القومي w. al-iršād al-qaumī Ministry of
National Guidance (Eg.); وزارة الاستعلامات
ministry of information; وزارة الأشغال
العمومية (‘umūmīya) ministry of public
works; وزارة الأوقاف ministry of religious
endowments, wakf ministry; وزارة البحرية
w. al-baḥrīya naval department, ministry
of the navy; وزارة التجارة ministry of
commerce; وزارة التربية والتعليم (w. attarbiya)
ministry of education; وزارة الحربية
w. at-tarbiya war ministry; وزارة الحقانية w.
al-ḥaqqānīya ministry of justice; وزارة
الخارجية w. al-kārijīya foreign ministry;
وزارة الداخلية w. ad-dākilīya ministry of the
interior; وزارة الزراعة ministry of
agriculture; وزارة الشؤون الاجتماعية w. aššu’ūn
al-ijtimā‘īya ministry of social
affairs; وزارة الشؤون البلدية والقروية (baladīya,
qarawīya) Ministry of Municipal and
Rural Affairs (Eg.); وزارة الصحة العمومية w.
aṣ-ṣiḥḥa al-‘umūmīya ministry of public
health; وزارة الطيران w. aṭ-tayarān air
ministry; وزارة ھلعدل (العدلية ) w. at-‘adl
(al-‘adlīya) ministry of justice; وزارة المالية
w. al-mālīya finance ministry; وزارة
المعارف ministry of education; وزارة
المواصلات w. al-muwāṣalāt ministry of
communications
وزاري wizārī ministerial
وزع waza‘a يزع yaza‘u (waz‘) to curb,
restrain ( ه s.o.) II to distribute ( على ھ s.th.
among or to, بين ھ s.th. among), allot,
apportion, deal out ( على ھ، الى ھ s.th. to
s.o.); to deliver ( ھ the mail); pass. wuzi‘a
to be distributed, be divided ( بين among) V
to be distributed; to be divided; to divide
among themselves, (successively,
alternately) beset and torment ( ه s.o.; e.g.,
anxieties, sorrows, thoughts)
اوزاع auzā‘ groups or crowds of people
وزيعة wazī‘a pl. وزائع wazā’i‘ share,
portion, allotment
توزيع tauzī‘ distribution (also, e.g., in
motion-picture industry); division,
apportionment, allotment; delivery; sale,
market │ توزيع الثروة t. at-tarwa
distribution
of (public) wealth; توزيع العمل t. al-‘mal
division of labor; توزيع الجوائز distribution
of prizes, award of prizes; توزيع الأرباح
distribution (or payment) of dividends;
توزيع مستعجل (musta‘jil) special delivery,
express delivery (mail)
وازع wāzi‘ obstruction, obstacle,
impediment
موزع muwazzi‘ distributing; distributor
│ موزع البريد postman, mailman 1065
موزع muwazza‘ distributed; scattered,
dispersed │ موزع الخواطر and موزع الفكر m.
al-fikr absent-minded; unconcentrated,
distraught, scatterbrained
وزال wazzāl genista, broom (bot.)
وزن wazana يزن yazinu (wazn, زنة zina) to
weigh ( ھ s.th.); to balance, equilibrate,
equalize, even up ( ھ s.th.); to weigh out,
sell by weight ( ل ھ s.th. to s.o.) III to
equal in weight ( ھ s.th.), be of the same
weight as ( ھ ), be balanced ( ھ with),
equilibrate, counterbalance ( ھ s.th.); to
outweigh ( ھ s.th.), compensate, make up (
ھ for); to balance, equilibrate, poise ( بين
two things); to compare ( بين – و s.th. with),
weigh one thing against the other; to make
a comparison, draw a parallel ( بين -- وبين
between -- and); to distribute equally ( ھ
s.th.) VI to be balanced, be in equilibrium,
be counterpoised, be in equipoise
زنة zina weighing; weight
وزن wazn pl. اوزان auzān weight;
(poetic) measure, meter; noun or verb
pattern, form (gram.); tonnage of a
vessel); weight, weight class (in boxing,
etc.) │ لا وزن له (wazna) or عديم الوزن
imponderable; insignificant, of no
consequence, negligible; اقام وزنا كبيرا ل to
attach great importance to, set great store
by; مصلحة الوزن والكيل maṣlaḥat al-w. wa-lkail
bureau of standards; وزن الديك w. addīk
bantamweight (boxing); الوزن الفارغ
dead weight
وزنة wazna pl. wazanāt weight; gold or
silver talent; (Ir.) weight of about 100 kg
(varying; officially 10s.835 kg) │ وزنة
اضافية (idāfīya) additional weight,
overweight
وزني waznī weight- (in compounds), of
weight; ponderable, appreciable; weighty,
ponderous, grave
وزان wizāna (prep.) commensurate
with, corresponding to, in conformity
with, in analogy to, following the model
or pattern of
وزين wazīn weighty, ponderous │ وزين
الرأي of sound judgment, judicious
ميزان mīzān pl. موازين mawāzīn2
balance, scales; weight; measure; poetic
measure, meter; rule, method; justice,
equity, fairness, impartiality; الميزان Libra,
Balance (astron.) │ ميزان الحرارة m. al-
ḥarāra thermometer; ميزان راصد selfregistering
scales; ميزان طبلي (ṭablī)
weighing machine, platform scale;
weighbridge; ميزان الماء spirit level, level
ميزانية mīzānīya balance, equilibrium,
equipoise; balance (com.); budget │ ميزانية
ملحقة (mulḥaqa) supplementary budget
موازنة muwāzana equality of weight,
balance, equilibrium, equipoise;
outweighing; counterbalance,
counterpoise, counterweight,
compensation; stabilizing effect;
comparing, weighing; comparison,
parallel ( بين between); budget; (tun.)
timetable, schedule
توازن tawāzun balance, equilibrium,
equipoise; poise, balance; balancing,
poising │ توازن سياسي (siyāsī) political
balance; توازن القوى t. al-quwā balance of
power; اعاد التوازن بين to restore the balance
between
اتزان ittizān balance, equilibrium,
equipoise; mental health; harmony;
impartiality
وازن wāzin weighing; of full weight;
drunk, tight
موزون mauzūn weighed; of full weight;
balanced, in equilibrium, evenly poised;
well-considered, well-advised, deliberate;
well-balanced, well-proportioned, wellmeasured;
rhythmically balanced; of
sound judgment, judicious 1065
موازن muwāzin outweighing,
counterbalancing, equal, equivalent
متوازن mutawāzin balanced, in
equilibrium
متزن muttazin balanced, measured,
regular; well-balanced, harmonious (in
color, and the like)
وزى III to be parallel ( ھ to s.th.); to be
opposite s.th. ( ھ ), be the counterpart ( ھ
of); to correspond, amount, be equal or
equivalent ( ھ to), equal ( ھ s.th.) VI to be
parallel, run side by side; to be mutually
corresponding, be equivalent
موازاة muwāzāh equal distance;
parallelism; equivalence
تواز tawāzin equal distance; parallelism;
equivalence │ على التوازي side by side,
parallel
مواز muwāzin parallel; equivalent
متواز mutawāzin parallel; similar │ O
متوازي الأضلاع parallelogram; O متوازي
السطوح parallelepiped
وسخ wasaka يوسخ yausaku (wasak) to be or
become dirty II and IV to dirty, soil, sully,
stain, foul ( ھ s.th.) V and VIII اتسخ
ittasaka = I
وسخ pl. اوساخ ausāk dirt; filth, squalor
وسخ wasik dirty, filthy, soiled, sullied,
unclean
وساخة wasāka dirtiness, filthiness,
uncleanness, dirt, filth, squalor
وسد II to put under s.o.’s ( ه) head ( ھ pillow),
rest, lay ( ھ ه s.o.’s head on), bed ( ھ ه s.o.
on) │ وسده التراب (turāba) to lay s.o. or
s.th. to rest in the ground; وسده صدره
(ṣadrahū) to take s.o. to one’s breast, hug
s.o. V to lay one’s head on a pillow ( ھ ); to
rest or recline on a pillow or cushion ( (ھ
وساد wasād, wusād, wisād pl. وسد
wusūd pillow, cushion │ لزم الوساد lazima
l-wasāda to be confined to bed
وسادة wisāda pl. -āt, وسائد wasā’id2
pillow, cushion
موسد muwassad easy, smooth, paved
(way)
موسر see يسر
وسط II to place, put, or set in the middle ( ھ
s.th.); to choose or appoint as mediator (
بين ه s.o. between) V to be in the middle or
center (iJ of); to stand in the middle, keep
to the middle, hold the middle between
two extremes, steer a middle course; to
mediate ( ب ل for s.o. s.th.; بين between),
act as mediator or go-between ( في in)
وسط wasaṭ, وسط pl. اوساط ausāṭ middle;
center, heart; waist; milieu, environment,
surroundings, sphere; means, instrument,
agent, medium; mediocrity, medium
quality, average; pl. circles, quarters,
classes, strata (of the population; -- wasaṭ
pl. اوساط ausāṭ median, medial, middle,
central; in the middle, middle-of-the-road,
moderate; intermediate (between two
extremes); middling, mediocre, coverage,
mean, medium; -- wasṭa (prep.) in the
middle, heart, or center of, in the midst of,
amid, among │ في وسط من (wasaṭin) in the
middle or midst of, within; في الوسط in the
very center; midway; of medium quality;
في وسطنا in our midst, among us; وسط
الصيف midsummer; حجم وسط (ḥajm)
medium size; حل وسط (ḥall) middle
solution, middle course, compromise;
السيرة الوسط (sīra) medium pace; a
moderate, neutral attitude; الأوساط الدبلوماسية
diplomatic circles; الأوساط العامة (‘āmma)
the general public, the public at large;
اوساط الناس the middle classes 1066
وسطي wasaṭī of or relative to the milieu
or environment
وسطاني wasṭānī middle, central, medial,
median; intermediate; middling, medium,
mediocre
وسطية wasṭīya pl. -āt patio, inner
courtyard
وساطة wisāṭa mediation, intervention;
good offices, recommendation,
intercession │ بوساطة by means of,
through, by, per; عن وساطة فلان through the
good offices of s.o. قدم وساطته to offer
one’s good offices for
وسيط wasīṭ pl. وسطاء middle,
intermediary, intermediate, medial,
median; mediator, intercessor;
intermediary; agent, go-between, broker,
middleman; medium (occultism) العصر
الوسيط (‘aṣr) the Middle Ages
وسيطة wasīṭa pl. وسائط wasā’iṭ2 means,
medium │ وسائط المواصلات والنقل w. almuwāṣalāt
wa-n-naql means of
communication and transportation
اوسط ausaṭ2 pl. اواسط awāsīṭ2, f. وسطى
wusṭā pl. وسط wusaṭ middle, central;
الوسطى the middle finger │ في اواسط ھذا
الأسبوع (usbū‘) in the middle of this week;
اواسط الشھر a. aš-šahr the middle of the
month; اواسط افريقية Central Africa; اوروبا
الوسطى (urubbā)) Central Europe; الشرق
الأوسط (šarq) the Middle East; الطبقات
الوسطى (ṭabaqāt) the middle classes; القرون
العصور) الوسطى ) the Middle Ages; نتيجة
وسطى mean result, average
توسط tawassuṭ mediation, intervention;
situation or position in the middle,
intermediateness, intermediacy;
mediocrity
واسطة wāsiṭa pl. وسائط mediator,
mediatress, intermediary; mediacy,
agency, instrumentality, agent, device,
means, medium; expedient │ بواسطة by
means of, through, by, per; on the part of,
by; بالوساطة indirectly, mediately; بھذه
الواسطة by this means or device, by that;
بوساطة ذلك by means of that, by that; واسطة
الاتصال w. al-ittiṣāl link
متوسط mutawassiṭ middle, medium;
medial, median, intermediate; centrally
located, central; mediating, intermediary;
mediator, go between; mean, average │
متوسط الحال those of average means; متوسط
الحجم m. al-ḥajm middle-sized, of medium
size; متوسط العمر m. al-‘umr middle-aged;
متوسط القامة of medium height, middlesized;
متوسط النوع m. an-nau‘ middling, of
medium quality; البحر الأبيض المتوسط (baḥr,
abyaḍ) the Mediterranean; موجات متوسطة
(maujāt) medium waves (radio); متوسط
الھجوم center forward (soccer)
وسع wasu‘a يوسع yausu‘u ( وساعة wasā‘a) to be
wide, roomy, spacious, vast, extensive; --
wasi‘a يسع yasa‘u ( سعة sa‘a) to be wide,
roomy, spacious; to be well-to-do, be well
off; to hold, accommodate, house, seat,
etc. ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), have room, have
capacity ( ھ، ه for); to contain, comprise,
comprehend, encompass, include ( ھ s.th.);
to be large enough, suffice, be sufficient,
adequate, enough ( ھ، ه for); wasi‘a yasa‘u
وسع) wus‘, سعة sa‘a) esp. with negation: to
be possible ( ه for s.o.), be permitted, be
allowed ( ه to s.o.), be in s.o.’s ( ه) power,
be up to s.o. ( ه); to be able ( ھ to do s.th.),
be capable ( ھ of); to be allowed ( ھ to do
s.th.) │ لا يسعني ان اقول I cannot say; ما اسع
ذلك I can’t do that II to make wider,
roomier, more spacious ( ھ s.th.); to
extend expand ( ھ s.th.); to widen, enlarge
ھ) or من s.th.); to broaden ( ھ s.th.); to be
generous, liberal, openhanded ( على toward
s.o., ھ ه toward s.o. with s.th.); to make
rich. enrich ( على s.o.) │ وسع خطاه (kuṭāhu)
to take longer strides, stride out, quicken
one’s pace; وسع المكان ل (makāna) to make
room for IV = II; to be or become rich │
اوسعه برا (birran) to 1067 treat s.o. with the
greatest reverence, bestow ample favors
upon s.o.: اوسعه شتما (šatman) to heap
abuse on s.o.; اوسعه ضربا (ḍarban) to give
s.o. a sound beating, wall s.o.; اوسع النفقة
(nafaqata) to incur great expenses V to be
extended, be expanded, be widened; to
spread (out), expand, widen, expand; to
have enough room, sit comfortably; to
make o.s. comfortable, make o.s. at home
في) in); to enlarge, expatiate ( في on), talk
or write at great length ( في about); to
proceed ( في in); to continue ( في s.th., in
s.th.) │ توسع في النفقة (nafaqa) to incur great
expenses VIII اتسع ittasa‘a to be extended,
be expanded, be widened, be enlarged; to
expand, widen, grow, increase; to stretch
far and wide, be vast; to extend, range; to
become rich; to be large or wide enough,
suffice, be sufficient, adequate, enough ( ل
for); to hold, accommodate, house, seat,
etc. ( ل s.o., s.th.), have room ( ل for); to be
at s.o.’s ( ل) disposal; to be susceptible ( ل
of); to be able (~ to do s.th.). be capable (
ھ of) │ بكل ما تتسع له الكلمة من معنى
(kalimatu, ma‘nan) in the widest sense of
the word X to widen, expand, become
wider; to become larger, increase in size;
to find wide or large ( ھ s.th.)
سعة sa‘a wideness, roominess,
spaciousness; extent, range, compass;
volume, holding capacity, capacity;
capability, faculty, power, ability;
comfortableness, comfort; plenty,
abundance, profusion; luxury, affluence,
wealth │ ذو سعة well-to-do, wealthy; بسعة
or عن سعة amply, abundantly; على الرحب
والسعة (ruḥb) welcome! على قدر سعتي (qadri
sa‘atī) to the best of my abilities; كان في
سعة من رزقه (rizqihī) to be wealthy, live in
luxury; سعة الصدر s. ṣadr patience, longsuffering;
سعة كھربائية (kahrabā’īya)
electric capacity; O سعة الموجة s. al-mauja
amplitude (el.)
وسع wus‘ ability, capability, faculty;
capacity; power, strength; holding
capacity │ وسعه wus‘uhū what he can do.
what is in his power; في وسعه ان it is in his
power to ..., he can …; في وسعي ان اقول I
can, or I may, say; ليس في وسعه الا (illā) ha
has no other possibility but ..., he cannot
but ...; بذل وسعه to go to great pains, do
one’s best or utmost
وسع wasa‘ vastness, vast space
وسعة wus‘a wideness, roominess,
spaciousness; extent, range, compass;
plenty, abundance, profusion ( من of)
وسيع wasī‘ pl. وساع wisā‘ wide, vast;
roomy, spacious, large; capacious
اوسع ausa‘2 wider, larger, roomier,
more spacious │ اوسع صدرا (ṣadran) more
patient; اوسع مدى (madan) broader, wider
توسيع tausī‘ widening, expansion;
broadening, extension; enlargement,
increase
توسعة tausi‘a: اجل التوسع ajal at-t.
reprieve, reprieve (jur.)
توسع tawassu‘ extending, extension,
widening, increase, enlargement;
expansion │ مع التوسع in a wider sense, by
extension; توسع استعماري (isti‘mārī)
imperialistic expansion; O توسع الحرب t. al-
ḥarb extension of the (theater of) war;
سياسة التوسع siyāsat at-t. policy of
expansion
توسعي tawassu‘ī expansionist (adj.) │
سياسة توسعية (siyāsa) policy of expansion,
expansionist policy
اتساع ittisā‘ extending, extension,
extensiveness, wideness, spaciousness,
vastness, expanse, range, scope, compass,
extent; O amplitude (el.); O gauge (of
railroad tracks); sufficiency, adequacy │
اتساع في الكلام (kalām) vagueness of
expression; عدم الاتساع ل ‘adam al-itt,
insufficiency, inadequacy for 1068
واسع wāsi‘ wide; broad; large, roomy,
spacious, vast, sweeping, extensive; farreaching
│ واسع الانتشار widespread; واسع
الرحمة (العدل ) (al-‘adl) abounding in mercy
(in justice); واسع الصدر w. aṣ-ṣadr patient;
forbearing, indulgent, generous,
magnanimous; واسع النطاق far-reaching,
extensive; comprehensive; large-scale;
رجل واسع الحيلة (rajul, ḥila) a resourceful,
ingenious man; ثوب واسع (taub) wide or
loose garment; سھل واسع (sahl) vast
(sweeping) plain; شارع واسع broad street
موسوعة mausū‘a pl. -āt comprehensive
work; encyclopedia; thesaurus
موسوعي mausū‘ī encyclopedic
موسع mūsī‘ rich, wealthy
متسع mutasi‘ wide, extensive, vast,
spacious, roomy, large; ample, abundant,
sufficient
متسع muttasa‘ space; room │ لم يجد متسعا
من الوقت ل (yajid, waqt) or لم يكن في الوقت
متسع ل (yakun) not to have enough time
for; O متسع حيوي (ḥayawī) lebensraum
وسق wasaqa يسق yasiqu (wasq) to load,
freight ( ھ ھ a ship with) IV do. VIII اتسق
ittasaqa to be in good order, be wellordered;
to harmonize, be in keeping ( مع
with) X to be or become possible ( ل for
s.o.)
وسق wasq pl. وسق wusūq, اوساق ausāq
load, freight, cargo
اتساق ittisāq harmony
متسق muttasiq in good order, wellordered;
balanced, harmonious
وسكي wiskī whiskey
وسل V to ingratiate o.s. curry favor ( الى with),
seek to gain access ( الى to), seek or solicit
s.o.’s ( الى ) favor; to implore, beseech,
entreat ( الى s.o.), plead ( الى with s.o.); to
ask s.o.’s ( ب) help, turn with a request ( ب
to s.o.); to use as a means ( ب s.th.), make
use ( ب of a means)
وسيلة wasīla pl. وسائل wasā’il2 means,
medium; device, expedient, instrument,
tool, agent; measure, step │ وسائل الاحتياط
precautionary measures, precautions; وسائل
التعليم educational aids, training aids,
material of instruction; وسائل التكييف airconditioning
installation; وسائل المواصلات
w. al-muwāṣalāt means of
communication; وسائل النقل w. an-naql
means of transportation; ابتغى الوسيلة to try
to ingratiate o.s. ( ب الى with s.o. by s.th.);
اتخذ منه وسيلة (ittakada) to regard s.th. as an
expedient for ...
توسل tawassul request, entreaty, fervent
plea; petition, application │ توسلا الى
tawassulan ilā so as to succeed by this
means in ..., in order to get to the point
where ...
وسائل النقل w. an-naql means of
transportation; ابتغى الوسيلة to try to
ingratiate s.o. ( ب الى with s.o. by s.th); اتخذ
منه الوسيلة ل (ittakada) to regard s.th. as an
expedient for ...
توسل tawassul request, entreaty, fervent
plea; petition, application │ توسلا الى
tawassulan ilā so as to succeed by this
means in ..., in order to get to the point
where ...
وسم wasama يسم yasimu (wasm, سمة
sima) to brand ( ھ cattle); to stamp, mark,
brand ( ب ھ، ه s.o., s.th. as) │ وسمه بالعار to
brand as infamous, stigmatize s.o. وسم جبينه
ب (wusima jabīnuhū) to be written in
s.o.’s face II to distinguish ( ه s.o.) confer
distinction ( ه upon s.o.), award a
decoration or order ( ه to) V to scrutinize,
regard attentively, watch closely ( ھ s.th.);
to examine carefully ( ھ s.th.); to regard ( ه
s.o.) look at ( ه); to be marked,
characterized ( ب by) │ توسم فيه خيرا
(kairan) to see promising signs in s.o.,
expect a lot of good of s o., set great hopes
on s.o. VIII اتسم ittasama to be branded; to
be marked, characterized ( ب by), to bear
the stamp of ( (ب
سمة sima pl. –āt, sign, mark,
characteristic; outward characteristic,
feature, trait; stamp, impress, character (of
s.th.); visa (Saudi Ar.); pl. -āt also:
features, facial expression, mien, bearing
1069
وسم wasm pl. وسوم wusūm brand; tribal
mark, tribal brand, characteristic, mark;
coat or arms
وسام wisām pl. اوسمة ausima badge;
decoration, medal; order; badge or honor
│ وسام الاستحقاق order or merit; وسام ربطة
الساق w. rabṭat as-sāq Order or the Garter;
وسام الشرف (جوقة الشرف ) w. aš-šaraf (jauqat
aš-š.) Legion of Honor; الوسام العلوي
(‘alawī) the Moroccan “ouissam alaouite”
وسامة wasāma grace, gracefulness,
charm, beauty
وسيم wasīm pl. وسماء wusamā’ وسام , 2
wisām graceful, comely, pretty, goodlooking;
beautiful (face)
موسم mawāsim pl. مواسم mawāsim2 time
or the year, season; festive season; specif.,
the Muslim hadj festival); festival, feast
day, holiday; fair; bed date, deadline;
harvest │ المواسم والأعياد the feasts and
holidays; موسم الاصطياف summer season (of
a health resort); موسم تمثيلي (tamtīlī) or موسم
مسرحي (masraḥī) theater season; موسم الحج
m. al-ḥajj season or the Pilgrimage; موسم
القطن m. al-quṭn cotton harvest, cotton
season
موسمي mausimī: الريح الموسمية (rīḥ) the
monsoon
ميسم mīsam pl. مواسم mawāsim مياسم , 2
mayāsim2 branding iron; brand; stigma
موسوم mausūm branded; stigmatized;
marked, characterized ( ب with)
وسن wasina يوسن yausanu (wasan, سنة sina) to
sleep, slumber
وسن wasan slumber, doze
سنة sina slumber, doze │ سنة من النوم
(naum) a short nap
وسن wasin sleepy, drowsy, somnolent
وسنان wasnān2, f. وسنى wasnā sleepy,
drowsy, somnolent
وسوس waswasa to speak under one’s breath,
whisper ( ل or الى to s.o.); to inatill evil
ل) or الى in s.o.; passion, devil), prompt
or tempt s.o. ( ل or الى ) with wicked
suggestion; to awaken doubts, arouse
scruples ( ل or الى in s.o.’s mind;
conscience) II tawaswasa to reel uneasy,
have scruples, be anxious, worried, full of
apprehensions; to be in doubt, have
misgivings, be suspicious
وسواس waswās pl. وساوس wasāwis2
devilish insinuation, temptation;
disturbance; scruple; misgiving, suspicion;
rustling, rustle, whisper (or leaves, and the
like)
وسواس waswās pl. وساوس wasāwis2
devilish insinuation, temptation; wicked
thoughts; doubt, misgiving, suspicion;
delusion, fixed idea; uneasiness, anxiety,
concern; melancholy; الوسواس the Tempter,
Satan │ وسواس القطن w. al-quṭn cotton buds
موسوس muwaswas obsessed with
delusions
وسى 1 IV to shave ( ھ the head)
موسى mūsā f., pl. مواس mawāsin, امواس
amwās straight razor; see also
alphabetically
وسى 2 III (variant or اسى III) and مواساة see اسى
وشب wišb pl. اوشاب awšāb horde, mob, crowd
وشيج wašīj: وشيج الاتصال w. al-ittiṣāl closely
connected
وشيجة wašīja pl. وشائج wašā’ij close tie
متواشج mutwāsij connected, interrelated
وشح III to adorn or dress ( ه s.o., with the wišāḥ,
q.v.) V and VIII اتشاح ittašḥa to put on,
don ( ب a belt, sash, and the like),; to throw
on loosely ( ب a cloak or 1070 similar
garment); to garb o.s. ( ب with); to assume
ب) a name), go by a name ( (ب
وشاح wišāḥ, wušāḥ pl. وشح wušuḥ, اوشحة
aušiḥa, وشائح wašā’iḥ2 ornamented belt
worn by women (in older times, a double
band worn sashlike over the shoulder);
sash, scarf, cummerbund; band (esp., of an
order); tie, bond (fig.); swordbelt; military
sash
وشاحة wišāḥa sword
توشيح taušīḥ pl. تواشيح tawāšīḥ
composition (mus.); postclassical form of
Arab poetry, arranged in stanzas
موشح muwaššah, موشحة muwaššaḥa pl.
-āt postclassical form of Arab poetry,
arranged in stanzas
متشح muttašiḥ clad, garbed, attired ( ب
in)
وشر wašara يشر yaširu (wašr) to saw, saw
apart ( ھ s.th.)
موشور maušūr pl. مواشير mawāšīr2 prism
موشوري maušūrī prismatic(al)
وشع II to reel, spool ( ھ cotton)
وشيع wašī‘ hedge
وشيعة wašī‘a pl. وشائع wašā’i‘2 reel,
spool, bobbin │ وشيعة التحريض induction
coil (el.)
وشق wašaq lynx (zool.)
وشك wašuka يوشك yaušuku (wašk, وشاكة
wašāka) and II to be quick, hurry IV to be
on the point or verge ( ان of doing s.th.), be
about to do s.th. ( على or أن ), be close ( على
to) │ يوشك أن he almost ..., he all but ...
وشك wašak, wušk speed, swiftness,
hurry │ على وشك أن on the point or verge
of (doing s.th.), about to (do s.th.), على
وشك الخروج about to go out, just going out
وشكان waškān, wuškān speed, swiftness
وشيك wašīk imminent, impending, near,
forthcoming │ وشيك الزوال w. az-zawāl
doomed to early ruin; وشيك الحل w. al-ḥall
close to a solution, almost solved
(problem)
وشل wašal pl. اوشال aušāl dripping water, tears
وشم wašama يشم yašinu (wašm) and II to tattoo
ھ) s.th.)
وشم wašm pl. وشام wišām, وشوم wušūm
tattoo, tattoo mark
وشيمة wašīma enmity, hostility, malice
وشنة wašna, wišna (eg.) morello, mahaleb
cherry
وشوش wašwaša to whisper in s.o.’s ( ه) ear II
tawašwaša to whisper
وشوشة wašwaša whispering, whisper
وشى wašā يشي yašī (wašy) to embellish,
ornament with many colors, embroider ( ھ
a fabric); -- (wašy, وشاية wišāya) to
slander, defame ( الى ب s.o. with); to
inform ( ب against), denounce, betray ( ب
s.o.) II to embellish, ornament with many
colors, embroider ( ھ a fabric)
شية šiya pl. -āt blotch, spot; blemish,
flaw, fault, defect; mark, sign
وشي wašy pl. وشاء wišā’ many-colored
ornamentation, embroidery;
embroidered or painted fabrics
وشاء waššā’ vendor of embroidered or
painted fabrics
وشاية wišāya defamation, slander
توشية taušiya embellishment,
ornamentation; embroidery
واش wāšin pl. واشون wāšūn, وشاة wušāh
traitor; slanderer, calumniator; informer,
denunciator 1071
وضب waṣaba يصب yaṣibu ( وصوب wuṣub) to
last; -- waṣiba يوصب yauṣabu (waṣab) and
V to be (chronically) ill
وصب waṣab pl. اوصاب auṣāb illness;
discomfort, hardship, suffering
واصب wāṣib lasting, permanent
وصد waṣada يصد yaṣidu (waṣad) to be firm,
stand firmly IV to close, shut ( ھ a door) │
اوصد الباب في وجھه (wajhihī) to block s.o.’s
way, deny s.o. access
وصيد waṣīd pl. وصد wuṣud threshold,
doorstep
وصف waṣafa يصف yaṣfu (waṣf) to describe,
depict, portray, picture ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
characterize ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to praise,
laud, extol ( ه s.o.); to attribute, ascribe ( ب ه
to s.o., quality), credit ( ب ه s.o. with),
praise ( ب ه s.o. for), say s.th. ( ب) to s.o.’s (
ه) credit; to prescribe ( ل ھ a medicine to
s.o.) │ لا يوصف (yūṣafu) indescribable;
nondescript VI to describe to one another,
tell one another ( ھ s.th.) VIII اتصف
ittaṣafa to be described; to possess as a
characteristic ( ب a quality or peculiarity);
to be distinguished, known, characterized,
marked ( ب by a quality, property,
peculiarity) X to consult ( ه a doctor)
صفة ṣifa pl. -āt quality, property;
attribute; characteristic, distinguishing
mark, peculiarity; adjective (gram.);
asyndetio relative clause (without relative
pronoun; gram.); way, manner │ بصفة as,
in the capacity of; بصفته وزيرا in his
capacity of minister, as a minister; بصفة
خاصة (kāṣṣa) in particular, especially,
specifically; بصفة غير رسمية (gair
rasmīyatin) unofficially
وصف waṣf description, depiction,
portrayal, characterization; -- (pl. اوصاف
auṣāf) quality, property; characteristic,
distinguishing mark, peculiarity; adjective
(gram.); pl. اوصاف description of a person
│ شيء يفوق الوصف (yafūqu l-waṣfa) a thing
beyond description, an indescribable
thing; اخذ اوصافه to take down s.o.’s
personal description
وصفة waṣfa description, depiction,
portrayal; medical prescription
وصفي waṣfī descriptive, depictive
وصاف waṣṣāf describer, depicter
وصيف waṣīf pl. وصفاء wuṣafā’2 servant;
page
وصيفة waṣīfa pl. وصائف waṣā’if2 maid,
servant girl; maid of honor, lady in
waiting
مواصفة muwāṣafa detailed description;
explanation, interpretation; specification;
pl. -āt specifications │ مواصفة العلاج
directions for treatment
موصوف mauṣūf described, depicted,
portrayed, pictured; characterized ( ب by),
having II attribute ( ب s.th.); noun followed
by attribute or asyndetic relative clause
(gram.); prescribed
متصف muttaṣif characterized ( ب by),
possessing II a property or an attribute ( ب
s.th.)
مستوصف mustauṣaf pl. -āt clinic
وصل waṣala يصل yaṣilu (waṣl, صلة ṣila)
to connect, join, unite, combine, link,
interlock ( ب ھ s.th. with), attach ( ب ھ s.th.
to); to establish ( صلة ṣilatan a contact, a
connection; a relation بين – و between --
and); to bring into relation ( بين – و s.th.
with s.th. else); to give ( ب s.o. s.th.),
bestow, confer ( ب ه upon s.o. s.th.), award
ب ه) to s.o. s.th.); -- ( وصول wuṣūl) to arrive
الى) or ھ at a place); to come to s.o.’s ( الى
or ه) hands; to reach ( الى or ھ, ه s.o., s.th.);
to come, get ( الى or ھ, ه to); to reach ( الى or
ھ an amount), amount to ( الى or ھ ); to
enter ( الى a phase); to get ( الى ب s.o. to or
to the point where) │ وصلني خطاب I have
received a letter; وصله الخبر 1072
(kabar)he received the news; يصل ھذا الى حد
كذا (ḥaddi k.) this gets to the point
where ...; وصل الى الصفحة الحاصمة (ṣafḥa) to
enter the decisive phase II to connect,
join, unite, combine ( ب ھ s.th. with); to
make ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.) get ( الى to), see that
s.o. or s.th. ( ھ، ه ) gets to ( ھ ); to get, take,
bring, move, lead, show, conduct, convey,
channel ( الى ھ، ه s.o., s.th. to); to give ( ه
s.o.) a ride, a lift; to carry, transport,
transfer, convey ( الى، ھ s.th. to); to deliver,
transmit, communicate ( الى ھ s.th. to); to
conduct, act as a conductor (el.); to
accompany, escort ( الى ه s.o. to); to
connect ( الى ھ s.th. to an electric circuit, ب
ھ one apparatus with another, an electric
device with the main line), plug in ( ھ
s.th.); to turn on, switch on ( ھ s.th.; el.) III
to continue ( في or ھ s.th.), proceed ( في or
ھ in or with); to persist, persevere ( في or ھ
in); to be connected ( ھ with), bear ( ھ on),
belong, pertain ( ھ to); to be close friends,
maintain close relations ( ه with s.o.); to
have sexual intercourse ( ھا with a woman)
│ واصل الليل بالنھار (laila, nahāri) to work
day and night; واصل جھده (سعيه) في
(jahdahū, sa‘yahū) to make untiring
efforts for IV = II; O to put through (a
long-distance call) │ اوصل كل ذي حق بحقه
(kulla dī ḥaqqin bi-ḥaqqihī) to give
everyone his due V to obtain access ( الى
to); to gain access by certain means ( الى
to), get ( الى into) in come way or other; to
attain ( الى to), arrive ( الى at), reach ( الى
s.th.), come by s.th. ( الى ) VI to be
interconnected; to form an uninterrupted
sequence VIII اتصل ittaṣala to be joined (
ب to), be connected ( ب with); to combine,
unite ( ب with); to get in touch ( ب with
s.o., also, e.g., by telephone); to contact (
ب s.o.); to have relation ( ب to), bear ( ب
on), be connected, have to do ( ب with); to
join ( ب s.o. or s.th.); to be attached ( ب to);
to be near s.o. or a place ( ب), be adjacent,
continuous ( ب to), adjoin ( ب s.th.), border,
abut ( ب on), belong ( ب to); to come to
s.o.’s ( ب) knowledge; to be continued,
continue, go on; to be continuous, form a
continuous chain; to be related ( الى to); to
trace one’s descent ( الى to); to come, get (
الى to), arrive ( الى at), reach ( الى s.th.) │ قد
اتصل بنا ان it has come to our knowledge
that ...; اتصل به تلفونيا to get in touch with
s.o. by telephone, have o.s. connected
with; اتصلت به النار to catch fire
صلة ṣila pl. -āt junction, juncture;
relation; connection; link, tie, bond;
relationship, kinship; present, gift, grant;
syndetic relative clause (gram.); O leadin,
lead-in wire (radio) │ صلة الوصل ṣ. al-waṣl
connecting link
وصل waṣl junction, juncture,
connection; union, combination; linkage,
nexus; synopsis, summary; reunion of
lovers; (pl. اوصال auṣāl) relation, link, tie,
connection; contact (el.); (pl. وصولات
wuṣūlāt) voucher, receipt │ وصل الفائت
synopsis of the previous chapters of a
newspaper serial; ليلة الوصل lailat al-w. last
night of a lunar month
وصل wuṣl, wiṣl pl. اوصال auṣāl limb,
member (of the body); pl. articulations,
joints │ حل اوصاله (ḥalla) or قطع اوصاله to
dismember, dissect s.th.
وصلة waṣla a character ( ) over silent
alif (gram.)
وصلة wuṣla pl. -āt, وصل wuṣal junction,
juncture; connection; contact (el.);
attachment, fastening, fixture; tie, link;
joint (also arch.); hinge; connecting piece,
coupling; inset, insertion; overlap (arch.);
line of communication; hyphen │ وصلة
التمدد w. at-tamaddud expansion joint
(arch.)
وصلية waṣlīya connecting road, side
road; feeder road 1073
وصول wuṣūl arrival; attainment,
obtainment, achievement; receipt; (pl. -āt)
receipt, voucher
وصولي wuṣūlī upstart, parvenu
وصيل waṣīl inseparable friend, intimate,
chum
الموصل al-mauṣil Mosul (city in N Iraq)
توصيل tauṣīl uniting, joining,
connecting; supply, feed; connection,
junction; electric contact, feed wire,
feeder; electric circuit, connection layout,
connection; conductivity (el.);
communication, transmission, transfer,
conveyance;
delivery; execution, dispatch,
discharge; (pl. تواصيل tawāṣīl) receipt,
voucher │ O توصيل الى الأرض (arḍ) ground
connection, ground (radio); O توصيل على
التضاعف (taḍā‘uf) multiple connection,
series parallel (el.); O توصيل على التوازي
(tawāzī) parallel connection (el.); O توصيل
على التوالي series connection (el.); جيد
التوصيل jayyid at-t. or good conductivity,
good conductor (el.); O سداد التوصيل
saddād at-t. (male) plug (el.)
توصيلة tausīla connection, contact (el.)
│ توصيلة الأرض t. al-arḍ ground
connection (radio)
وصال wiṣāl reunion, being together (of
lovers); communion (in love)
مواصلة muwāṣala connection;
continuation, continuance; continuity; pl.
-āt lines of communication,
communications │ مواصلة حديدية (ḥadīdīya)
rail communication; مواصلة سلكية (silkīya)
wire communication; اسباب المواصلة means
of communication, communications; طرق
المواصلات ṭuruq al-m. traffic routes; وزارة
المواصلات ministry of communications
ايصال īṣāl pl. -āt joining, connecting,
junction; uniting, union; connection;
communication; conveyance; transport,
transportation; passage; transmission;
putting through (of a long-distance call);
receipt, voucher
توصل tawaṣṣul attainment ( الى of an
objective), achievement ( الى of a purpose);
arrival; reunion
تواصل tawāṣul continuance; continuity
│ بتواصل continually, persistently
اتصال ittiṣāl connectedness, unitedness,
union; juncture, conjunction, link;
connection; contact; liaison; establishment
of contacts; tuning in (of a radio);
contacting ( ب of), getting in touch ( ب
with); junction, intersection (of two
roads); continuance, continuation;
continuity │ على اتصال ب in touch with;
استمر في اتصاله ب (istamarra) to keep in
touch with s.o.; نقطة الاتصال nuqṭat al-itt.
points of contact; اتصال تلفوني telephone
connection
موصول mauṣūl bound, tied; glued,
riveted ( ب to), fixed ( ب on; of the eyes);
relative pronoun (gram.) │ اياما موصولة
(ayyāman) for several (or many)
consecutive days, for some time
موصل muwaṣṣil pl. -āt conductor (el.) │
O موصل ارضي (arḍī) ground wire (radio);
O موصل سلكي (silkī) wire, wiring (el.)
متواصل mutawāṣil persistent, continued,
continuous, continual, unceasing,
incessant, uninterrupted
متصل muttaṣil persistent, continued,
continuous, continual, unceasing,
incessant, uninterrupted; adjoining,
adjacent, contiguous │ ضمير متصل
pronominal suffix (gram.); متصل الحلقات m.
al-ḥalaqāt closely interlinked, closely
connected
وصم waṣama to disgrace, tarnish, blemish ( ھ
name, honor); to afflict with the blemish (
ب of s.th.; ه s.o.), put the blame for s.th. (
ب) on s.o. ( ه) V to be tarnished, sullied
(honor)
وصم waṣm disgrace 1074
وصمة waṣma disgrace; mark of
disgrace, stain, blot, blemish; fault, flaw,
shortcoming, defeat; ailing condition,
malaise
توصيم tauṣīm sailing condition, malaise
وصوص waṣwaṣa to peep through a hole or
crack; (also = وسوس ) to whisper
وصوص waṣwaṣ and وصواص waṣwāṣ pl.
وصاوص waṣāwiṣ peephole
وصوصة waṣwaṣa furtive glance, peep,
peek
وصو II and IV to entrust, commend, commit (
ب ه to s.o.’s charge or care s.o.); to direct,
bid, advice, counsel ( ب ه s.o. to do s.th.),
recommend ( ب ه to s.o. s.th.), impress ( ب ه
on s.o. s.th.); to order ( ه s.o., ب to do s.th.),
charge, commission ( ب ه s.o. with), enjoin
ب ه) on s.o. s.th.), make s.th. ( (ب
incumbent ( ه on s.o.); to order ( ب ه from
s.o. s.th.), give s.o. ( ه) an order for ( ,(ب
place an order ( ب ه with s.o. for); to decree
ب) s.th.); to make one’s will; to will,
determine or decree by will ( ان that); to
bequeath, make over, transfer by will ( ب ل
to s.o. s.th.); to appoint as executor ( الى
s.o.) │ اوصاه خيرا ب (kairan) he urged him
to take care of X استوصى به خيرا (kairan) to
make s.th. one’s concern (or one’s
business), make a point of s.th. (in
deference to another’s recommendation);
to mean well, have the best intentions
with; استوصى بالأجر خيرا (bi-l-ajri kairan)
to fix a moderate or low price
وصي wasīy pl. اوصياء auṣiyā’
plenipotentiary, mandatory, authorized
agent, commissioner; executor; legal
guardian, curator, tutor; administrator,
caretaker, trustee; regent; testator; client,
principal, mandator │ وصى على العرش
(‘arš) regent, prince regent
وصية waṣīya pl. وصايا waṣāyā direction,
directive, instruction, injunction, order,
command, commandment;
recommendation advice, counsel,
admonition, exhortation; will, testament,
testamentary disposition; bequest, legacy
│ الوصايا العشر (‘ašr) the Ten
Commandments
وصاة waṣāh and وصاية prescription;
order, ordinance, regulation, decree;
instruction, direction, advice, counsel
وصاية wiṣāya guardianship, curatorship,
tutorship; executorships; tutelage;
mandate (pol.); trusteeship │ مجلس الوصاية
majlis al-w. regency council
توصية tauṣiya pl. -āt, تواص tawāṣin
recommendation; admonition, exhortation,
advice, counsel; proposal, suggestion;
order, instruction, direction, commission,
mandate; (commercial) order, commission
│ بالتوصية to order, on commission; خطاب
توصية letter of recommendation; شركة
توصية širkat t. limited partnership
ايصاء īṣā’ = توصية ; appointment of an
executor (Isl. Law)
موص muwaṣṣin and mūṣin client,
principal; mandator, testator │ شريك موص
silent partner
موصى به mūṣan bihī that which has
been disposed of; bequeathed, willed;
bequest, legacy; decreed, ordered;
recommended; موصى عليه registered
(letter); الموصى له legatee; heir; الموصى اليه
executor
وضؤ waḍu’a يوضؤ yauḍu’u ( وضوء wuḍū’,
وضاءة waḍā’a) to be pure, clean V to
perform the ritual ablution before prayer
وضاء brilliant, radiant, bright
وضاءة wuḍā’a purity, cleanness,
cleanliness
وضوء wuḍū’ purity, cleanness,
cleanliness; ritual ablution before prayer
وضوء waḍū’ water for the ritual
ablution
وضيء waḍī’ pl. وضاء wiḍā’ pure, clean
1075
توضؤ tawaḍḍu’ ritual ablution
ميضأة mīḍa’a and ميضاءة mīḍā’a
fountain or basin for the ritual ablution
توضيب taḍīb arrangement; preparation;
dressing, processing (mining industry)
وضح waḍaḥa يضح yaḍiḥu ( وضوح wuḍūḥ) to be
or become clear, plain, patent, manifest,
evident; to appear, show, come out, come
to light, become visible II and IV to make
clear, make plain ( ھ s.th.); to explain,
explicate, clear up, clarify, expound,
elucidate, illustrate ( ھ s.th.); to set forth,
propound ( ھ s.th.); to make visible, make
manifest, show ( ھ s.th.); to indicate,
designate, denote, express ( ھ s.th.) V = I;
to be made clear, be clarified, be cleared
up; to be shown, be indicated; to be
obvious VIII اتضح ittaḍaḥa = I and V; to
follow clearly ( من from), be explained ( من
by) X to ask ( ه s.o.) for an explanation, for
clarification ( ھ of s.th.); to examine,
investigate, explore
ھ) or عن s.th.), inquire, search ( ھ or عن
into); to try to see clear ( ھ in), seek to
understand clearly ( ھ s.th.)
وضح waḍaḥ pl. اوضاح auḍāḥ light,
brilliance, luminosity, brightness │ في
وضح النھار (w. in-nahār) in broad daylight
وضاح waḍḍāḥ) bright, clear, brilliant,
shining, luminous
وضوح wuḍūḥ clarity, clearness,
plainness, distinctness; visibleness;
obviousness; appearance │ بوضوح clearly,
plainly, distinctly
اوضح auḍaḥ2 clearer
توضيح tauḍīḥ elucidation; showing,
visualization; explanation; clarification;
explication, illustration
ايضاح īḍāḥ pl. -āt elucidation; showing,
visualization; explanation; clarification;
explication, illustration
ايضاحي īḍāḥī clarifying, explanatory,
explicatory, illustrative, elucidative
اتضاح ittiḍāḥ clarity, clearness;
plainness, distinctness; visibleness,
manifestness
استيضاح istīḍāḥ pl. -āt request for
clarification, inquiry, formal question,
interpellation
واضح wāḍiḥ clear, lucid; plain, distinct;
obvious, patent, manifest; visible,
conspicuous; evident, apparent, ostensible
│ وضح بذاته (bi-dātihī) self-evident; selfexplanatory;
من الواضح ان it is obvious
that ...; الأمر واضح وضوح الشمس في رابعه
(wuḍūḥa š-šamsi fī rābi‘ati n-nahār) the
matter is clear as daylight
متضح muttaḍiḥ plain, distinct; clear;
obvious, patent, manifest
وضر waḍar pl. اوضار auḍār dirt, filth
وضع waḍa‘a يضع yaḍa‘u (waḍ‘) to lay, lay off,
lay on, lay down, put down ( ھ s.th.); to set
down ( ھ s.th.); to place ( ھ s.th.); to set up,
erect ( ھ s.th.); to fix, attach, affix ( في ھ
s.th. to. on, in); to lay, put ( في ھ s.th. into);
to impose ( على ھ s.th. on s.o.); to take ( عن
ھ s.th. from s.o.), rid of a burden,
unburden ( عن s.o.), unsaddle ( عن a horse);
to bear ( ه a child), give birth to ( ه); to
invent, contrive, devise, originate, produce
ھ) s.th.); to found, establish, set up, start (
ھ s.th.); to write down, put down in
writing, set down, lay down ( ھ s.th.); to
write, compile, compose ( ھ a book or
similar work of the mind), create ( ھ s.th.);
to coin ( ھ a new word, a new term, or the
like); to humble, humiliate, disparage ( من
or ه s.o.), derogate, detract ( من or ه from);
-- (waḍ‘, وضوع wuḍū‘, ضعة ḍa‘a, di‘a)
with نفسه nafsahu: to abase o.s. humble
o.s.; -- waḍu‘a يوضع yauḍu‘u ( وضاعة
waḍā‘a) to be low, lowly, humble │ وضع
اساسا (asāsan) to lay a foundation, lay a
cornerstone; وضع ثقته في 1076 (tiqatahu) to
place one’s confidence in; وضع جانبا (على
جانب ) (jāniban) to lay, or put, s.th. aside;
وضعه في جيبه (jaibihī) to put s.th. in one’s
pocket; وضع حدا ل (ḥaddan) to put an end
to s.th.; وضع ختما على (katman) to please a
seal on; وضع السلاح to lay down arms; وضع
السلسلة في عنقه wuḍi‘at is-silsilatu fī
‘unuqihī approx.: to have a millstone
about one’s neck, he seriously
handicapped; وضع مشروعا to make or form
a plan; وضع من قدره (qadrihī) to depreciate
s.th., lower the value of s.th.; وضع تقريرا to
write or make a report; وضع اقتراحات to
draw up proposals, make suggestions;
وضع في مقدمة اھتمامه (muqaddamati
htimāmihī) to devote particular attention
to s.th., make s.th. one’s foremost
concern, give priority to s.th.; وضع لفظا ل
(lafẓan) to coin a word for; وضع للفظ معنى
خاصا به (li-l-lafẓi ma‘nan kāṣṣan bihī) to
give a special meaning to an expression,
place a particular construction on an
expression; وضعه نصب عينيه (nuṣba
‘ainaihi) to point out, demonstrate s.th. to
s.o.; وضع نظارته على عينيه (naẓẓāratahū) to
put on one’s glasses; وضع نظما (nuẓuman)
to lay down rules, وضع على حدة (ḥidatin) to
set s.th. apart, single out s.th.; وضع موضعه
(mauḍi‘ahū) to put s.th. in the place of
s.th. else; وضعه موضع التنفيذ (mauḍi‘ahū) to
put s.th. into force, make s.th. effective or
operative; to implement s.th.; وضع موضع
الشك (mauḍi‘a š-šakk) to doubt s.th.,
question s.th.; وضعه موضع العمل (mauḍi‘a
l-‘amal) to put s.th. into action, translate
s.th. into deeds; وضع الفكرة موضع الفعل
(fikrata mauḍi‘a l-fi‘l) to translate the idea
into action; وضع نفسه موضع فلان to put o.s.
in s.o.’s position; وضع في غير موضعه to
mislay, misplace s.th.; وضع يده على
(yadahū) to take possession of, lay hold
of; وضع يده على الف اسير to take 1,000
prisoners; وضع يده على ضميره to lay one’s
hand over one’s heart; وضع من يده (yadihī)
to lay s.th. aside, toss s.th. aside; وضعه تحت
يده to put s.th. in s.o.’s power IV to hurry;
to take an active part, participate actively (
في in); pass. ūḍi‘a to suffer losses ( في in)
VI to behave humbly and modestly, to
abase o.s., humble o.s.; to agree, come to
an agreement ( على on) VIII اتضع ittaḍa‘a
to humble o.s., abase o.s.
ضعة ḍa‘a, ḍi‘a lowness, lowliness,
humbleness; scantiness, poorness,
inferiority
وضع waḍ‘ pl. اوضاع auḍā‘ laying down;
putting down; laying on; fixing, attaching;
setting up; placing; writing down,
record(ing)j drawing up, execution (of a
document, deed, etc.); composition (of a
printed work); writing, compilation (of a
book); creation; invention; coining (of a
word); coinage; conclusion (of a treaty);
parturition, delivery, childbirth;
regulation, rule; sketch, draft; attitude,
bearing, carriage; posture, pose (of the
body, e.g., in dancing, before a camera);
position, location; situation; statement
(math.); foundation, establishment; --
humiliation; -- pl. اوضاع circumstances,
conditions; statutes; rules, principles;
manner; mores, practices, usages,
customs; conventions, conventional rules
│ وضعا وقولا wad‘an wa-qaulan in words
and deeds; الوضع الحالي the present
situation; وضع اليد w. al-yad laying on of
the hand; occupation, occupancy, seizure;
آلام الوضع labor pains
وضعة waḍ‘a, wiḍ‘a situation; position
وضعي waḍ‘ī relating to situation or
position, situational, positional; positive;
positivistic; positivist (philos.); manmade;
based on convention, conventional
│ قانون وضعي positive law (jur.); القيم
الوضعية (qiyam) decimals (math.)
وضعية waḍī‘ya situation; positivism
(philos.) 1077
وضاعة waḍā‘a lowness, lowliness,
humbleness
وضيع waḍī‘ pl. وضعاء wuḍa‘ā’2 lowly,
humble, base, vulgar, common; plebeian;
low; inferior │ الطبقة الوضعية (ṭabaqa) the
lowest class; الوضيع الرفيع low and high, the
lowly and the great
وضيعة waḍī‘a pl. وضائع waḍā’i‘2 s.th.
put down, laid down or deposited; s.th.
entrusted to s.o.’s custody, trust, charge,
deposit; (īsl. Law) resale with a loss; price
reduction, rebate
موضع mauḍi‘ pl. مواضع mawāḍi‘2 place,
spot, site, locality; passage (in a book);
object (of s.th.); position, situation,
location; rank; occasion │ في موضعه in the
right place, at the right time, timely,
convenient, opportune; في غير موضعه in the
wrong place, out of place; في موضع الحال in
the present case; كان موضع حفاوة (mauḍi‘a
ḥafāwatin) he was the object of a (festive)
reception; موضع الاعجاب m. al-i‘jāb object
of admiration; موضع الحنان m. al-ḥanān
object of sympathy; see also waḍa‘a I;
موضع قدم m. qadamin a foot (of ground)
موضعي mauḍi‘ī local
تواضع tawāḍu‘ humility, modesty;
lowness, lowliness, humbleness
اتضاع ittiḍā‘ humility, modesty;
lowness, lowliness, humbleness
واضع wāḍi‘ writer, author; creator;
inventor; originator; in childbed; unveiled
(woman) │ واضع اليد al-yad occupier,
occupant; holder of actual possession,
possessor (jur.)
موضوع mauḍū‘ pl. -āt, مواضيع mawāḍī‘2
object; theme, subject, topic; question,
problem, issue; subject matter, matter;
treatise, essay, article, paper; axiom;
postulate (math.) │ فھرس الموضوعات fihris
al-m. table of contents, index; ادرك
الموضوع adraka l-mauḍū‘a he got the
point; غير ذي موضوع not topical, not timely
موضوعي mauḍū‘ī objective; concerning
the subject matter, the subject itself (not
the form)
موضوعية mauḍū‘īya objectivism
(philos.)
مواضعات muwāḍa‘āt analogous (word)
coinings
متواضع mutawāḍi‘ humble; modest,
unpretentious, unassuming, simple; small,
little, insignificant
وضم waḍam pl. اوضام auḍām meat counter,
meat block, butcher’s block
وطئ waṭI’a يطأ yaṭa’u ( وطء waṭ’) to
tread underfoot ( ھ s.th.), tread, step, walk
ھ) on); to set foot ( ھ on); to walk ( ھ
over); to mount ( ھ a horse); to trample
down, trample underfoot ( ھ s.th.); to have
sexual intercourse (to with a woman) II to
pave, level, make smooth or even ( ھ s.th.,
esp., the way); to make smooth and soft,
prepare, fix up, make comfortable ( ھ a
seat, the bed, or the like, ل for s.o.); to
make ready, prepare ( ھ s.th.); to reduce,
slash ( ھ s.th.); to force down, press down
ھ) s.th.); to lower ( ھ s.th.) │ وطأ صوته
(ṣautahū) to lower the voice III to agree,
be in agreement ( على ه with s.o. on) IV to
make ( ه s.o.) step or tread ( ھ on); to make
ه) s.o.) trample down ( ھ s.th.) VI to agree,
be in agreement, cooperate, work hand in
hand, act in concert, play into each other’s
hands, act in collusion ( على in s.th., in
order to carry out s.th.)
وطء waṭ’ and وطاء waṭā’ low ground,
depression
وطأة waṭ’a pressure; oppression,
coercion, compulsion, force; gravity;
violence, vehemence │ شديد الوطأة cruel (
على to), having a deadly effect ( على on), of
fatal consequences ( على for); اشتدت وطأة
الشيء ١٠٧٨ (ištaddat) to aggravate,
become grave, trying, grueling (distress);
لاشتداد وطأة المرض li-št. w. il-maraḍ)
because of the violence with which the
disease struck
وطئ waṭI’ low; flat, level
اوطأ auṭa’2 lower
موطأ mauṭa’ and موطئ mauṭi’ pl. مواطئ
mawāṭi’2 place where the fact is set down,
footing, foothold; footprint, footstep,
track; footstool │ موطئ الأقدام m. al-aqdām
a foot (of ground); مواطئ الأقدام the ground
توطئة tauṭi’a introduction, initiation;
preparation; reduction, lowering │ لتوطئة
in preparation of ..., for the purpose of ...;
توطئة الصوت t. aṣ-ṣaut lowering of the
voice
مواطأة muwāṭa’a agreement; secret
understanding, connivance, collusion
تواطؤ tawūṭu’ agreement; secret
understanding, connivance, collusion
واطئ wāṭi’ low; muffled, subdued, soft
(voice) │ الأراضي الوطئة the Netherlands
وطب waṭb pl. وطاب wiṭāb, اوطاب auṭāb, اواطب
awāṭib2 milkskin │ مملوء الوطاب ب amply
provided with; خالي الوطاب empty-handed
وطد waṭada يطد yaṭidu (waṭd) and II to make
firm, strong or stable, strengthen, brace,
reinforce, cement, consolidate, stabilize ( ھ
s.th.); to stamp down, ram, tamp ( ھ earth,
etc.); to pave ( ل ھ the way for s.o.),
prepare ( ل ھ the ground for) │ وطد ثقته في
(tiqatahū) to rely firmly on, put one’s faith
in; وطد العزم ان (‘azma) to resolve firmly
to ..., come to the firm decision to ...; وطد
عرى المحبة (‘urā l-maḥabba) to strengthen
the bands of friendship; وطد اقدامه في
(aqdāmahū) to gain a footing in
وطيد waṭīd firm; strong; solid, sturdy;
unshakable │ وطيد الأمل ب (w. al-amal)
having strong hopes of, confident of
اوطاد auṭād mountains
ميطدة mīṭada rammer, tamper
توطيد tauṭīd strengthening, bracing,
reinforcement, cementation;
consolidation, stabilization │ توطيد السلم t.
as-silm safeguarding, or maintenance, of
peace; توطيد سعر الفرنك t. si‘r al-f.
stabilization of the franc
موطد muwaṭṭad firm, strong; solid,
sturdy │ موطد الأركان firmly established,
resting on firm foundations
وطر waṭar pl. اوطار auṭār wish, desire; aim,
end, object, purposed
وطيس waṭīs furnace │ حمي الوطيس (ḥamiya)
there was fierce fighting; حامي الوطيس
fierce, grim, bitter (fighting)
وطش waṭaša يطش yaṭišu (waṭš) to strike, hit,
slap ( ه s.o.)
وطف waṭifa يوطف yauṭafu (waṭaf) to have
bushy eyebrows
اوطف auṭaf2, f. وطفاء waṭfā’2 bushybrowed;
وطفاء rain-heavy and low-hanging
(cloud)
وطن waṭana يطن yaṭinu (waṭn) to dwell,
live, reside, stay ( ب in a place) II to
choose for residence ( ھ a place), settle
down, get settled, take up one’s residence
ھ) in a place) │ وطن نفسه على (nafsahū) to
get used to, adjust o.s. to, reconcile o.s. to,
put up with; to prepare o.s. mentally for;
to make up one’s mind to (do s.th.) V to
settle down ( ھ or ب in a place) │ توطنت
نفسه على (nfsuhū) = وطن نفسه على (see
above) X to choose for residence ( ھ a
place); to settle ( ھ a country); to settle
down, get settled, take up one’s residence
ھ) in); to live permanently ( ھ in a place);
to take root, become naturalized,
acclimated ( ھ in)
وطن waṭan pl. اوطان auṭān homeland,
home country, fatherland; home │ الوطن
القبلي (qiblī) Cape Bon (tun.); الوطن القومي
الاسرائيلي (qaumī, isrā’īlī) the Jewish 1079
National Home; اھل وطنه ahl w. his
countrymen, his compatriots; حب الوطن
ḥubb al-w. patriotism; O شائع الوطن
cosmopolitan
وطني waṭanī home; native; indigenous,
domestic; patriotic; national; nationalistic;
(pl. -ūn) nationalist, patriot │ مصنوعات
وطنية domestic products, products of the
country
وطنية waṭanīya nationalism; national
sentiment, patriotism
موطن mauṭin pl. مواطن mawāṭin2
residence, domicile; habitat; native place,
home town, home; native country, home
country. fatherland; place, locality, area,
region, section, district, zone; point, spot;
right place; right time │ موطن الضعف m.
aḍ-ḍu‘f soft or sore spot; weak spot,
weakness; وضع يده على موطن العلة (yadahū,
m. il-‘illa) to lay one’s finger on an open
sore, touch a sore spot; الموطن الوضيع the
lowest point, the low mark, the bottom
استيطان istīṭān immigration; settling
down; settling, settlement, colonization;
“istitan”, a special impost in Tunisia
مواطن muwāṭin countryman,
compatriot, fellow citizen │ مواطن عالمي
(‘ālamī) world citizen
متوطن mutawaṭṭin native, indigenous,
domestic; resident; deep-rooted; endemic
(med.)
مستوطن mustauṭin native, indigenous,
domestic; resident; deep-rooted
وطواط waṭwāṭ pl. وطاوط waṭāwiṭ وطاويط , 2
waṭāwīṭ2 bat (zool.)
□ وطى II for وطأ II
واط wāṭin low; soft; see alphabetically
وظب waẓba يظب yaẓibu ( وظوب wuẓūb) to do
persistently, regularly, keep doing,
practice constantly ( على or ھ s.th.),
continue to do s.th. III do.; to persevere,
persist ( على in), take pains ( على with),
devote o.s. assiduously, apply o.s. with
perseverance or steadily ( على to s.th.)
مواظبة muwāẓaba diligence, assiduity,
perseverance, persistence
مواظب muwāẓib diligent, assiduous,
persevering, persistent
وظف II to assign ( على ه s.th. to s.o.); to impose
على ه) s.th., esp. a tax, on s.o.), burden,
encumber ( على ھ with s.th. s.o.); to assign
an office ( ه to s.o.), appoint to an office,
employ, hire ( ه s.o.); to invest ( ھ money)
V to be appointed to an office, obtain a
position. get a job; to hold an office, work
in a position, have a job │ توظف في الحكومة
to work as an official with the government
وظيفة waẓīfa pl. وظائف waẓā’if2 daily
ration; pay; office, position, post, job;
officialship, officialdom; duty, task,
assignment; (school) assignment, lesson,
homework; employ, service; work;
function │ ادى وظيفة (addā) to fill a post,
attend to an office, exercise a function;
وظائف خالية (kāliya) vacancies; want ads (in
a newspaper); علم الوظائف ‘ilm al-w. or علم
وظائف الأعضاء ‘i. w. al-a‘ḍā’ physiology
وظيفي waẓīfī functional
توظيف tauẓīf employment, appointment
(to an office) │ توظيف المال investment
موظف muwaẓẓaf fixed (salary);
employed, appointed; -- (pl. -ūn)
employee; official, officer, civil servant;
functionary │ موظف الحكومة government
official; موظف عمومي (‘umūmī) public
functionary; اكبر الموظفين senior official
وعب wa‘aba يعب ya‘ibu (wa‘b) to take
the whole, all ( ھ of s.th.) IV do.; to insert
في ھ) s.th. in) X = I; to uproot, root out,
extirpate, exterminate ( ھ s.th.); to
embrace, enclose, encircle ( ه s.o., بين ذراعيه
with the arms); to contain, hold ھ) 1080
s.th.); to be able to take in ( ھ s.th.), nave
room ( ھ for); to comprehend, understand,
grasp, take in ( ھ s.th.)
استيعاب istī‘āb capacity; study; full
comprehension, grasp
وعث wa‘t, wa‘it difficult, hard, troublesome,
tiresome, laborious, arduous
وعثاء wa‘tā’ difficulty, trouble,
hardship, inconvenience, discomfort
وعد wa‘ada يعد ya‘idu (wa‘d) to make a
promise; to give one’s word; to promise (
ب ه or ھ ه s.o. s.th.); to threaten ( ب ه s.o.
with) │ وعد نفسه بان to promise o.s. to ...,
intend firmly to ...; وعد بشرفه (bi-šarafihī)
to pledge o.s. on one’s honor, give one’s
word of honor III to make an
arrangement; to arrange for a meeting or
rendezvous, make an appointment ( ھ ه
with s.o. for a given time or at a certain
place) IV = I; V to threaten; to menace ( ه
s.o.) VI to make an appointment VIII اتعد
itta‘ada to come to an understanding,
agree among each other, make
arrangements ( ان that)
عدة ‘ida promise
وعد wa‘d pl. وعود wu‘ūd promise
وعيد wa‘īd threats; promises
وعيدي wa‘īdī threatening, menacing,
minatory
موعد mau‘id, موعدة mau‘da pl. مواعد
mawā‘id2 promise; pledge, engagement,
commitment; rendezvous, date,
appointment; time and place of an
appointment; appointed time; time, date,
deadline; anniversary │ كان على موعد معه
منه )) to have an appointment with s.o.
ميعاد mī‘ād pl. مواعيد mawā‘īd2 promise;
appointment, date, rendezvous; appointed
time; time agreed on, time fixed by
appointment; deadline, date (esp. also due
date for repaying a debt); consulting hour,
office hour(s) (of a doctor, etc.); visiting
hours (in museums, etc.); (time of)
departure (of trains, buses, etc.) │ في الميعاد
or في ميعاده on time, punctually; على غير
ميعاد (gairi m.) untimely, unpunctually; من
غير ميعاد min gairi m. quite unexpectedly,
all of a sudden, suddenly; كان على ميعاد مع
to have an appointment with; بيان المواعيد
bayān al-m. railroad timetable; ميعاد الأكل
m. al-akl mealtime, eating time; ميعاد التسليم
date of delivery; ميعاد المرأة m. al-mar'a
menses; مواعيد عرقوبية (‘urqūbīya)
deceptive promises; ارض الميعاد arḍ al-m.
the Land of Promise
مواعدة muwā‘ada arrangement,
agreement; appointment, rendezvous, date
ايعاد ī‘ād threat
توعد tawa‘‘ud threat
توعدي tawa‘‘udī threatening, menacing,
minatory
موعود mau‘ūd promised; fixed,
appointed, stipulated (time); موعود and
موعودة mau‘āda pl. مواعيد mawā‘īd2
promise
وعر wa‘ara يعر ya‘iru (wa‘r and وعور wu‘ūr)
and wa‘ira يوعر yau‘aru (wa‘ar), wa‘ūra
yau‘uru ( وعارة wa‘āra, وعورة wu‘ūra) to
be rough, rugged, difficult (terrain) V = I
وعر wa‘r rock debris; rugged, roadless
terrain
وعر wa‘r pl. وعور wu‘ūr, اوعار au‘ār
covered with rock debris; cleft, riven,
rugged, wild; rough, uneven; roadless,
pathless; hard, difficult
وعير wa‘īr covered with rock debris;
cleft, riven, cragged, rugged, wild; rough,
uneven; roadless, pathless; hard, difficult
وعورة wu‘ūra unevenness, roughness;
difficulty │ وعورة الأرض w. al-arḍ difficult
terrain
اوعر au‘ar2 rougher, more rugged,
harder 1081
وعز IV to give to understand, intimate,
insinuate ( في or ب s.th., الى to s.o.), point
out by a sign or motion ( في or ب الى to s.o.
s.th.); to suggest ( في or ب الى to s.o. s.th.);
to inspire ( في or ب الى s.o. with, s.o. to do
s.th.); to advise, counsel, recommend ( في
or الى الى to s.o. s.th.); to induce ( ب الى s.o.
to); to instruct, direct, order ( الى s.o., ب to
do s.th.)
ايعاز ī‘āz advice, counsel,
recommendation; suggestion, intimation,
hint
ايعازي ī‘āzī advisory, recommendatory,
inspiring, inspiratory
موعز به mū‘az bihī inspired, suggested
by a higher authority
وعس wa‘asa يعس ya‘isu (wa‘s) to make
experienced, make wise ( ه s.o.; of fate)
وعس wa‘s pl. اوعاس au‘ās quicksand
ميعاس mī‘ās quicksand
وعظ wa‘aẓa يعظ ya‘iẓu (wa‘ẓ, عظة ‘iẓa) to
preach ( ه to s.o.), appeal to s.o.’s ( (ه
conscience; to admonish, exhort ( ه s.o.); to
warn ( عن ه s.o. of), caution ( عن ه s.o.
against) VIII اتعظ itta‘aẓa to let o.s. be
admonished or warned; to accede to an
admonition, take advice; to learn a lesson,
take a warning ( ب from), let s.th. ( ب) be a
warning
عظة ‘iẓa pl. -āt sermon; lesson, moral;
warning; admonition
وعظ wa‘ẓ and وعظة wa‘ẓa admonition;
warning; sermon; parsenesis
موعظة mau‘iẓa pl. مواعظ mawā‘iẓ2
religious exhortation, spiritual counsel;
exhortatory talk, exhortation; stem lecture,
severe reprimand
واعظ wā‘iẓ pl. وعاظ wu‘‘āẓ preacher
وعق wa‘q, wa‘iq surly, grumpy, cross; illtempered,
irritable, peevish, cantankerous,
petulant
وعك V to be indisposed, unwell
وعك wa‘ik indisposed, unwell
وعكة wa‘ka indisposition, illness;
sultriness
توعك tawa‘‘uk indisposition
موعوك mau‘ūk indisposed, unwell; ill
متوعك mutawa‘‘ik indisposed, unwell;
ill
وعل wa‘l, wa‘il pl. اوعال au‘āl, wu‘ūl mountain
goat
وعوع wa‘wa‘ to howl, yelp, bark, bay
وعى wa‘ā يعي ya‘ī (wa‘y) to hold ( ھ s.th.); to
comprise ( ھ s.th.); to contain ( ھ s.th.); to
retain in one’s memory, remember, know
by heart, know ( ھ s.th.); to pay attention (
الى or ھ to), heed, bear in mind ( الى or ھ
s.th.); to perceive, hear ( ھ s.th.); to
become aware ( الى of) │ وعى على نفسه
(nafsihī) to dawn on s.o., become clear to
s.o.; لا يعي (he is) unconscious; لا يكاد يعي
(he is) almost unconscious; لا يعي ما يقوله he
doesn’t know what he is saying II to warn,
caution ( من ه s.o. against) IV to put ( ھ s.th.
into a vessel or container) V to act with
caution, with prudence; to be on one’s
guard ( من against), beware ( من of)
وعي attention, attentiveness,
heedfulness, carefulness, advertence;
consciousness; awareness; feeling,
sentiment, sense; wakefulness, alertness │
في غير وعي unnoticed, without being
noticed; وعي قومي (qaumī) national
consciousness, nationalism; ما وراء الوعي
the subconscious; استرجع وعيه and عاد الى
وعيه to regain consciousness, come to; فقد
وعيه to lose consciousness, faint, pass out;
دون وعي unconscious(ly)
وعاء wi‘ā’ pl. اوعية au‘iya, اواع awā‘in
vessel (also anat.), container, receptacle │
اوعية دموية (damawīya) blood vessels
واع wā‘in attentive, heedful, careful;
conscious, in one’s senses, wide awake
1082
وغد wagd pl. اوغاد augād, وغدان wagdān
miserable, wretched; scoundrel
وغر wagara يغر yagiru, wagira يوغر
yaugaru (wagr, wagar) to be hot, be angry
│ وغر صدره على (ṣadruhū) to boil with
anger against s.o., harbor malice against
s.o., feel hatred for s.o. IV اوغر صدره على
(ṣadrahū) to arouse s.o.’s anger against,
stir up s.o. against, arouse bitter feelings
in s.o. against V to be furious, burn with
rage
وغر wagr, wagar anger, wrath, ire,
rancor, spite, malice, hatred
وغل wagala يغل yagilu ( وغول wugūl) to
penetrate deeply ( في into); -- (wagl, wugūl,
وغلان wagalān) to intrude ( على on s.o.),
come uninvited ( على to) IV to penetrate
deeply ( في into); to apply o.s. intensively (
في to an activity); to push, press ( في ه s.o.
into); to burry │ اوغل في السير (sair) to
walk briskly, advance quickly; اوغل في
الكلام (kalām) to exaggerate, draw a
longbow V to penetrate deeply ( في into);
to advance further and further
وغل wagl intruder, parasite
توغل tawaggul penetration, absorption,
preoccupation
واغل wāgil intruder, parasite;
extraneous, irrelevant; deep, deep-rooted,
deep-seated, inveterate (feeling)
موغل mūgil deep-reaching, deep-rooted
وغي wagy, wagan din, clamor, tumult, uproar
وفد wafada يفد yafidu (wafd, وفود wufūd, وفادة
wifāda) to come, travel ( على or الى to s.o.,
esp. as an envoy); to arrive ( على or الى
before s.o., in s.o.’s presence); to visit,
come to see ( على s.o.), call on s.o. ( على ) II
and IV to send, dispatch ( على or الى ه s.o.
to, also ھ a delegation); to delegate,
depute ( على or الى ه s.o. to. also ھ a group)
III to come or arrive together ( ه with s.o.)
VI to arrive together; to throng, flock ( على
to)
وفد wafd arrival, coming; -- (pl. وفود
wufūd, اوفاد aufād) a delegation, a
deputation; الوفد (formerly, Eg.) the Wafd
party
وفدي wafdī of or relative to the Wafd;
Wafdist, a member or adherent of the
Wafd
وفادة wifāda arrival │ اكرم (احسن) وفادته
(wifādatahū) to receive s.o. hospitably,
receive s.o. with kindness, treat s.o. with
deference
وفود wufūd arrival
ايفاد īfād delegation, deputation,
dispatch
وافد wāfid pl. وفود wufūd, اوفاد aufād, وفاد
wuffād arriving; (new)comer, arrival;
envoy; epidemic(al) (disease); pouring in,
coming (ideas, memories)
وافدة wāfida an epidemic
موفد mūfad appointed or nominated for
a special assignment; delegate │ الموفد
البابوي apostolic delegate
وفر wafara يقر rafiru (wafr, وفور wufūr) and
wafura يوفر yaufuru ( وفارة wafāra) to
abound, be ample, abundant, numerous,
plentiful; to increase, augment, grow,
become more II to increase, augment,
make abundant ( ھ s.th.); to give
abundantly ( ل ھ of s.th. to s.o.); to furnish
ھ) evidence, proof); to save ( ھ s.th.), be
sparing, be economical, hold back,
economize ( ھ with); to lay by, put by ( ھ
s.th., esp., money); to save ( ھ على s.o.
s.th.) │ وفر عليه مصاريف كثيرة to save s.o. a
lot of expenses IV to increase, augment ( ھ
s.th.) V to abound, be ample, abundant,
plentiful; to suffice, be sufficient, be
enough; to be fulfilled (condition); to be
of full value, sterling, up to standard,
unexceptionable. valid; to prosper, thrive,
be successful; to spare no trouble, go to
any length ( على in an undertaking or
activity), give all one’s attention, devote
1083 o.s. intensively, dedicate o.s. ( على
to); to be saved │ توفرت فيه الصفات اللازمة he
has the necessary qualities; توفرت فيه الشروط
he fulfills the conditions VI to be
numerous; to abound, be ample, abundant,
plentiful; to increase, multiply, grow in
number; to be fulfilled (conditions); to fall
amply to s.o.’s ( ل) share (e.g., qualities) │
توفر فيه الشباب والجمال (šabāb, jamāl) he is
richly endowed with youth and good looks
وفر wafr abundance, wealth; profusion,
superabundance; (pl. وفور wufūr, -āt)
excess, surplus, overplus; economy;
saving
وفرة wafra plenty, abundance, profusion
وفير wafīr abundant, ample
اوفر aufar2 more abounding ( ھ in);
more amply provided or endowed ( ھ
with); thriftier, more economical │ اوفر
حظا (ḥaẓẓan) luckier, more fortunate
توفير taufīr increase, augmentation;
raising, raise, rise; economizing,
economy; saving │ صندوق التوفير ṣundūq
at-t. savings bank
توفر tawaffur abundance, profusion,
wealth; superabundance; increase, rise,
augmentation, spread, expansion;
fulfillment │ عند توفر as soon as the
conditions are fulfilled
وافر wāfir ample, abundant, plentiful;
numerous, profuse, superabundant; (with
foll. genit.) abounding in; overlong (year);
الوافر name of a poetic meter
موفور maufūr ample, abundant,
plentiful; loaded, swamped; wealthy,
moneyed, rich; complete, perfectly intact
│ موفور المطالب m. al-maṭālib having many
wishes
متوفر mutawaffir ample, abundant;
thrifty, economical; savings yield or
interest
متوافر mutawāfir ample, abundant,
plentiful, profuse
وفز V to be roused, be alerted X to lie in wait;
to be in suspense; to be prepared, be in a
state of alertness
وفز wafz, wafaz pl. اوفاز aufāz hurry,
haste │ كان على اوفاز to be on one’s toes, be
on the alert
مستوفز mustaufiz alert, quick, vivid,
lively (e.g., mind); excited
وفض wafaḍa يفض yafiḍu (wafḍ) to run; to
hurry, rush
وفض wafḍa pl. وفاض wifāḍ leather bag,
traveling bag │ خلي الوفاض empty, vacant,
free; empty-handed
وفيعة wafī‘a penwiper
وفق wafiqa يفق yafiqu (wafq) to be right,
proper, suitable, fit, appropriate II to make
fit, make suitable, adapt, fit, adjust,
accommodate ( ھ s.th.); to make
consistent, bring to agreement, reconcile (
بين different things; بين-- وبين s.th. with); to
reconcile ( بين two parties), make peace, reestablish
normal relations ( بين between); to
give s.o. ( ه) success ( ل or الى in achieving
s.th.; of God); pass. wuffiqa to have
success, be successful ( ل or الى in or with),
have the good fortune, be lucky enough (
الى to), succeed ( الى in) │ وفق كل التوفيق الى
(wuffiqa kulla t-t.) to succeed completely
in, have every success in or with III to
befit, become ( ه s.o.); to suit ( ه s.o.), be
suitable, acceptable, agreeable, favorable,
convenient ( ه to s.o.), be consistent with
s.o.’s ( ه) wishes or interests; to fit, suit ( ه
s.o.; garment); to agree ( ھ with s.th., ه
with s.o., في or على in s.th.); to be agreed,
unanimous, of the same opinion, concur (
في or على ه with s.o. in s.th.); to fit ( ھ
s.th.), be consistent, be in keeping, be in
line ( ھ with s.th.); to correspond, be
analogous ( ھ to s.th.); to be in agreement,
1084 be in accordance, be in conformity,
be in harmony, go, harmonize ( ھ with); to
fall in, tally, coincide ( ھ with); to agree ( ھ
with; of food, climate, etc.), be
wholesome, beneficial ( ھ for); to be
conducive ( ھ to); to agree, consent,
assent, subscribe ( على to), grant, confirm,
approve, sanction, license, authorize,
ratify ( على s.th.); to adapt, fit ( بين one thing
to the other), make consistent, compatible,
bring to agreement, reconcile, balance,
equilibrate ( بين two things) V to be aided,
assisted, favored (by God); to have
success, be successful, prosper, succeed
VIII اتفق ittafaq to agree, come to an
agreement, reach an agreement; to agree,
be in agreement, in accordance, in
conformity, in keeping, in line, in
harmony, be consistent, be compatible,
coincide, tally, square, fall in line ( مع or و
with acc.: with): to be agreed, be
unanimous; to make a contract, conclude
an agreement, a treaty, agree on an
arrangement; to agree ( على on s.th.),
arrange ( على s.th.), come to terms ( على
about s.th., مع with s.o.); to chance,
happen accidentally, come to pass, occur,
happen ( ل to s.o., e.g., an oversight); to
fan unexpectedly ( ل to s.o.), turn out
successfully ( ل for s.o.) contrary to his
expectation; to be given, be destined ( ل to
s.o.) │ كما اتفق (ka-mā) as chance would
have it, at random, haphazardly,
carelessly; كيفما اتفق (kaifa-mā) however it
may turn out, whatever may come; no
matter how, anyway; at any rate, in any
case
وفق wafq sufficient amount;
sufficiency; agreement, accordance,
conformity; harmony, concord; wafq or
وفقا ل or من وفق in accordance with, in
conformity with, conformable to,
according to, commensurate with; in
pursuance of, pursuant to, on the strength
of, on the basis of │ وفق wafqa l-aṣl true,
accurate, exact (copy)
وفقة wafqa: اجر بالوفقة ajr bi-l-w. piece
wage, task wage, wage for piecework
اوفق aufaq2 more suitable, fitter, more
appropriate
توفيق taufīq conformation, adaptation,
accommodation; balancing, adjustment,
settlement; reconciliation, mediation,
arbitration, peacemaking, re-establishment
of normal relations; success (granted by
God), happy outcome, good fortune, good
luck, prosperity, successfulness,
succeeding │ لجنة التوفيق lajnat at-t. board
of arbitration
وفاق wifāq accordance, conformity,
conformance; unity; concord, harmony;
consent, assent; agreement, covenant; وفاقا
ل in accordance with. in conformity with,
conformable to, according to,
commensurate with; in pursuance of,
pursuant to, on the strength of, on the
basic of
موافقة muwāfaqa agreement,
conformity, conformance; accordance;
correspondence, analogy; suitability,
fitness; approval, consent, assent,
authorization, sanction
توافق tawāfuq coincidence, congruence,
congruity; agreement, conformity,
conformance
اتفاق ittifāq coincidence, congruence,
congruity; agreement, conformity,
conformance; accident, chance; (pl. -āt)
covenant, compact, convention, contract;
understanding, arrangement, entente;
agreement, treaty, pact │ اتفاقا accidentally,
by chance, by coincidence; بالاتفاق by
(mutual) agreement, by appointment; اتفاق
الآراء unanimity; باتفاق الآراء unanimously;
اتفاق بحري (baḥrī) naval agreement; اتفاق
تجاري (tijārī) commercial agreement, trade
agreement; اتفاق عدم الاعتداء itt. ‘adam ali‘
tidā‘ nonaggression pact; دول الاتفاق
الصغير duwal at-itt. the countries of the
Little Entente 1085
اتفاقي ittifāqī accidental, fortuitous,
chance; hued on convention, conventional
اتفاقية ittifāqīya pl. -āt agreement, treaty;
convention, concordat
موفق muwaffaq successful, prospering,
fortunate, lucky
موافق muwāfiq accordant, comfortable,
congruous, consistent, concordant,
corresponding, analogous; suitable, fit,
appropriate; agreeable, acceptable,
convenient, favorable, propitious,
wholesome, beneficial, conducive
متوفق mutawaffiq successful,
proopering, fortunate, lucky
متفق عليه muttafaq ‘alaihi agreed upon
وفى wafā يفي yafī to be perfect, integral,
complete, unabridged; -- ( وفاء wafā’) to
live up ( ب or ھ to a promise, an
agreement, a vow, or the like), redeem,
fulfill, carry out, keep ( ب or ھ s.th.); to
satisfy, gratify ( ب a wish, a desire), supply
ب) a need); to serve ( ب a purpose); to
meet, fulfill, discharge ( ب an obligation,
an engagement); to pay (a debt); to
redeem (a pledge); to cover (costs,
expenses); to be sufficient, be enough,
suffice ( ب for), be adequate ( ب to); to
make up, compensate fully ( ب for),
counterbalance ( ب s.th.); to be equivalent (
ب to s.th.), fulfill the function ( ب of s.th.),
substitute ( ب for); to realize or carry out
(fully, completely; ب s.th.) II to bring up
to standard, complete, round out ( ھ s.th.);
to give ( ھ ه s.o. s.th.) to the full extent, let
s.o. ( ه) have his full share of s.th. ( ھ ); to
present, lit forth, or treat exhaustively (a
topic) III to come ( ه to s.o.), appear, show
up ( ه before s.o., in s.o.’s presence); to
bring, lake, deliver ( ب to s.o. s.th.),
supply, provide, furnish ( ب s.o. with); to
fulfill ( ھ s.o.’s wish), comply ( ھ with
s.o.’s request) │ وافاه اجله (ajaluhū) his fate
overtook him IV to give to the full; to
fulfill, keep ( ب or ھ s.th.), live up ( ب or ھ
to); to come or draw near s.th. ( ,(علي
approach ( علي s.th.); to exceed, transcend (
علي s.th.), go beyond ( اوفى علي │ ( علي
الانتھاء to draw to a close; عمره الآن قد اوفى
علي التاسعة (‘umruhū) he is already past
nine years of age V to exact fully ( ھ s.th.),
take one’s full share ( ھ of), receive in full
ھ) s.th.); توفاه لله God hal taken him unto
Him; pass. tuwuffiya to die VI to be
complete; to decide unanimously ( علي for,
in favor of) X to receive in full, exact
(fully) ( ھ s.th.); to give (fully) ( ھ ل to s.o
s.th.), let s.o. have his full share of; to
complete, bring to a finish ( ھ s.th.), go
through with s.th. ( ھ ); to lit out, hear to
the end ( ھ a program); to bring to its full
value ( ھ s.th.); to treat exhaustively ( ھ a
topic); to exhaust ( ھ s.th.); to present in
detail. at great length ( ھ s.th.); to fulfill ( ھ
the condition); to receive full
compensation or indemnity
وفاء wafā’ keeping, fulfillment,
redemption (e.g., of a promise); meeting,
discharge (of an obligation); payment (of
a debt); counterbalance, setoff,
compensation; faithfulness fidelity; good
faith; loyalty, allegiance; fulfillment,
accomplishment, realization, completion
│ وفاء ل wafā’an li in fulfillment of, in
discharge of; as an offset to; as a
compensation for; يوم وفاء النيل yaum w. annīl
the Day of the Nile Inundation
(popular holiday; Eg.); احتفظ بالوفاء ل to
remain loyal to s.o.
وفاة wafāh pl. وفيات wafayāt decease,
demise; death; death certificate │ كثرة
الوفيات katrat al-w. high mortality, high
death rate
وفي wafīy pl. اوفياء aufiyā’2 true to one’s
word; faithful (lover); reliable,
trustworthy; entire, whole, total, full,
complete, integral, perfect 1086
اوفى aufā more faithful, more loyal;
more complete, of greater perfection;
serving better ( ب a purpose), fulfilling
better ( ب wish, etc.)
توفية taufiya satisfaction; fulfillment,
discharge
موافاة muwāfā arrival; communication (
ب of a message)
ايفاء īfā’ fulfillment, discharge; payment
│ قادرة علي الايفاء solvent
استيفاء istīfā’ acceptance by the creditor
of the performance or payment due (Isl.
Law); fulfillment; exhaustive treatment;
performance, discharge, accomplishment,
execution, consummation, completion;
payment
واف wāfin faithful, loyal; full, complete,
perfect; quite sufficient, enough; ample,
abundant; adequate
موف muwaffin completing, rounding
out (a number) │ في الموفي عشرين (ثلاثين) من
الشھر (šahr) on the 20th (30th) day of the
month
متوفى mutawaffan deceased, dead
وقة wuqqa, wiqqa pl. -āt, وقق wiqaq oka, a
weight, see اقة
وقب waqaba يقب yaqibu (waqb) to he sunken,
hollow (eye); to become dark, gloomy
وقب waqb pl. اوقاب auqāb cavity;
hollow, hole; eye socket, orbit
وقبة waqba cavity
وقت II to appoint, fix, or set a time ( ھ for),
schedule ( ھ s.th.) for a given time; to time
ھ) s.th.); to set a time limit ( ھ for)
وقت waqt pl. اوقات auqāt time; period of
time, time span; moment, instant │ وقتا
waqtan once, at one time, one day; بوقته at
once, right away, immediately; في وقته on
time; at the right time, in good time,
timely; في غير وقت at the wrong time,
untimely; في الوقت نفسه or في نفس الوقت at the
same time, simultaneously; في اول وقت fī
awwali waqtin one of these days, at the
first opportunity; للوقت or لوقته at once,
right away, immediately; لھذا الوقت this
time; مع الوقت in (due) time, in the course
of time, by and by, gradually; من وقت لآخر
(li-ākara) from time to time; اوقاتا اوقاتا do.;
في بعض الأوقات at times, sometimes; في كثير
من الأوقات often, frequently; وقت الفراغ w.
al-farāg leisure, sparetime, free time; الوقت
المدني (madanī) civil time; وقت اوربا الوسطى
w. ūrubbā l-wusṭā Central European time;
اشارة الوقت išārat al-w. time signal (radio)
وقتئذ waqta’idin then, at that time, by
then
وقتذاك waqtadāka then, at that time, by
then
وقتما waqtamā (conj.) while, as
وقتي waqtī temporal, of time; time- (in
compounds); temporary; passing,
transient, transitory; provisional, interim;
momentary; وقتيا for some time, for a short
time │ تصوير وقتي time exposure (phot.)
موقت mauqit pl. مواقت mawāqit
appointed time; appointment, date
ميقات mīqāt pl. مواقيت mawāqīt
appointed time; date, deadline; time;
season, time of the year; meeting point,
rendezvous; pl. times of departure and
arrival, timetable │ مواقيت الأفلام business
hours; موقيت الحج m. al-hajj rendezvous
points and times of the Mecca pilgrims
توقيت tauqīt timing; reckoning of time │
توقيت صيفي (ṣaifī) daylight-saving time;
توقيت محلي (maḥallī) local time; في الساعة
العاشرة حسب توقيت جرينش (ḥasaba t. g.) at
10.00 hours Greenwich mean time
موقوت mauqūt appointed, bed, set
(time); temporary; limited in time,
1087 scheduled for a given time; provided
with a time fuse (bomb)
موقت muwaqqit timing, determining the
time; timekeeper, timetaker; controller
موقت muwaqqat and مؤقت mu’aqqat
scheduled for a given time or hour;
appointed, fixed, lilt (time); effective for a
certain time, for a time only, temporal,
temporary, passing, transient, transitory,
provisional, interim I l:i.... temporarily,
provisionally, for the time being; بصورة
موقتة (bi-ṣūra) do.; حكومة موقتة provisional
government
وقح waqaḥa يقح yaqiḥu ( قحة qiḥa, qaḥa),
waquḥa يوقح yauquḥu ( وقاحة waqāḥa, وقوحة
wuqūḥa) and waqiḥa yauqaḥu (waqaḥ) to
be shameless, impudent, insolent V do.; to
behave impudently ( على toward s.o.),
display insolent manners VI to display
impudence, behave in an insolent manner
قحة qiḥa impudence, shamelessness,
insolence, impertinence, sauciness
وقح waqiḥ impudent, shameless,
insolent, impertinent, saucy, cheeky,
forward
وقاح waqāḥ (m. and f.) pl. وقح wuquḥ
impudent, shameless, insolent,
impertinent, saucy, cheeky, forward
وقيح waqāḥa impudent, shameless,
insolent, impertinent, saucy, cheeky,
forward
وقاحة waqāḥa impudence, insolence,
impertinence, sauciness, cheek, nerve
وقوحة wuqūḥa impudence, insolence,
impertinence, sauciness, cheek, nerve
وقد waqada يقد yaqidu (waqd, waqad,
وقود wuqūd) to take fire, ignite, burn II and
IV to kindle, ignite, light ( ھ s.th.) │ اوقد فيه
النار (nāra) to set s.th. on fire V = I; to
kindle, light, ignite ( ھ s.th.) VIII اتقد
ittaqada = I; to break forth (anger), be
aroused (zeal) │ اتقد غيرة (حماسا) على
(gairatan, ḥamāsan) to burn with zeal
(enthusiasm) for X to kindle, light, ignite (
ھ s.th.)
وقد waqd, waqad burning, combustion;
fire; fuel
وقدة waqda fire; blaze
وقاد wiqād fuel
وقاد waqqād burning, fiery; lively,
heated; bright, brilliant, radiant (star); (pl.
-ūn) stoker
وقود waqūd fuel (also for motors) │
مخزن الوقود makzan al-w. coal cellar, coal
storeroom
وقيد waqīd fuel
موقد mauqid pl. مواقد mawāqid2
fireplace; hearth; stove; O boiler of a
locomotive │ موقد الغاز kerosene stove
ليقاد īqād kindling, lighting, setting on
fire, ignition
توقد tawaqqud burning, combustion
اتقاد ittiqād burning, combustion
موقود mauqūd kindled, lit, ignited,
burning
متوقد mutawaqqid burning, flaming,
blazing │ متوقد الذھن m. ad-dihn fiery,
impulsive, having a lively mind
متقد muttaqid aflame, burning
مستوقد mustauqad hearth, fireplace; O
hath heater, geyser
وقذ waqada يقذ yaqidu (waqd) to hit fatally, hit
hard, throw down, fell ( ه s.o.)
وقيذ waqīd and موقوذ mauqūd fatally ill
وقر waqara يقر yaqiru (waqr) to break,
fracture, crack ( ھ s.th., esp. a bone); to be
settled, certain, an established fact; to
stay, remain │ وقر في نفسه ان to him it was
an established fact that ...; وقر في خلده
(kaladihī) do.; وقرت الصورة في نفسه (ṣūratu)
the picture stood vividly 1088 before his
mental eye; waqura يوقر yauquru ( وقار
waqār, وقارة waqāra) to be dignified,
sedate, staid, grave II to respect, honor,
revere, reverence ( ه s.o.); to render grave
or sedate ( ه s.o.) IV to load, burden,
overload ( ھ a beast of burden); to oppress
ه) s.o.), weigh heavily ( ه upon); to be
overladen with fruit (tree)
وقر waqr pl. وقور wuqūr cavity, hollow
وقرة waqra cavity, hollow
وقر wiqr pl. اوقار auqār heavy load,
burden
وقار waqār gravity, sobriety, dignity,
deportment commanding respect;
sedateness, dignified bearing
وقور waqūr grave, sedate; dignified;
venerable, reverend
توقر tawaqqur dignified bearing
موقر muwaqqar respected, held in
respect; venerable, reverend
وقص waqaṣa يقص yaqiṣu to break s.o.’s neck (
(ھوقظ
waqaẓa يقظ yaqiẓu (waqẓ) to beat brutally (
ه s.o.) II to arouse, incite, inflame, whip up
ھ) s.th., e.g., passions)
وقع waqa‘a يقع yaqa‘u ( وقوع wuqū‘) to
fall; to fall down, drop; to tumble; to come
to pass, take place, occur; to happen ( ل to
s.o.), befall ( ل s.o.); to get ( في in a
situation, also, e.g., in a fix); to get ( الى
to), arrive ( الى at); to come, run ( علي
across), meet ( علي with); to fall ( علي to
s.o., to s.o.’s lot or share); to slight, settle
down ( علي on: bird); to have sexual
intercourse ( علي with a woman); to be
divided ( في into), consist ( في of); to be
located, be situated, lie (geog.,); -- ( وقيعة
waqī‘a) to slander, backbite, defame,
disparage ( من or ب s.o.): -- (waq‘) to rush,
pounce, fall ( ب upon s.o.) │ وقعوا في بعضھم
they fell to quarreling, they fell out with
one another; وقع بايديھم (bi-aidīhim) he fell
into their hands; وقع تحت حواسه (ḥawāssihī)
to enter s.o.’s range of perception, become
palpable, tangible for s.o.; وقعت في حبه
(ḥubbihī) she fell in love with him; وقعت
حرب (ḥarb) war broke out; وقع الحق (ḥaqq)
the law has been determined; وقع الحق عليه
he was found guilty; وقع في الفخ (fakk) to
walk into the trap, get caught in the snare;
وقع فريسته (farīsatahū) to fall victim to s.o.,
become a prey of s.o.; وقع من قلبه في مكان
(min qalbihī fī makānin) to take s.th. to
heart; to make s.th. one’s business, attend
to s.th.; وقع القول عليه (qaul) he was called
upon to speak, he was given the floor; وقع
في نفسه ان it came to his mind, it occurred
to him to ...; وقع الكلام في (kalām) the words
impressed him, went to his heart, touched
him; وقعت في (من) نفسه she has made an
impression on him, she has bewitched
him; وقع في ھواھا (hawāhā) he fell in love
with her; وقع موقعه (mauqi‘ahū) to stand in
place of, stand for; وقع في غير موقعه (fī gairi
mauqi‘ihī) to be misplaced, stand in the
wrong place, be used in the wrong context
(word); وقع الكلام منه موقعا (kalāmu,
mauqi‘an) the words moved or impressed
him; وقع الأمر منه موقعا حسنا (mauqi‘an
ḥasanan) the matter pleased him very
much, was most welcome to him; وقع عنده
موقع الرضا (mauqi‘a r-riḍā) it met his
approval; وقع في النفوس موقعا جليلا to leave a
strong, splendid impression; وقع ووقع
الاستغراب to cause raised eyebrows, cause
astonishment II to let fall, drop ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to cause to fall, bring down, throw
down, overthrow ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
perform, carry out, execute ( ھ s.th.); to
enter, record, register ( علي or في ھ s.th. in
or on); to 1089 sign ( ھ s.th.); to inflict (
علي ھ a punishment on s.o.); to play ( علي
on a musical instrument); to sow
dissension ( بين between, among) │ وقع
حجزا على (ḥajzan) to seize, confiscate,
impound or distrain s.th.; وقعه بالأحرف الأولى
(bi-l-aḥrufi l-ūlā) to initial s.th.; وقع نفسه
(nafsahū) to give o.s. up; وقع على الوتر
الحساس (al-watar al-ḥassās) to touch the
sensitive spot III to attack ( ه s.o.), fight ( ه
with); to have sexual intercourse ( ھا with a
woman) IV to let fall, drop ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to cause to fall, bring down, throw
down, overthrow ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to
plunge ( في ه s.o. into s.th., esp. fig.), get,
land ( في ه s.o. in a situation); to fall ( ب
upon s.o.), attack, assault ( ب s.o.); to score
a hit ( ب on); to sow the seeds of discord,
drive wedge ( بين -- وبين between -- and); to
project ( ھ s.th.) │ اوقع الرعب في قلبه (arru‘
ba fī qalbihī) to strike terror to s.o.’s
heart, frighten or scare s.o.; اوقع عقوبة علي
to inflict a punishment on; اوقعه في كمين to
let s.o. walk into an ambush V to expect,
anticipate ( ھ s.th.); to prepare o.s., wait ( ھ
for); to dread ( ھ s.th.); to be inflicted ( علي
on s.o.; punishment), be passed ( علي
against s.o.; judgment) X to expect,
anticipate, dread ( ھ s.th.), feel uneasy, be
concerned ( ھ about), look forward with
apprehension ( ھ to)
وقع waq‘ falling, dropping, tumbling;
fall, drop, tumble; thump, thud, blow;
happening, occurrence, incidence;
impression (s.th. makes), effect; impact │
وقع الأقدام footfall, footsteps; وقع اقدام ثقلية
heavy footfall; كان له احسن وقع في النفوس
(aḥsanu waq‘in) to make the best
impression on everyone
وقعة waq‘a pl. waqa‘āt fall, drop,
tumble; thump, thud, blow; shock, jolt;
incident, occurrence; encounter, combat,
battle; meal, repast
وقاع waqqā‘ and وقاعة waqqā‘a
talebearer, scandalmonger, slanderer
وقوع wuqū‘ falling, fall, tumble; letting
in, incidence (of an event), occurence,
happening
وقيعة waqī‘a pl. وقائع waqā’i‘ incident,
event, occurrence, happening; encounter,
battle; -- pl. وقائع happenings, goings on,
developments; factual findings, factual
evidence, facts (of a legal case);
proceedings (of an assembly); facts │ دفتر
الوقائع daftar al-w. minute book; الوقائع
المصرية (miṣrīya) the Egyptian Official
Gazette (the oldest Arab newspaper)
موقع mauqi‘ pl. مواقع mawāqi‘2 place
where s.th. drops or fells down; place,
site, locality, spot; position (of a ship and
mil.); scene, situation, location, position;
impression; time or date on which s.th.
falls │ مواقع الأطلال (sites of) ruins; مواقع
الأنظار m. anẓār field (or range) of vision;
موقع متقدم (mutaqaddim) advanced position
(mil.); مواقع النجوم the orbits of the stars; لم
يكن يعرف موقع وقته ذاك من الليل (mauqi‘a
waqtihī) he did not know what time of the
night it was at that moment; see also
waqa‘a (at end of illustrative phrases)
موقعة mauqi‘a pl. مواقع mawāqi‘2
battlefield; fighting, combat, battle
ميقعة mīqa‘a device for sharpening or
honing; grindstone, whetstone
توقيع tauqī‘ dropping; performance,
consummation, execution; discharge,
undertaking (of an act or action); infliction
(of a punishment); entering, recording,
registration; (pl. -āt) signature │ بتوقيع
تحت توقيع) فلان ) signed by, from the pen of;
مھمل التوقيع (muhmal) without signature,
unsigned
توقيعي tauqī‘ī rhythmic(al)
وقاع wiqā‘ coition, sexual intercourse
ايقاع īqā‘ pl. -āt rhythm; projection
ايقاعي īqā‘ī rhythmic(al) 1090
توقع tawaqqu‘ expectation; anticipation
واقع wāqi‘ falling, dropping, tumbling;
occurring, happening; actual, real, factual;
material, corporeal, tangible; event, fact,
matter of fact; factual findings, factual
evidence, facto; located, situated (geogr.);
transitive (gram.); الواقع reality, the real,
material world │ واقعا wāqi‘an or في الواقع
or في واقع الأمر in effect, indeed, as a matter
of fact, actually, really, in reality; بواقع biwāqi‘
i to the .mount of (with foll. figure);
غير واقع untrue, unreal; intransitive
(gram.);
الأمر الواقع the accomplished fact; واقع
الحال factual findings, factual evidence,
facts; الواقع ان (anna) it is a fact that ..., as a
matter of fact ..., actually ...; دون الواقع بكثير
(dūna, bi-katīrin) far from being true; من
واقع ھذه السجلات (sijillāt) according to the
data contained in these registers
واقعة wāqi‘a incident, occurrence,
event; happening, development; fact;
accident, mishap; fighting, combat, battle
واقعي wāqi‘ī actual, real; de facto;
realistic; positive; positlvistic (philos.)
واقعية wāqi‘īya reality
موقع muwaqqi‘ signing; signer,
signatory
موقع muwaqqa‘ entered, recorded,
registered; signed
متوقع mutawaqqa‘ expected,
anticipated; supposed, presumable,
probable, likely │ من المتوقع it is expected
that ...
وقف waqafa يقف yaqifu (waqf, وقوف
wuqūf) to come to a standstill, come to a
stop; to stand still; to place o.s. post o.s.,
station o.s., take one’s stand, step ( فوق on
s.th.), stand ( فوق on, دون in the way of
s.th.); to stop ( عند or علي at; الى at, short of,
= to reach, extend to, go as far as); to halt;
to pause; to hesitate, waver, have doubts
or scruples ( في in s.th.); to use the pausal
form, pronounce a word without i‘rāb
ending (gram.); to rise, get up, stand up,
get on one’s feet; to plant o.s., station o.s.,
stand erect, hold o.s. erect; to stand; to
stand on end (hair); to withstand, resist,
oppose; to take up position ( علي .t); to
stand ( مع by s.o.), stick ( مع to s.o.), side ( مع
with s.o.), support, back ( مع s.o.); with
foll. participle; to continue to do s.th.,
keep doing s.th.; -- (wuqūf) to occupy o.s.
علي) with), attend ( علي to), go in for ( ;(علي
to read ( علي s.th.); to apply o.s., devote o.s.
علي) to); to take an interest, be interested (
علي in); to inquire, seek information,
inform o.s. ( علي about); to learn, be
informed ( علي of); to understand,
comprehend, grasp, learn ( علي s.th.); to
come to know ( علي s.th.). become
acquainted (Jo with); to know ( علي s.th.);
(waqf) to bring to a standstill, to a stop,
arrest, halt, stop ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.), put an
end ( ھ to s.th.); to hinder, prevent, hold
back ( ھ، ه or ب s.o., s.th., دون or عن from);
to make dependent, conditional ( على ھ
s.th. on), pass. wuqifa to depend, be
conditional ( على on); to apprise, inform,
notify ( على ه s.o. of), acquaint ( على ه s.o.
with), let s.o. ( ه) know ( على about); to tell,
advise, instruct ( على ھ s.o. about), call
s.o.’s ( ه) attention ( على to); to donate,
grant, create, institute ( على ه s.th. for a
pious or charitable purpose), bequeath as a
religious endowment or wakf ( على ھ s.th.
to); to make over, bequeath, transfer ( على
ھ s.th. to); to dedicate, consecrate, devote
على ھ) s.th. to a purpose); to assign,
appoint ( ھ s.th., ل to, to a purpose),
designate, set apart ( ھ s.th., ل for s.th., for
a purpose); to apply, devote ( نفسه nafsahū
o.s., ل to s.th., to a task) │ قف qif halt!
(command); stop! (e.g., on a traffic sign);
وقف امامه (amāmahū) to resist, oppose, stop
s.th., put an end to s.th.; وقف الى جانبه to be
on s.o.’s side; وقف الى يساره 1091 (yasārihī)
to stand at his left;   وقف (saddan)
to rise as an obstacle in the way to s.th.,
stand in the way to s.th.; لا يقف دون شيء
nothing will stand in his (or its) way,
nothing can stop him (or it); وقف حائرا to
be in a quandary, at a loss what to do; وقف
علي الحياد (ḥiyād) to remain neutral,
observe strict neutrality; وقف علي ساق الجد ل
(sāqi l-jidd) to throw o.s. into s.th.,
identify o.s. with s.th., go to great lengths,
make every effort in order to ...; وقف علي
شفير الھلاك (šafīri l-halāk) to be on the
brink of ruin, be about to perish; وقف عند
حد ... (ḥaddi) to stop at or short of …, go
as far as ...; وقف في وجه فلان ... (wajhi s.) to
offer s.o. resistance, stand up against s.o.;
وقف موقفا من (mauqifan) to assume an
attitude, take a stand toward or with
regard to; وقف موقفا ملؤه الحزم (mil’uhū l-
ḥazm) to assume an attitude of utmost
determination; وقف وقفا (waqfan) to assume
a posture; وقف وقفة (waqfatan) to stand
still; to assume an attitude; وقفه على العمل
(‘amal) to suspend s.o. from duty II to
bring to a standstill, to a stop, arrest, halt,
stop, hold up, check, stunt, obstruct,
trammel, hamper, slow down ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.); to park ( ھ an automobile); to raise,
erect, set up, set upright, place in an
upright position ( ھ s.th.); to arrest, seize ( ه
s.o.); to hold back, restrain, keep, prevent
عن ه) s.o. from); to acquaint ( علي ه s.o.
with); to institute a religious endowment
or wakf ( علي for the benefit of, in favor of)
│ وقفه عند حده (ḥaddihī) to put s.o. in his
proper place IV to make ( ھ s.th.) stand,
set up ( ھ s.th.); to bring to a standstill, to a
stop, arrest, halt, stop, hold up, check,
stunt, obstruct, trammel, hamper, slow
down ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to stop, suspend,
stay, discontinue, interrupt ( ھ s.th.); to
break off, sever ( ھ relations); to postpone,
put off, delay, defer ( ھ an activity); to
arrest, seize, apprehend, capture ( ه s.o.); to
suppress, ban ( ھ a newspaper); to acquaint
علي ه) s.o. with), inform, notify, apprise (
علي ه s.o. of), let s.o. ( ه) know ( علي about);
to tell, advise, instruct ( علي ه s.o. about),
call s.o.’s ( ه) attention ( علي to); to donate,
grant, create, institute ( علي ه s.th. for a
pious or charitable purpose), bequeath as a
religious endowment or wakf ( علي ھ s.th.
to); to bequeath, make over, transfer ( علي
ھ s.th. to); to assign, appoint ( علي ھ s.th.
to), designate, set apart ( علي ھ s.th. for); to
devote ( علي ھ s.th. to a purpose); to spend
ھ) efforts, علي for) │ اوقف اھتمامه علي
(htimāmahū) to concentrate on; اوقف تنفيذ
الحكم (tanfīd l-ḥukm) to stay the execution
of a sentence, grant a reprieve; to stay the
execution (of a judgment in a civil case),
arrest a judgment (jur.); اوقف حركة المرور
(ḥarakata l-murūr) to obstruct traffic; اوقفه
عن المرور (‘amal) to relieve s.o. of his post,
remove s.o. from office V to stop, halt,
come to a stop, put in a stop, stop over; to
come to a standstill; to stand still; to reach
a deadlock (fig., of negotiations, and the
like); to pause ( عن in an activity), suspend,
interrupt ( عن s.th.); to stop, quit ( عن s.th.,
doing s.th.), discontinue ( عن s.th.); to
desist, refrain, abstain ( عن from); to
waver, be undecided, hesitate ( في in s.th.);
to depend, be dependent, conditional ( علي
on); to rest, be based ( علي on), be due ( علي
to); to consist ( علي in) VI to fight each
other; to meet in battle X to ask ( ه s.o.) to
stop; to bring to a stop, to stop, halt, hold
up, detain, check, impede, obstruct,
trammel, hamper, slow down ( ھ، ه s.o.,
s.th.), stunt, arrest ( ھ s.th.); to give s.o. ( (ه
pause; to call on a vessel ( ھ ) to stop; to try
to hold or retain; to hold ( ھ s.th.; fig.) │
استوقف نظره (naẓarahū) to catch s.o.’s eye,
arouse s.o.’s attention; استوقف الانتباه to
arrest the attention 1092
وقف waqf stopping, stop; halting, halt;
discontinuation, suspensions, stay,
standstill; pausing, resting; stagnation,
dullness, listlessness (of the market);
pause (gram.); checking, restraining,
prevention; interruption, hitch,
impediment, obstacle, obstruction;
suspension from duty, removal from
office, discharge, dismissal; blocking (of
all account), stoppage (of salaries); -- (pl.
اوقاف auqāf) religious endowment, wakf,
“habeus” (Isl. Law); endowment (in
general), endowment fund; unalienable
property │ كان وقفا علي (waqfan) to be
completely dependent on; وقفا علي
restricted to; وقف اھلي (ahlī), وقف خاص
(kāṣṣ) or (ir.) وقف ذرية w. durrīya family
endowment, private will, estate in
mortmain entailed in such a manner that
its proceeds will accrue to the members of
the donor’s family, and, after the death of
its last descendent, go to a charitable
purpose; وقف خيري (kairī), (tun.) وقف عام
(‘āmm) public endowment, endowment,
set apart for a charitable or religious
purpose, public wakf; ناظر الوقف nāẓir alw.
administrator of all endowment,
trustee, curator; الأوقاف the wakf system,
estates in mortmain; وزارة الأوقاف the
ministry entrusted with government
supervision of estates in mortmain, will
ministry; وقف اطلاق النار w. iṭlāq an-nār
cease-fire (mil.); وقف التنفيذ stay of
execution (jur.); اكل خبز الوقف (kubza l-w.)
to have independent means of subsistence,
have a sinecure
وقفي waqfī of or pertaining to
endowments or the wakf system, wakf- (in
compounds)
وقفية waqfīya wakf system, endowment
system; list of religious endowments, of
the estates in mortmain; original charter of
a wakf
وقفة waqfa (n. vic.) pl. -āt standing,
stand, stance; position, posture; halt, stop;
pause; 0 period, full stop (punctuation
mark); station, way station, specif. that on
Mount ‘Arafāt during the Pilgrimage;
attitude, stand, policy; eve of a religious
festival, also وقفة العيد الصغير │ يوم الوقفة w.
al-‘īd aṣ-ṣagīr the day preceding ‘īd alfiṭr,
the Feast of Breaking the Ramadan
Fast on the last day of Shawwal; وقفة العيد
الكبير (kabīr) the day preceding ‘īd al-aḍḥā
the Feast of Immolation on the 10th day of
Zu’lhijja
وقاف waqqāf overseer, supervisor,
warden, keeper
وقوف wuqūf stopping, stop; halting,
halt; standing; stand, stance; (with (:علي
study, pursuit, occupation (with), search,
inquiry (into), investigation, cognizance,
knowledge, understanding,
comprehension; (Isl. Law) abeyance of
rights; pl. of واقف wāqif standing
موقف mauqif pl. مواقف mawāqif2
stopping place; station; (cab, etc.) stand;
(bus, train, etc.) stop; parking lot, parking
place; stopover, stop; place, site; scene,
scenery; position, posture; situation;
attitude; stand, position, opinion │ موقف
  (ḥarbī) strategic situation; موقف
سياسي (siyāsī) political situation; موقف عدائي
(‘adā’ī) hostile attitude; مھيمن الموقف
muhaimin al-m. master of the situation;
موقفه من his attitude toward, his stand with
regard to
توقيف tauqīf raising, setting up,
erection; apprehension, detention, seizure,
arrest; parking
ايقاف īqāf raising, setting up, erection;
apprehension, detention, seizure, arrest;
stopping, halting, checking, arresting,
stunting, trammeling, hampering,
impeding, obstruction; stoppage,
suspension (e.g., of work); interruption,
discontinuation; postponement, deferment,
delay, stay, arrest; removal from office,
suspension from duty; notice, notification
│ ايقاف التنفيذ 1093 stay of execution (jur.);
ايقاف الحكم i. al-ḥukm arrest of judgment
(jur.); ايقاف الدعوى ī. ad-da‘wā stay of
proceedings (jur.); ايقاف الدفع ī. ad-daf‘
delay of payment, respite, moratorium;
ايقاف العمل ī. al-‘amal suspension of work
توقف tawaqquf halt, cessation,
standstill; pause; stopover, stop (also. of
an airplane); hesitation, wavering;
dependence ( على on) │ التوقف عن الدفع
(daf‘) suspension of payment (jur.)
واقف wāqif stopping, baiting, coming to
a stop; standing still, motionless, at rest;
standing; upright, erect; acquainted,
familiar ( علي with s.th.); bystander,
spectator, onlooker (during a street scene);
wakif, donor of a wakf │ علي الواقف
instantly, on the spot, right away, at once;
ھب واقفا habba wāqifan to get on one’s
feet, get up, stand up, rise
موقوف mauqūf arrested, stopped;
suspended; interrupted, discontinued;
delayed, postponed, deferred;
apprehended, detained, arrested; person
under arrest, prisoner; suspended from
duty, removed from office; entailed
through an endowment, established as a
wakf; unalienable, in mortmain; donated,
granted, instituted; dedicated. devoted;
designated, set apart, reserved ( علي for);
dependent, conditional ( علي on); based,
resting ( علي on); abeyant, in abeyance
(rights; Isl. Law) │ الموقوف عليه beneficiary
or usufructuary of a wakf; الأراضي الموقوفة
(arāḍī) the estates in mortmain; لاعب
موقوف disqualified player (athlet.); موقوف
قيد المحاكمة (qaida l-muḥākama) detained
pending investigation. committed for trial
متوقف mutawaqqif dependent,
conditional ( على on)
وقل V to climb, mount
وقواق 1 waqwāq and واقواق wāqwāq in the
descriptions of Arab geographers, name of
two different groups of islands (one east
of China, the other located in the Indian
Ocean)
وقوق 2 waqwaq cuckoo
وقى 1 waqā يقي yaqī (waqy, وقاية wiqāya) to
guard, preserve ( ھ s.th.), take good care (
ھ of); to safeguard, shield, shelter,
preserve, protect, keep ( ھ ه s.o. from),
guard ( ھ ه s.o. against); to protect, offer or
afford protection ( ھ against); to prevent,
obviate ( ھ a danger) V and VIII
اتقى ittaqā to beware, be wary ( ھ of),
guard, be on one’s guard, protect o.s.
make suer ( ھ against) │ اتقى لله to fear
God; اتقى لله في حق الشيء (ḥaqqi) (lit.: to
fear God with regard to s.th., i.e.) to spare
s.th. or deal mercifully with s.th. for fear
of God, show regard for s.th. for God’s
sake, make s.th. a matter of conscience
وقي waqī protection; safeguard
وقاء waqā’, wiqā‘ protection;
prevention
وقاية wiqāya protection; prevention;
precaution; obviation, averting; defense (
من against); prophylaxis (mat.) │ الوقاية من
الغارات الجوية (jawwīya) anti-aircraft
defense; معدات الوقاية mu‘addāt al-w. safety
device
وقاية waqqāya protective covering
وقائي wiqā’ī preventive │ الطب الوقائي
(ṭibb) preventive medicine, prophylaxis
وقي waqīy protecting; protector,
preserver, guardian
تقوى taqwā godliness, devoutness, piety
تقى tuqan godliness, devoutness, piety
تقي taqīy pl. اتقياء atqiyā’ godfearing,
godly, devout, pious
تقية taqīya fear, caution, prudence; (in
Shiitic Islam) dissimulation of one’s
religion (under duress or in the face of
threatening damage) 1094
واق wāqin preserving, guarding,
protecting; preventive, preservative,
prophylactic; protective; guardian,
protector │ واق من الريح (rīḥ) protecting
from the wind; درع واق (dir‘) protective
armor; صفحة واقية (ṣafḥa) flyleaf; dust
cover, jacket, wrapper; مظلة واقية (miẓalla)
parachute; معطف واق (mi‘ṭaf) raincoat; قناع
واق gas mask
واقية wāqiya protection, shelter, shield;
a preventive, a preservative
متق muttaqin godfearing, godly, devout,
pious
2□ وقية wiqīya (eg.), wuqīye (Syr.) a weight, in
Eg. = 1/12 raṭl = 37 g; in Aleppo = 320 g,
in Beirut = 213.39 g, in Jerusalem = 240g
وكأ V and VIII اتكأ ittaka’a to support one’s
weight ( على on), lean ( على against, on); to
recline ( على in a chair, and the like)
تكأة tuka’a staff; support, prop, stay;
back (of a chair, etc.); idler, lazybones
توكؤ tawakku’ resting, leaning, reclining
اتكاء ittikā’ resting, leaning, reclining
متكأ muttaka’ pl. -āt support, prop, stay;
cushion, pad; sofa; couch
وكب wakaba يكب yakibu (wakb, وكوب wukūb,
وكبان wakabān) to walk slowly, proceed or
advance slowly III to accompany ( ه s.o.),
escort ( ه s.o., ھ s.th.); to convoy,
accompany as military escort ( ھ s.th.)
موكب maukib pl. مواكب mawākib 2
parade, pageant; procession; mounted
escort, retinue, cortege; triumph │ موكب
المشاعيل torchlight procession; موكب الجنازة
m. al-janāza funeral procession
مواكبة muwākaba military escort,
convoying, convoy duty
وكد II to make fast, fasten ( ھ s.th.); to
corroborate, substantiate ( ھ s.th.); to
confirm, affirm ( ھ s.th.); to give assurance
ھ) of), assert ( ھ s.th.) V to be
corroborated, substantiated, asserted,
affirmed, confirmed; to ascertain ( من a
fact), make sure, convince o.s. ( من of)
وكد wakd wish, desire, intention, aim,
goal, end, purpose, object, aspiration,
endeavor, effort, attempt
وكيد wakīd corroborated, substantiated,
confirmed; sure, certain; positive
توكيد taukīd pl. -āt, تواكيد tawākīd2
confirmation; affirmation, assurance;
assertion; emphasis, stress; (gram.)
intensifying apposition; pleonasm
موكد muwakkad sure, certain, definite
متوكد mutawakkid sure, certain, positive,
convinced
وكر wakr pl. اوكار aukār, وكور wukūr nest,
bird’s nest; aerie; habitation, abode,
retreat; O aircraft hangar │ وكر اللصوص
den of robbers
وكرة wakra pl. وكر wukar bird’s nest
وكز wakaza يكز yakizu (wakz) to strike with the
fist ( ه s.o.); to thrust, push, hit; to spur ( ھ a
horse); to pierce, transfix ( ب ه s.o. with)
وكس wakaaa يكس yakisu (waks) to decline in
value, depreciate; to decrease, diminish,
reduce, lower ( ھ the value or price of);
pass. wukisa to suffer losses (in business)
II to decrease, diminish, reduce, lower ( ھ
the value of)
وكس waks decline, drop (of value or
price); depreciation; loss │ باغ بالوكوس to
sell at a loss
وكع waku‘a يوكع yauku‘u ( وكاعة wakā‘a) to be
hard, strong, sturdy
ميكعة mīka‘a plowshare 1095
وكف wakafa يكف yakifu (wakf, وكفان wakafān)
to drip, trickle; to be defective and
leak
وكف wakf leaking, leak (of a ship)
وكل wakala يكل yakilu (wakl and وكول wukūl) to
entrust ( الى ھ s.th. to s.o., with s.th. s.o.),
assign ( الى ھ s.th. to s.o.), commission,
charge ( ھ الى s.o. with), put s.o. ( الى ) in
charge ( ھ of) II to authorize, empower,
appoint as representative or agent ( ه s.o.);
to put s.o. ( ه) in charge ( ب of) engage as
legal counsel ( ه an attorney, عن or ب in a
matter in dispute); to invest s.o. ( ه) with
full power, give s.o. power of attorney ( في
in); to entrust ( ب ه to s.o. s.th.) III to be on
a confidential basis ( ه with s.o.), be in a
position of mutual trust ( ه with s.o.); to
trust ( ه s.o.) IV to entrust, assign ( الى ھ
s.th., a task, to s.o.) V to be appointed as
representative or agent, take over or act as
(legal) representative; to act as
commissioner, as agent, or by proxy ( في in
s.th.); to take upon o.s. assume ( ب s.th.);
to be responsible, answerable, answer,
vouch ( ب for), guarantee, warrant ( ب
s.th.); to rely, depend ( على on), place one’s
confidence ( على in), trust ( على in) │ توكل
على لله to trust in God, put o.s. in God’s
hands VI to trust each other; to react with
indifference, be noncommital, indifferent
VIII اتكل ittakala to rely, depend ( على on),
trust ( على in)
وكيل wakīl pl. وكلاء wukalā’2 authorized
representative, attorney in fact, proxy;
(business) manager; head clerk; deputy,
vice-; agent; trustee; mandatary, defense
counsel; attorney, lawyer; (Syr., mil.)
approx.: technical sergeant │ وكيل الأحباس
in Tunis, commissioner for estates in
mortmain; الوكيل البابوي (bābawī) papal
legate; وكيل بلوك امين w. bulūk amīn (1939
وكيل امين ) approx.: quartermaster corporal
(mil.; Eg.); وكيل اونباشي w. onbāšī (1939
وكيل محارب w. muḥārib) private first class
(Eg.); وكيل باشجاويش staff sergeant (Eg.);
وكيل جاويش، وكيل شاويش ( ١٩٣٩ وكيل مجاھد w.
mujāhid) sergeant; وكيل ضابط
noncommissioned officer (Tun.); company
sergeant-major, master sergeant (Syr.,
mil.); وكيل الحق العام w. al-ḥaqq al-‘āmm
government commissioner at Tunisian
courts (Tun.); وكيل قنصل w. qunṣul viceconsul;
وكيل مدير w. mudīr deputy director;
وكيل الوزارة under-secretary of state
تكلة tukala one who relies on others,
who is incapable of attending to his own
affairs
وكالة wakāla pl. -āt representation,
deputyship, proxy; full power, power of
attorney; management; agency; (Eg.) inn,
caravansary, resthouse, khan │ وكالة الأنباء
w. al-anbā’ news agency, wire service;
وكالة الإشھار w. al-išhār advertising agency
نوكيل taukīl appointment as
representative, agent, deputy, or proxy,
delegation of authority; authorization;
power of attorney, full power; warrant of
attorney
توكل tawakkul trust, confidence; trust in
God; passivity of living (of the early
ascetics and mystics)
تواكل tawākul mutual confidence or
trust; indifference
اتكال ittikāl trust, confidence, reliance
موكل muwakkil constituent, principle,
mandator
موكل muwakkal commissioned, charged
ب) with), in charge ( ب of), responsible,
answerable ( ب for)
متوكلي mutawakkilī: المملكة المتوكلية اليمنية
(mamlaka, yamanīya) the Yemenite
Kingdom (official designation)
موكم mūkim offensive, hurting (word) 1096
وكن wacana يكن yakinu (wakn, وكون wukūn) to
brood, Bit on its eggs (bird); to hatch,
incubate ( على or ھ eggs)
وكن wakn pl. وكون wukūn bird’s nest,
aerie
وكنة wakna, wukna pl. wukunāt nest
وكى wakā يكي yakī to tie up ( ھ a waterskin, or
the like)
وكاء wikā’ pl. اوكية aukiya thong or
string for tying up a waterskin or bag
ولج walaja يلج yaliju ( لجة lija, ولوج wulūj) to
enter ( الى or ھ s.th., into s.th.), penetrate (
الى or ھ into) │ ولج الباب to go in by the
door IV to make ( ھ s.th.) enter ( في s.th.
else); to introduce, insert, interpose,
intromit, interpolate, thrust ( في ھ s.th.
into) V = I; to engage ( ھ in), take upon
o.s. ( ھ s.th.)
ولوج wulūj penetration, entering, entry
وليجة walija intimate friend, confidant;
secret depth (of the heart)
ايلاج ilei; insertion, intromission,
interposition, interpolation, intercalation
مولج maulij pl. موالج mawālij2 entrance
موالح see ملح
ولد walada يلد yalidu ( ولادة wilāda, لدة lida, مولد
maulid) to bear ( ه a child), give birth ( ه to);
to beget, generate, procreate; to bring
forth, produce ( ھ s.th.) │ ولدت منه to have
a child by s.o. (woman) II to assist in
childbirth ( ھا a woman; of a midwife); to
generate, produce ( من ه s.th. from); to
engender, breed, cause, occasion, ( ھ s.th.);
to bring up, raise ( ه a child) IV to make ( ھا
a woman) bear children │ اولدھا طفلا
(ṭiflan) he got her with child V to be born;
to be descended ( من from s.o.); to be
generated, produced ( من from), be brought
forth, be engendered, bred, caused,
occasioned ( من by); to originate, grow,
develop, arise, proceed, follow, result ( من
from) VI to propagate, reproduce,
multiply by generation X to want children;
to want the generation ( من ھ of s.th. from),
want to produce ( من ھ s.th. from)
ولد walad pl. اولاد aulād, ولد wuld
descendant, offspring, scion; child; son;
boy; young animal, young one; (coll.)
progeny, offspring, children │ ولد الزنا w.
az-zinā illegitimate child, bastard; ولد
الملاعنة w. al-mulā‘ana child whose
paternity is contested by لعان li‘ān (q.v.)
(Isl. Law)
ولدة walda childbirth, birth │ ولدت اثنين
في ولدة she gave birth to two at a time
لدة lida childbirth, birth; (pl. لدون lidūn,
لدات lidāt) person of the same age,
contemporary; coetaneous
ولادة wilāda parturition, childbearing,
childbirth, birth, confinement, delivery │
ولادة معجلة (mu‘ajjala) premature birth;
حديث الولادة newborn; علم الولادة ‘ilm al-w.
obstetrics (med.)
ولادة wallāda frequently producing
offspring, bearing many children; fertile,
prolific, fruitful
ولود walūd frequently producing
offspring, bearing many children; fertile,
prolific, fruitful; littering, having young
ولودية wulūdīya childishness, puerility
وليد walīd pl. ولدان wildān newborn
child, baby; boy, son; young, new; (with
foll. genit.) the product of, the result of,
occasioned by, engendered by, sprung
from │ وليد ساعته w. sā‘atihi conceived on
the spur of the moment (idea, plan, etc.)
وليدة walīda pl. ولائد walā’id2 newborn
girl; girl; product
وليد wulaid little child
مولد maulid pl. موالد mawālid2
birthplace; birthday; anniversary, birthday
1097 of a saint (also Chr.) │ المولد النبوي
(nabawī), مولد النبي m. an-nabīy the
prophet’s birthday; لغة المولد lugat al-m.
mother tongue, native language
ميلاد milād pl. مواليد mawālīd2 birth; time
of birth. nativity; birthday; pl. مواليد age
classes, age groups (recruitment, etc.) │
عيد الميلاد ‘īd al-m. Christmas (Chr.); قبل
ميلاد السيد المسيح (sayyid) or only قبل الميلاد
before Christ, B.C.; نقصان المواليد nuqṣān
al-m. falling birth rate
ميلادي mīlādī birthday- (in compounds);
relating to the birth of Christ; after Christ,
A.D. │ سنة ميلادية (sana) year of the
Christian era
توليد taulīd procreation, begetting;
generation, producing, production;
midwifery, assistance at childbirth,
delivery │ دار التوليد and مصحة للتوليد
(maṣaḥḥa) maternity home; فن التوليد fann
at-t. obstetrics, midwifery; معمل (محطة) توليد
القوة الكھربائية ma‘mal (maḥaṭṭaṭ) t. al-quwā
al-kahrabā’īya electric power station; توليد
الھلال “generation of the crescent”, the first
appearance of the new moon on the first
day of the month
تولد tawallud generation, production
استيلاد istilād generation, production
والد wālid procreator, progenitor; father,
parent; الوالدان the parents, father and
mother
والدة wālida pl. -āt mother; parturient
woman, woman in childbed
والدي wālidī paternal
مولود maulūd produced, born, come into
the world; birth; birthday; -- (pl. مواليد
mawālīd2) newborn baby, infant; child,
son; pl. مواليد creations, novelties,
nouveautés │ المواليد الثلاثة the three
kingdoms of nature
مولد muwallid generating, producing,
procreative, generative; procreator,
progenitor; obstetrician, accoucheur; --
(pl. -āt) generator (tech.) │ O مولد التيار m.
at-tayyār or مولد كھربائي (kahrabā’ī)
generator, dynamo; O مولد التيار المتناوب m.
at-t. al-mutanāwib alternating, current
generator, alternator; مولد الحموضة oxygen;
مولد الماء hydrogen; مولد ذري (darrī) atomic
reactor
مولدة muwallida pl. -āt midwife
مولد muwallad born, begotten,
produced, generated; brought up, raised;
born and raised among Arabs (but not of
pure Arab blood); not truly old Arabic,
introduced later into the language, postclassical
(esp. of words); half-breed, halfcaste,
half-blood; (pl. -āt) product; pl.
المولدون the postclassical (also, recent)
Arab authors
ولدنة waldana childhood; childish trick,
puerility
ولس walasa يلس yalisu (wals) to deceive, cheat,
dupe ( ه s.o.) III to play the hypocrite; to
double-cross ( ه s.o.); to misrepresent,
distort ( ب s.th.) IV to misrepresent, distort
ب) s.th.)
ولس wals fraud, deceit, deception;
cunning, craft, double-dealing, duplicity
موالسة muwālasa fraud, deceit,
deception; cunning, craft, double-dealing,
duplicity
ولط wall volt (el.)
ولع wali‘a يولع yaula‘u (wala‘, ولوع walū‘) to
catch fire, burn; to be dead set ( ب on), be
mad ( ب after), be crazy ( ب about), be
passionately fond ( ب of), be madly in love
ب) with); to glow with enthusiasm ( ب for),
be enthusiastic ( ب about) II to kindle, light
ھ) s.th.), set fire ( ھ to); to make ( ه s.o.)
crave ( ب s.th.), inflame s.o.’s ( ه) desire ( ب
for), enamor ( ب ه s.o. of) IV = II; pass.
ūli‘a to be fond, enamored ( ب of s.th.), be
very devoted, 1098 be given ( ب to); to be
dead set, be hell-bent ( ب on); to be in love
ب) with) V = I
ولع wala‘ passionate love; ardent desire,
craving; passion
ولع wali‘ madly in love
ولوع walū‘ greed, craving, eager desire;
love
ولاعة wallā‘a (cigarette) lighter
تولع tawallu‘ passionate love; ardent
desire, craving; passion
مولع mūla‘ in love ( ب with); dead set,
hell-bent ( ب on), mad ( ب after), crazy ( ب
about); passionately fond, enamored ( ب of
s.th.); enthusiastic ( ب about), full of
enthusiasm ( ب for)
ولغ walaga يلغ yalagu (walg, ولوغ wulūg) to
lick, lap (esp., of a dog); to defile ( في
s.o.’s honor) │ ولغ في الدم (dam) to taste
blood, become bloodthirsty
ولكن wa-lākin, wa-lākinna (the latter with foil.
acc. or pers. suffix) but, however, yet
ولم IV to give a banquet
ولم walm, walam saddle girth, cinch
وليمة walīma pl. ولائم walā’im2 banquet
وله walaha, يله yalihu, waliha يوله yaulahu
(walah) to lose one’s head, become mad
(with love, grief, or the like), be thrown
off one’s balance, go off the deep end II
and IV to make crazy, throw into utter
confusion ( ه s.o.), drive ( ه s.o.) out of his
wits V = I; to be infatuated ( ب with)
وله walah distraction, utter confusion,
giddiness, hare-brainedness; painful
agitation; passionate love, amorous
rapture
ولھان walhān2 distracted, confused,
bewildered, out of one's wits, giddy,
harebrained; passionately in love
توله tawalluh distraction, utter
confusion, giddiness, hare-brainedness;
infatuation
واله wālih distracted, confused,
bewildered, out of one’s wits, giddy,
harebrained; grief-stricken, deeply
afflicted
متوله mutawallih distracted, confused,
bewildered, out of one's wits, giddy, harebrained
ولو see و
ولول walwala to cry “woo”; to lament, wail,
howl, break into loud wails
ولولة walwala pl. ولاول walāwil2 wailing,
wails
ولي waliya يلي yalī to be near s.o. or
s.th. ( ه، ھ ), be close ( ھ، ه to), lie next ( ھ
to); to adjoin ( ھ s.th.), be adjacent ( ھ to);
to follow ( ھ، ه s.o., s.th.); to border ( ھ
on); -- ( ولاء walā’, ولاية walāya) to be a
friend ( ه of s.o.), be friends ( ه with); -- (
ولاية walāya, wilāya) to be in charge ( على
or ھ of s.th.), manage, run, administer,
govern, rule ( على or ھ s.th.), have power,
authority, or the command ( على or ھ over)
│ ما يلي the following, what follows; كما يلي
as follows, like this; فيما يلي in what
follows, in the following, in the sequel; ما
يلي البدن من الملابس (badana) the underwear,
the underclothes; غرفة تلي السقف (gurfa,
saqf) a chamber under the roof; ولى الحكم
(ḥukma) to take over the government,
come into power II to turn ( ھ ه to or
toward s.o. s.th., e.g., the back, the face of
s.th.); to turn away ( عن or ه from s.th.),
avoid, shun ( عن or ه s.th.); to turn around,
turn back, wheel around; to flee ( عن or ھfrom
s.th.); to pass, go by, glide away
(days, years); to appoint as manager,
director, administrator, governor, or ruler (
ه s.o.); to put ( ه s.o.) in cbarge ( ھ of),
make s.o. ( ه) the head of ( ھ ); to entrust ( ھ
ه s.o. with, to s.o. s.th.), commission,
charge ( ھ ه ١٠٩٩ s.o. with), assign ( ه ھ to
s.o. s.th.) │ ولاه دبره (duburahū) or ولاه ظھره
(ẓahrahū) to turn one’s back on s.o. or
s.th.; ولوا عنه الأدبار they turned their backs
on him, they turned away from him; ولى
ھاربا (hāriban) to wake to flight, run away;
ولى وجھه (wajhahū) to turn, face ( ھ
toward) III to be a friend. a helper, a
supporter, a patron, a protector; to help,
aid, assist ( ه s.o.); to do constantly,
incessantly ( ھ s.th.); to continue without
interruption ( ھ s.th., to do s.th.). go about
s.th. ( ھ ) successively, systematically; to
pursue, practice, cultivate ( ھ s.th., e.g.,
arts); to follow immediately ( ھ s.th.;
time), be subsequent ( ھ to) IV to bring
close ( ھ ه to s.o. a.th.); to turn ( ھ ه toward
s.o. one’s back. or the like); to commit ( ھ
ه to s.o. the care or responsibility for),
entrust, commission, charge ( ھ ه s.o.
with); to do, render ( ھ ه s.o. a favor); to do
ھ ه) to s.o. s.th. harmful), bring ( ه ھ upon
s.o. s.th.); to display, evince ( ھ ه toward.
s.o. s.th., e.g., indifference) │ اولاه ثقته
(tiqatahū) to have confidence in s.o.; اولاه
معروفا to do s.o. a favor V to occupy, fill,
hold ( ھ an office), be entrusted ( ھ with),
be in charge ( ھ of); to take possession,
take charge ( ھ of), take over, take upon
o.s., undertake, take in hand ( ھ an affair),
attend ( ھ to); to take care ( ھ of), see ( ھ to
s.th.), arrange ( ھ for s.th.); to assume the
responsibility ( ھ for), seize control ( ھ of);
to take over the government, come into
power; to turn away, desist, refrain ( عن
from), forgo ( عن s.th.) │ توالى الحكم
(ḥukma) to be in power, hold supreme
power; to seize power; تولاه اليأس (ya’su) he
was seized (or overcome) by despair VI to
follow in succession, without interruption;
to come continually ( على to), arrive
constantly ( على at); to progress, continue
(e.g., an advance, a march) X to possess
o.s., take possession ( على of), seize ( على
s.th.), make 0.s. muter or ( على ); to receive
as one’s own, take over, capture,
confiscate, requisition, occupy ( على s.th.);
to overpower, overwhelm, overcome ( على
s.o.); to take prisoner, capture ( على s.o.)
ولى walīy near, nearby; neighboring,
adjacent; close; -- (pl. اولياء auliyā’2)
helper, supporter, benefactor, sponsor;
friend, close associate; relative; patron,
protector; legal guardian. curator, tutor; a
man close to God, holy man, saint (in the
popular religion of Islam); master;
proprietor, possessor, owner │ ولي لله the
friend of God; ولي الأمر w. al-a. the
responsible manager, the man in charge;
ruler; tutor, legal guardian; ولي w. ad-dam
avenger of blood, executor of a blood
feud; ولي السجادة w. as-sajāda title of the
leader of a Sufi order in his capacity of
inheritor of the founder’s prayer rug; ولي
العھد w. al-‘ahd successor to the throne,
heir apparent, crown prince; ولي النعمة w.
an-ni‘ma benefactor
ولية walīya holy woman, saint; woman,
lady
ولاء walā’ friendship, amity;
benevolence, good will; fidelity, fealty,
allegiance; devotion, loyalty; clientage
(Isl. Law) │ معاھدة الولاء mu‘āhadat w.
treaty of friendship
ولائي walā’ī friendly, amicable, of
friendship
ولاية wilāya sovereign power,
sovereignty; rule, government; -- (pl. -āt)
administrative district headed by a vali,
vilayet (formerly, under the Ottoman
Empire), province; state │ الولايات المتحدة
(muttaḥida) the United States; ولاية العھد w.
al-‘ahd succession to the throne; --
walāya guardianship, curatorship; legal
power; friendship │ ھم على ولاية واحدة they
stick together, they assist each other 1100
اولى aulā more entitled ( ب to); worthier,
more deserving; more appropriate, better
suited ( ب for), more suitable, more
adequate ( ب to); see also under │ اول
بالأولى or من باب الأولى with greater reason,
all the more reason, the more so; ھي أولى به
منه it is more natural for her than for him,
it is for her rather than for him, she is
more entitled to it than he is
أولوية aulawīya priority; precedence
مولى maulan pl. موال mawālin master,
lord; protector, patron; client; charge;
mend, companion, associate; المولى the
Lord, God; مولاى maulāya and مولانا
maulānā form of address to a sovereign
مولاة maulāh mistress, lady
مولوى maulawī pl. īya a dervish of the
order of Maula Jalāl-ud-din Rumi
مواليا mawāliyā see موال 2 mawwāl
تولية tauliya appointment (as vali, to an
executive position, as successor); resale at
cost price (Isl. Law)
ولاء wilā’ succession, sequence, series,
continuation; ولاء wilā’an or على ولاء
successively, uninterruptedly
موالاة muwālāh friendship; contract of
clientage (Isl. Law); constancy,
incessancy, continuance (of an action)
ايلاء īlā’ annulment of a marriage after
the husband’s sworn testimony to have
refrained from marital intercourse for a
period of at least four months (Isl. Law)
تول tawallin entrance office, taking
over of an office to management,
direction, administration, government
توال tawālin continuous succession,
uninterrupted sequence, continuation │
على التوالي continuously, without
interruption; successively, consecutively,
one after the other, one by one; على توالي
الأيام (t. l-ayyām) in the course of time; بتول
ي السنين bi-t. s-sinīn with the years, in time,
as time goes on
استيلاء istīlā’ appropriation; seizure,
taking possession; capture, conquest
وال wālin pl. ولاة wulāh leading,
managing, executive, administrative;
ruler; governor, vali; prefect
(administrative officer, Mor.) │ ولاة الأمور
the leading personalities, the leaders
موال muwālin mend, helper, supporter;
client, feudal tenant, vassal, dependent,
partisan, follower, adherent
موالية muwāliya clientage, clientele,
following, adherence
متوال mutawālin entrusted,
commissioned, in charge │ متولي الأعمال
(ir.) chargé d’affaires
متوال mutawālin successive,
consecutive, uninterrupted, incessant; --
(pl. متاولة matāwila) member of the Shiite
sect of Metualis in Syria
ومأ IV to motion, signal, beckon, make a sign;
to point out, indicate ( الى s.th.), point ( الى
to); to make a gesture
ايماء īmā’ mimic action, gestures,
gesticulations │ فن الإيماء fann al-ī.
pantomime, dumb show (as an art); إيماء
الى īmā’an ilā with reference to
إيماءة imā’a pl. -āt gesture; nod
مومأ mūma’: المومأ اليه the one referred
to, the above-mentioned
ومد wamid sultry, muggy
ومس wamasa يمس yamisu (wams) to rub off; to
smooth, polish ( ب ھ s.th. with)
مومس mūmis and مومسة mūmisa pl. –āt
prostitute
ومض wamaḍa يمض yamiḍu (wamḍ, وميض
wamīḍ, ومضان wamaḍān) to flash IV to
glance furtively; to wink ( ه at s.o.) 1101
ومضة wamḍa (n. vic.) pl. -āt blink,
blinking; gleam of light; reflection of light
وميض wamīḍ blinking, sparkle, twinkle
ومق wamiqa يمق yamiqu (wamq) to love
tenderly ( ه s.o.)
موماة maumāh, موماء maumā’ pl. موام mawāmin
desert
ون wanna i (wann) to buzz, hum (bee)
الوندل al-wandal the Vandals
ونش (Engl. winch) winš pl. -āt, أوناش aunāš
winch; crane, derrick │ ونش دوار (dawwār)
derrick crane; ونش عائم floating crane; ونش
باليد (yad) hand winch
ونى wanā يني yanī, waniya يونى yaunā ( ونى
wany, wanan, wanīy, وناء winā’) to be or
become faint, weak, tired, dispirited,
despondent, sapless, effete, lose vigor,
flag, languish │ لا يني (with foll. imperf.)
not to tire (of doing s.th.); بھمة لا تني bihimmatin
lā tani with unflagging zeal II to
be slow, slack, lax, negligent, remiss ( في
in some work) VI to flag, languish, relax,
slacken; to be or become slack, limp,
flabby; to hesitate, waver, temporize ( في
in), wait ( في with)
ونى wanan slackening, relaxation;
slackness; weakness, languor, lassitude
وناء wanā’ slackening, relaxation;
slackness; weakness, languor, lassitude
توان tawānin tiring, flagging; slowness;
flabbiness, limpness; negligence,
indifference
وان wānin weak, feeble, spent,
exhausted │ غير وان unremitting, untiring,
unflagging
متوان mutawānin weak, languid, slack,
limp, flabby; negligent, remiss, slow,
tardy
وھب wahaba يھب yahabu (wahb) to give,
donate ( ل or ه ھ s.th. to s.o.); to grant,
accord ( ل or ھ ه s.th. to s.o.); to present ( ل
or ھ ه with s.th. s.o.); to endow ( ل or ه s.o.,
ھ with) │ وھبته من ذات نفسھا she gave
herself unreservedly to him; ھب hab
suppose that ..., assuming that ...; ھبني فعلت
habnī fa’altu suppose I had done it; – ھبني
ھبني (with foll. acc.) suppose I were -- or I
were; ولنھب (wal-nahab) let us suppose
that ...
ھبة hiba pl. -āt gift, present, donation,
grant │ عقد الھبة ‘aqd al-h. deed of gift
وھبة wahba tip, gratuity
وھابي wahhābī Wahabite; Wahabi
الوھابية al-wahhābīya Wahabiism
موھبة mauhiba pl. مواھب mawtāhib2 gift;
talent
ايھاب īhāb donation, grant(ing)
واھب wāhib giver, donor
موھوب mauhūb given, granted; gifted;
talented; موھوب له recipient of a gift or
grant, donée
وھج wahaja يھج yahiju (wahj, وھجان wahajān)
to glow, burn, blaze, flame; to be
incandescent; to gleam, glitter, glisten IV
to light, kindle ( ھ the fire) V to glow,
burn, blaze, flame; to be incandescent; to
gleam, glitter, glisten; to flicker (eyes)
وھج wahaj blaze, fire; white heat,
incandescence; glare of the sun
وھاج wahhāj glowing; white-hot,
incandescent; blazing; sparkling, flashing;
brilliant, radiant │ نور وھاج (nūr) glaring
light; ذھب وھاج (dahab) glittering gold
وھيج wahīj blaze, fire; white heat,
incandescence; glare of the sun
وھجان wahajān fire, blaze; glow
وھد II to level, even, prepare ( ھ ل s.th. for)
وھد wahd lowland, low ground,
depression 1102
وھدة wahda pl. وھاد wihād, وھد wuhad
depression, lowland; abyss, precipice,
chasm, deep pit, gorge, ravine; lowness,
low level (of morals)
اوھد auhad2 low, depressed, low-lying
(land)
وھر wahara يھر yahiru (wahr) to involve in
difficulties ( ه s.o.); to frighten, scare ( ه
s.o.) II do.; to put out, disconcert, confuse
ه) s.o.)
وھرة wahra terror, fright, fear, alarm,
dismay, consternation
وھران wahrān2 Oran (seaport in NW
Algeria)
وھق wahq, wahaq pl. اوھاق awhāq lasso
وھل wahila يوھل yauhalu (wahal) to be
frightened, appalled, dismayed; to take
alarm II to frighten, scare, intimidate, cow
ه) s.o.), strike terror to s.o.’s heart ( (ه
وھل wahal terror, fright, fear, alarm,
dismay, consternation
وھلة wahla fright, terror; moment,
instant │ لأول وھلة li-awwali wahlatin at
first sight; right away, at once; في الوھلة
الأولى (ūlā) at first, first off
وھم wahama يھم yahimu (wahm) to imagine,
fancy, think, believe, suppose, presume,
guess, surmise; to misconstrue,
misinterpret ( في s.th.), have a wrong idea
or notion ( في of); -- wahima يوھم yauhamu
(waham) to make a mistake, be mistaken (
في in, about) II and IV to instill a delusion,
a prejudice, a groundless fear ( ه in s.o.); to
make ( ه s.o.) believe ( ان that), make as if V
to have a presentiment ( ھ of), suspect,
presume, imagine ( ه the existence of), be
under the delusion ( ھ of); to think, believe
ھ ھ) s.th. to he s.th. else), regard ( ھ ھ
s.th. as), take ( ھ ھ s.th. for) VIII اتھم
ittahama to suspect ( ه s.o.); to question,
doubt ( ھ a fact), have doubts ( ھ about); to
charge ( ب ه s.o. with), impute ( ب ه to s.o.
s.th.), suspect, accuse ( ب ه s.o. of), indict (
ب ه s.o. for)
تھمة tuhma accusation, charge;
suspicion; insinuation
وھم wahm pl. اوھام auhām delusive
imagination, erroneous impression, fancy,
delusion; belief, guess, surmise,
conjecture; imagination; bias, prejudice;
error; self-deception, self-delusion;
illusion; suspicion, misgiving, doubt;
foreboding, evil presentiment
وھمي wahmī thought, believed,
imagined, fancied; imaginary; seeming,
apparent; presumed, supposed,
hypothetical; delusive │ امراض نفسية ووھمية
(nafsīya, wahmīya) emotional
disturbances, psychic disorders
وھمية wahmiya chimera, phantom,
delusion; guess. surmise, conjecture,
supposition, belief; imaginative power,
imagination
ايھام īhām pl. -āt deception, deceit,
fraud, imposition; misleading, delusion;
suggestion │ رفع الإيھام raf‘ al-ī.
Rectification, correction
توھم tawahhum suspicion; imaginative
power; imagination
اتھام ittihām suspecting; accusation,
charge; indictment │ دائرة الاتھام the
prosecuting authority, the prosecution;
قرارلا اتھام qarār al-itt. information (jur.);
ورقة الاتھام waraqat al-itt. bill of indictment
اتھامية ittihāmīya (jur.) indictment │ ھيئة
الاتھامية hai’at al-itt. the prosecuting
authority, the prosecution
واھمة wāhima fantasy, imagination,
imaginative power
موھوم mauhūm fancied, imagined,
imaginary; fantastic 1103
متھم muttahim accuser; indictor;
prosecutor
متھم muttaham suspected, suspicious;
accused, charged; indicted; defendant │
متھم المنظر m. al-manẓar auspiciouslooking
وھن wahana, wahina يھن yahinu, wahuna يوھن
yauhunu (wahn, wahan) to be weak,
feeble, lack the strength ( في for), be
incapable ( في of); to grow feeble,
languish, flag; to loose vigor or courage │
لا يھن untiring, unflagging, inexhaustible II
to weaken, enfeeble ( ه s.o.), sap the
strength ( ه of so.); to discourage,
dishearten, wear down, unnerve ( ه s.o.); to
deem or declare ( ھ s.th.) weak IV to
weaken ( ه s.o.); to discourage ( ه s.o.)
وھن wahn weak, feeble
وھن wahn, wahan weakness,
feebleness, saplessness
وھين wahīn foreman, overseer
موھن mauhin deep of the night
واھن wāhin pl. وھن wuhun weak, feeble;
weakened, debilitated; enervated,
unnerved; sapless, effete, spent, dispirited,
despondent
وھى 1 wahā يھي yahī (wahy), wahiya (wahan) to
be weak, feeble, frail, fragile IV to
weaken, sap ( ھ، من s.th.)
واه wāhin pl. وھاة wuhāh weak, feeble;
thin; frail, fragile, brittle, friable; flimsy;
unsubstantial, inessential, insignificant,
trivial; untenable, unfounded, baseless,
groundless (excuse, argument)
واه، واھا 2 look up alphabetically
وي wai woe! shame!
ويبة waiba pl. -āt whiba, a dry measure (Eg. =
33 l)
ويح 1 waiḥa (with foll. genit. or pers. suffix)
alas ...! woe unto ...! (expressing regret,
disapproval); ويحك waiḥaka woe unto you!
ويحا ل waiḥan li woe to ...!
واحة 2 wāḥa pl. -āt oasis
ويركو (Turk. vergi) wērkō tribute formerly paid
by Egypt to the Sultan; excise tax;
(Pal.) real-estate tax
ويسكى wiskī whiskey
ويك 1 waika (= wailaka) woe unto you!
ويكة 2 (eg.) wēka = باميا bāmiya okra, gumbo
(Abelmoschus esculentus; bot.)
ويل wail affliction, distress, woe; (with ل or ويل
waila with pers. suffix) woe! ويل لك
wailun laka or ويلك wailaka woe unto you!
ويله waila pl. -āt calamity, disaster,
distress, affliction, woe, misfortune,
adversity 1104
ي
يا yā (vocative and exclamatory particle) O, oh
│ يا حسرتي (ḥasratī) oh, my misfortune! يا
سلام (salām) good Lord! good heavens! oh
dear! يا طالما (ṭalamā) how often ...; how
many times ...! يا للتعس ويا للشقاء yā la-t-ta‘si
wa-yā la-š-šaqā’ oh, what a calamity! يا له
من رجل (rajulin) oh, what a man! يا ما how
much! how many! how often I how many
times! من 􀍿 يا ... (lillāhi) what a calamity is
...! how unfortunate is ...! يا ترى see رأى
ياء yā’ name of the letter ي
اليابان al-yābān Japan
ياباني yābānī Japanese; (pl. -ūn) a
Japanese 1104
ياردة yarda pl. -āt yard (measure of length)
يازرجة yāzirja astrology
يازرجي yāzirjī pl. -īya astrologer
يئس ya’isa a i ( يأس ya’s, يآسة ya’āsa) to
renounce, forgo ( من s.th.); to give up all
hope ( من of) IV to make ( ه s.o.) renounce
or forgo; to deprive of hope ( ه s.o.) X = I
يأس ya’s renunciation, resignation;
hopelessness, desperation │ سن اليأس sinn
al-y. the climacteric
يؤوس ya’ūs in despair, despairing;
hopeless, desperate
يئس ya’is hopeless, desperate (person)
ميؤوس mai’ūs: ميؤوس منه lost, desperate
(cause)
مستيئس mustai’is hopeless, desperate,
(person)
ياسمين yāsamīn jasmine (bot.)
ياسنت yāsint hyacinth (bot.)
ياطاش yāṭāš: خدمة بالياطاش kidma bi-l-y. (tun.)
piecework, jobwork
يافا yāfā Jaffa (seaport in SW Palestine)
يافطة yafṭa, yāfiṭa sign, signboard, plaque,
name plate, doorplate
ياقة yāqa pl. -āt collar
ياقوت yāqūt (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. يواقيت yawāqīt2
hyacinth (bot.); hyacinth, sapphire │ ياقوت
احمر (aḥmar) ruby; ياقوت احضر (akdar)
green corundum; ياقوت جمري (jamrī)
carbuncle
ياميش yāmīš dried fruits
يانسون yānisūn anise, aniseed
ياور yāwir pl. -īya adjutant, aide-de-camp
ياى yāy pl. -āt spring, spiral spring
يباب yabāb devastated, waste
يبس yabisa a (yabs, yubs) to be or become dry,
to dry II and IV to make dry, to dry ( ھ
s.th.)
يبس yabs, yubs, yabas dryness
يبس yabs, yabis dried, dried out,
desiccated, arid; اليبس al-yabs the dry land,
land, terra firma
يبوسة yubūsa dryness (also fig., e.g., of
writing or speech style)
يابس yābis dry, dried out, desiccated,
arid; rigid, hard, firm, compact; اليابسة alyābisa
land, terra firma
يتم yatama i, yatuma u and yatima II to be or
become an orphan, be bereaved of one’s
parents IV to orphan, deprive of his
parents ( ه s.o.) V = I
يتم yatm, yutm, yatam orphanhood
يتيم yatīm pl. ايتام aitām, يتامى yatāmā
orphan; unique of its kind, unequaled,
unmatched, incomparable; -- yatīm f. ة
single, sole, one only, isolated │ ملجأ الأيتام
malja’ al-a. and دار الأيتام orphanage
ميتم maitam pl. مياتم mayātim2 orphanage
ميتم muyattam orphaned, parentless;
orphan
يثرب yatrib2 original name of Medina
يحبور see حبر
ميحار mīḥār mace, scepter; crosier; bat, mallet
يحمور yaḥmūr see حمر
يحيى yaḥyā John
يخت yakt pl. يخوت yukūt yacht
يخضور see خضر
يخنة yakna and يخنى yaknī a kind of ragout
يد yad f., pl. ايد aidin, اياد ayādin hand; foreleg;
handle; power, control, influenoe, 1105
authority; assistance, help, aid; (Isl. Law)
(personal) possession, actual control;
benefit; favor │ l. With prepositions: يدا بيد
yadan bi-yadin personal(ly), from hand to
hand; بين يدي ... (yadai) in front of; بين يديه
in front of him; in his presence; in his
power; بأيدينا bi-aidīnā or بين ايدينا at our
disposal; الكلام بين ايديكم (kalāmu) you have
the floor, you may speak; ما بين ايدينا من
what … are before us or present
themselves to us; تحت اليد on hand, handy,
available; تحت يده under his authority, in
his power; على يد pl. على ايدي (with foll.
genit.) at the hand(s) of; على يده or عن يده
with his help, through his good offices;
على ايدي الناس with the help of other people;
at the hands of other people; في اليد in
hand, on hand, availahle; -- 2. Construct
forms: يد الجوزاء y. al-jauzā’ a bright star in
Orion; لا افعله يد الدھر (yada d-dahr) I shall
never do it; يد المظلة y. al-miẓalla umbrella
handle; يد النكاح conjugal authority (Isl.
Law); ذو اليد powerful, influential; holder
of actual control, possessor (Isl. Law);
ساعة اليد wrist watch; سبط اليدين sabiṭ al-y.
liberal, openhanded, generous; شنطة اليد
šanṭat al-y. handbag; شغل اليد šugl al-y. or
عمل اليد ‘amal al-y. manual work;
handwork; صفاد اليد handcuff; صفر اليدين ṣifr
al-y. empty-handed; عربة اليد ‘arabat al-y.
handcart; قنبلة اليد qunbulat al-y. hand
grenade; -- 3. Other phrases: يد بيضاء pl. اياد
بيضاء benefit, favor; skill, competence,
capability, qualification, achievement; له يد
بيضاء في to be skilled, versed, experienced
in; to have the upper hand in; يد مبطلة
(mubṭila) unrightful possession (Isl. Law);
يد محقة (muḥiqqa) rightful possession (Isl.
Law); بقي مكتوف الأيدي امام (baqiya) to stand
helpless before ...; دق يدا بيد (daqqa) to clap
one’s bands; ذھبوا ايدي (ايادي) سبا dahabū
aidiya (ayādiya) sabā to be scattered in all
directions; اسدى اليه يدا (asdā) to do s.o. a
favor; سقط في يده (suqiṭa) to stand aghast,
be embarrassed, be bewildered; اسقط في يده
(usqiṭa) do.; شد يده على (šadda yadahū) to
cling to s.th.; مشغول باليد or مصنوع باليد
handmade; طلب يد المرأة (yada l-mar’a) to
propose to a woman, ask her hand in
marriage; اعطاه شيئا عن ظھر يد a‘ṭāhu ‘an
ẓahri yadin to give s.o. s.th. for nothing,
give s.o. s.th. as a present; اليد العاملة labor
force, labor; الأيدي العاملة man power, labor,
workmen, hands; قدمه باليد (qaddamahū) to
band s.th. over personally, deliver s.th. in
person; له عندي يد I am obliged to him (or a
favor; له يد في he has a hand in ...; له اليد
الطولى في (ṭūlā) to be powerful in, have
decisive issuance on; له عند الناس يد he has
great influence on other people, he can
accomplish a great deal with other people;
ما لي بذلك يدان that is not in my power; مد يد
المساعدة (or العون or المعونة ) madda yada lmusā‘
ada (l-ma‘ūna, l-‘aun) to extend
one’s help, lend a helping hand; ھم يد واحد
علي (‘alayya) they are in league against
me; وضع يده على (yadahū) to take
possession of; يده قصيرة he is incapable, his
powers are limited
يدوي yadawī manual; hand- (in
compounds) │ شغل يدوي (šugl) or عمل يدوي
(‘amal) manual work; handwork; صناعة
يدوية handicraft; طراز يدوي hand-operated
model (of an apparatus); العملة اليدويون
(‘amala) the manual workers, labor
يربوع yarbū‘ pl. يرابيع yarābī‘2 jerboa (zool.)
ياردة look up alphabetically
يرع yari‘a a (yara‘) to be a coward, be
chickenhearted
يراع yarā‘ cowardly; -- (coll.; n. un. (ة
glowworm, firefly; cane, reed; reed pen
1106
يرقان yaraqān a plant disease, mildew;
jaundice; (coll.; n. un. ة) larvae (zool.) │
يرقان الضفادع tadpoles
ميروق mairūq affected by mildew,
mildewy; jaundiced
اليرموك al-yarmūk Yarmuk river (in NW
Jordan)
يزيدي yazīdī Yazidi, belonging to the Yazidi
sect
اليزيدية al-yazīdīya the religion of the
Yazidis; the Yazidia or Devil Worshipers
(of Kurdistan)
يزرجة yazrija astrology
يزكي yazakī pl. يزك yazak guard, sentry
يازول yāzūl a variety of wild garlic (Allium
roseum L., bot.)
يسر yasira a (yasar) to be or become easy; --
yasura u (yusr) to be small, little,
insignificant; to be or become easy II to
level, smoothen, pave, prepare ( على ھ for
s.o., s.th.); to ease, make easy, facilitate ( ھ
على for s.o. s.th.) │ يسر السبيل امامه ل to pave
the way for s.o. to ..., enable s.o. to (do
s.th.) III to be lenient, indulgent, obliging,
complaisant ( ه with s.o.), humor ( ه s.o.) IV
to live in easy circumstances; to be or
become rich; to be lucky, fortunate; to
have an easy confinement (woman) V to
become easy; to be made easy, be
facilitated; to succeed, turn out successful;
to thrive, prosper; to be made possible, be
possible ( ل for s.o.) X to be easy; to
succeed, be successful
يسر yusr ease, easiness, facility ; easy,
pleasant circumstances; prosperity,
affluence, wealth, abundance, luxury
يسرة yasra left aside
يسار yasār ease, easiness, facility;
comfort; prosperity, affluence, wealth,
abundance, luxury; left hand; left side │
يسارا or عن اليسار to (at, on) the left
يساري yasārī leftist, left-wing (pol.)
يسرى yusrā pl. يسريات yusrayāt left side;
اليسرى the left hand
يسير yasīr easy ( على for); small, little,
slight, insignificant, (of time) short; plain,
homely; simple, uncomplicated
ايسر aisar2 easier; smaller, lesser,
slighter; more insignificant; more
prosperous, wealthier; left; left-handed;
left-sided
ميسر maisir an ancient Arabian game of
chance (forbidden by the Koran) played
with arrows without heads and feathering,
for stakes of slaughtered and quartered
camels
ميسرة maisara pl. مياسر mayāsir2 left
side; left wing (of an army)
ميسرة maisara, maisura, maisira ease,
comfort; prosperity, affluence, wealth,
abundance, luxury
تيسير taisīr facilitation
ميسور maisūr pl. مياسير mayāsīr2 easily
done, easily accomplished, within easy
reach y to carry out, feasible without
difficulty; easy; successful, fortunate,
lucky; prosperous, well-to-do, in easy
circumstances
ميسر muyassar facilitated, made easy,
within easy reach; successful, fortunate,
lucky; prosperous, well-to-do, wealthy,
rich
موسر mūsar pl. -ūn, مياسير mayāsīr2
prosperous, well-to-do, wealthy, rich
متيسر mutayassir facilitated, made easy;
easy; within easy reach; on hand,
available; taking a smooth and successful
course, going smoothly; successful,
fortunate, prosperous, well-to-do │ متيسر
well off, in easy circumstances
يسقجي yasaqjī kavass, consular guard, armed
attendant 1107
يسمين yasmīn jasmine
يسوع yasū’2 Jesus
يسوعي yasū’ī Jesuitic(al); (pl. -ūn)
Jesuit
يشب yašb jasper
يشم yašm jade
يشمق yašmak and يشمك yašmak (Turk. yaşmak)
face veil worn by women
يصب yaṣb and يصف yaṣf jasper
ياطاش look up alphabetically
يعبوب ya’būb see عب
يعسوب ya’sūb see عسب
يعقوب ya’qūb Jacob, James; see also عقب
يعقوبي ya’qūbī pl. يعاقبة ya’āqiba
Jacobite; Jacobitic (Chr.)
يافوخ yāfūk pl. يوافيخ yawāfīk2 vertex, crown of
the head
يفطة yafṭa (= يافطة ) sign, signboard, plaque,
name plate, doorplate
يفع yafa’a a (yaf’) to reach adolescence; to be
at the age of puberty IV and V do.
يفع yaf’ adolescence; puberty
يفع yafa’ hill, range, highland; -- (pl.
ايفاع aifā’) boy at the age of puberty,
adolescent, youth, teen-ager, juvenile
يافوت look up alphabetically
يقطين see قطن
يقظ yaqiẓa a (yaqaẓ) and yaquẓa u ( يقاظة
yaqāẓa) to be awake; to wake; to be on
one’s guard, be wary, watchful, alert,
vigilant II and IV to wake up ( ه s.o.); to
awaken, arouse, stir up, provoke ( ھ s.th.);
to warn, alert, put on his guard ( ه s.o.) V to
be awake; to be vigilant, watchful, alert,
on one’s guard X to wake up, awaken, be
awakened, be roused from sleep ( على by);
to have o.s. awakened, ask to be wakened;
to be awake; to be watchful, vigilant, alert
يقظ yaquz, yaqiz pl. ايقاظ aiqāẓ awake;
watchful, vigilant, alert, wary, cautious
يقظة yaqẓa, yaqaẓa waking,
wakefulness; sleeplessness, insomnia;
watchfulness, vigilance; wariness,
caution; alertness, keenness of the mind
يقظان yaqẓān2, f. يقظى yaqẓā pl. يقاظى
yaqāzā awake; attentive, alert; wary,
cautious; watchful. vigilant │ ابو اليقظان
rooster, cook
ايقاظ īqāẓ awaking, reveille
تيقظ tayaqquẓ wakefulness;
watchfulness, vigilance, alertness,
wariness, caution
متيقظ mutayaqqiẓ awake; watchful,
vigilant, wary, cautious; alert, attentive
مستيقظ mustaiqiẓ awake
يقن yaqina a (yaqn, yaqan) to be sure, certain;
to know for certain ( ب or ھ s.th.), be sure,
be certain, be convinced ( ب or ھ of) IV, V
and X to ascertain ( ب or ھ s.th.), make
sure ( ب or ھ of s.th.); to know for certain (
ب or ھ s.th.), be sure, be certain, be
convinced ( ب or ھ of)
يقن yaqn, yaqan certainty, certitude
يقن yaqan, yaqun, yaqin and يقنة yaqana
credulous, ingenuous, unsuspecting
يقين yaqīn certainty, certitude ( ب about),
conviction ( ب of) │ يقينا certainly, surely,
positively; انا على يقين من ان or انا على يقين ان I
am convinced, I am positive, I am certain
that ...; كونوا على يقين you can be sure; حق
اليقين ḥaqq al-y. absolute certainty 1108
يقيني yaqīnī definitely laid down,
positive, absolute, indisputable; يقينيات
yaqīnīyāt established truths, axioms
ميقان mīqān credulous
موقن mūqin convinced ( ب of); certain,
sure ( ب of)
متيقن mutayaqqin convinced, positive,
sure, certain
اليكون see كون
يمّ II to betake o.s., repair, resort, go, turn,
wend one’s way ( ھ or صوب ṣauba, نحو
naḥwa or شطر šaṭra to or toward a place),
set out, head, be headed ( ، ھ، صوب، نحو
شطر for); to direct, turn ( ھ s.th.) │ يمم في فم
البركان (fami l-burkān) to venture into the
lion’s den; يمم وجھه شطر (wajhahū šaṭra) to
turn or face toward V to betake o.s.,
repair, resort, turn ( ھ to), make, head ( ھ
for); to aim ( ھ at), intend ( ھ s.th.)
يم yamm pl. يموم yumūm open sea; (syr.)
side │ من يمي from my side, on my part
يمام yamām (coll.; n. un. ة) pl. -āt, ( يمائم
yamā’im2 pigeon, dove
يمن yamana u, yamina a, yamuna u (yumn,
ميمنة maimana) to be lucky, fortunate II to
go to the right V to see a good omen ( ب
in) X do.
يمن yumn good luck, good fortune,
prosperity, success
يمن yaman and يمنة yamna right side or
hand; يمنا to (at, on) the right; يمنة
yamnatan do. │ شاما ويمنا to the north and
south; يمنة ويسرة (yasratan) to the right and
left
اليمن al-yaman Yemen
يمنى yamanī from Yemen, Yemenite
يمين yamīn f. pl. ايمان aiman right side;
right hand │ يمينا or عن اليمين to (at, on) the
right; يمينا وشمالا to the right and left; ما
ملكت (تملك) يمينه ma malakat (tamliku)
yamīnuhū his possessions
يمين yamīn f., pl. ايمن aimun, ايمان aimān
oath │ يمين الأمانة y. al-amāna oath of
allegiance; يمين الصبر y. aṣ-ṣabr perjury;
يمين قانونية (qānūnīya) oath of office,
official oath; يمين كاذبة perjury; يمين الولاء
والإخلاص y. al-walā’ wa-l-iklāṣ oath of
allegiance; ايمن لله aimunu llāhi and ايم لله
aimu llāhi I swear by God!
يميني yamīnī of or pertaining to the right
side, right-hand, right; O اليمينيون the rightwing
parties
يمنى yumnā pl. يمنيات yumnayāt right
hand; right side
ايمن I aiman, f. يمنى yumnā right-hand,
right, on the right; lucky
ميمنة maimana pl. ميامن mayāmin2 right
side; right wing (of an army)
تيمن tayammun auspiciousness, good
augury, good omen
ميمون maimūn pl. ميامن mayāmin
fortunate, lucky; blessed; monkey │ ميمون
الطائر favorable, auspicious; على الطائر
الميمون happy journey! Godspeed!
ميمن muyamman lucky, auspicious
يناير yanāyir ينائر , 2 yanā’ir2 January
ينبوع yanbū‘ see نبع
ينسون yansūn (= يانسون ) anise, aniseed
ينع yana‘a a i (yan‘, yun‘, ينوع yunū‘) to
become ripe, ripen, mellow IV do.
ينيع yanī‘ ripe, mellow
ايناع īnā‘ ripening, mellowing
يانع yāni‘ pl. ينع yan‘ ripe, mellow
اليھود al-yahūd the Jews, Jewry
يھودي yahūdī Jewish; Jew
يھودية yahūdīya Judaism
يوبيل yūlbīl jubilee
يوحنا yūḥannā John │ يوحنا الصابغ John the
Baptist 1109
يود yūd iodine
ياور look up alphabetically
يورانيوم yūrāniyum uranium
يوزباشي yuzbašī pl. -īya captain, battery
commander; (as a naval rank) lieutenant
(formerly, Eg.)
يوسف yūsuf Joseph; (eg., sur.) يوف افندي y.
afandī (coll.) tangerines
يوسفي yūsufī (eg.) tangerines
يوطنة (from Fr. lieutenant; tun.) yūṭana)
lieutenant
يوغسلافيا yūgōslāviyī Yugoslavia
يوغوسلافي yūgōslāvī Yugoslavian
يافة look up alphabetically
يوليو yūliyō and يوليه yūliya July
يوم III to hire by the day ( ه s.o.)
يوم yaum pl. ايام ayyām day; pl. also:
age, era, time │ اليوم al-yauma today; يوم
yauma on the day when ...; ايام ayyāma in
the days of, during; اياما ayyāman for a few
days; ايامه ayyāmahū his lifetime, his life
يومھا yaumahā then, at that time, that day;
يوما or يوم ما sometime, some day, one of
these days; ذات يوم data yaumin one day,
once; يوما يوما or يوما فيوما or يوما بعد يوم or
يوما عن يوم day by day, day after day, from
day to day; بعد اليوم from today on, starting
today; في يومنا ھذا nowadays, these days; في
يوم وليلة (laila) overnight, from one day to
the other; كل يوم kulla yaumin daily, every
day; من يوم الى يوم or من يوم ليوم from one
day to the other, from day to day; من يومه
from that time on, henceforth; right away;
منذ اليوم from now on, as of now,
henceforth; من ايام a few days ago; for the
put few days; بعد ذلك بأيام a few days after
that; -- يوم الأحد y. al-aḥad Sunday; يوم
الإثنين y. al-itnain Monday; يوم الثلثاء y. attalātā’
Tuesday; يوم الأربعاء y. al-arbi‘ā’
Wednesday; يوم الخميس y. al-kamīs
Thursday; يوم الجمعة y. al-jum‘a Friday; يوم
السبت Saturday; -- يوم اسود black day,
unlucky day; يوم الاشتغال workday; يوم ايوم
(aiwam) a bad day; يوم الدين y. Ad-dīn the
Day of Judgment; يوم رأس السنة y. ra’s assana
New Year’s Day; يوم عطلة y. ‘uṭla day
off, free day, holiday; ابن اليوم ibn al-y.
man of today, modern man; ابن يومه of one
day, short-lived, passing, ephemeral; ابن
الأيام a man of the world, a sophisticated
man; على توالى الأيام (tawālī l-a.) in the
course of time, in time
يومئذ yauma’idin (on) that day, then, at
that time
يومذاك yaumadāka (on) that day, then
يومي yaumī daily; by the day; يومي
daily, every day; يوميات everyday events;
everyday chronicle; daily news │ جريدة
يومية daily newspaper
يومية yaumīya daily wages, a day’s
wages; daily ration; a day’s work, daily
task; diary, journal; daybook; calendar
مياومة muyāwama work by the day, day
labor; muyāwamatan daily, by the day, per
day, per diem │ عامل مياومة day laborer,
hired man
اليونان al-yūnān the Greeks; Greece
يوناني yūnānī Greek; (pl. -ūn) a Greek
يونانية yūnānīya Grecism; Greek
language
يونس yūnus Jonah
اليونسكو al-yūnēskō, ھيئة اليونسكو hai’at al-y.
UNESCO, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization
يونوسفير yonosfēr ionosphere (radio)
يونيو yūniyō and يوية yūniya June 1110
